**On the Publication of Defense of**
**Japan 2016**

**Gen Nakatani**

Minister of Defense


We are seeing an increasingly severe security environment surrounding Japan, as well as shifts in the global

balance of power including in the Asia-Pacif c region. Since the beginning of this year, North Korea has

repeatedly conducted military provocations, such as a nuclear test and ballistic missile launches. Such

military actions by North Korea constitute a serious and imminent threat to security not only of Japan but

also of the region and the international community. At the same time, Chinese and Russian military forces

have intensif ed their activities in sea areas and airspace surrounding Japan. In the East China Sea, Chinese

government vessels have repeatedly intruded into Japanese territorial waters and have been engaged in

activities that are seen as promoting the Chinese government’s own assertions regarding the Senkaku

Islands. In the South China Sea, China has continued large-scale and rapid land reclamations, established

outposts, and utilized them for military purposes. By unilaterally altering the status quo and attempting

to turn it into a fait accompli, these actions heighten tension in the region. Turning eyes to overseas, we

can see international terrorist organizations including ISIL have increasingly gained power and Japanese

nationals have fallen victim to their activities, which means threats can easily cross national borders today

and no country can safeguard its security on its own.

Against this backdrop, the Ministry of Defense (MOD) / the Self-Defense Forces (SDF) has a

responsibility to assume any situations and take seamless responses in order to resolutely secure the

lives, property, and freedom of the people as well as Japan’s territorial land, water, and airspace. The

legislation for peace and security was passed in the Diet last year and entered into force this March.

This legislation enables Japan to strengthen its ability to prevent wars from occurring, i.e. its deterrence,

and implement seamless responses. To ensure that our deterrence functions adequately, it is essential

that Japan continues to build a more effective Dynamic Joint Defense Force that is ready to respond to

various situations appropriately.

The Japan-U.S. Alliance is the centerpiece of Japan’s security and plays a critical role as the cornerstone

of the peace and prosperity of the Asia-Pacif c region. As the security environment surrounding Japan

becomes increasingly severe, it will become indispensable that Japan and the United States work together


-----

Minister of Defense Nakatani encouraging the units deployed to provide disaster relief in the wake of the 2016 Kumamoto Earthquake

more closely and deal with any circumstances seamlessly from peacetime to contingencies. The legislation

has signif cantly deepened trust between the two countries and further strengthened the Alliance. Sending

this message out to the world will undoubtedly enhance our deterrence and further ensure Japan’s security.

Our partnerships with other countries are also pivotal for security of Japan and for the peace and

stability of the region. With an unprecedentedly increasing need for international cooperation in the f elds

of security and defense, the MOD/SDF is proactively engaged in visible activities under the banner of

Proactive Contribution to Peace based on the principle of international cooperation, including defense

cooperation and exchanges and international peace cooperation operations.

Domestically, many areas of Japan underwent devastating damages due to the heavy rain in the

Kanto and Tohoku regions in September 2015 and the Kumamoto Earthquake in April 2016. The MOD/

SDF deployed a number of personnel who worked tirelessly around the clock to rescue the lives of the

affected people and to help rebuild their daily life. The SDF personnel’s commitment to saving lives while

putting their own lives at risk provides reassurance to communities and has earned much praise and support

of the Japanese people.

Public understanding and support are indispensable for the defense policy of Japan and the activities

of the MOD/SDF. Additionally, it is greatly signif cant to maintain the transparency of Japanese defense

policy for gaining other countries’ further understanding and trust in Japan.

In this year’s Defense of Japan, we tried to provide a clear explanation of the legislation for peace

and security, including a column on this topic. In addition, we tried to make the MOD/SDF more familiar

to the people by adding an opening article summarizing this past year’s activities of the MOD, and basic

facts regarding the MOD/SDF as well as information on facilities and events at the end of the book. It is

my sincere hope that this year’s Defense of Japan will be read by as many people as possible, and that they

will deepen their understanding of, as well as agreement and sympathy with, the MOD/SDF.


-----

##### Defense Chronology


G The security environment surrounding Japan has grown increasingly severe,
and a variety of situations have occurred to threaten the peace, security
and prosperity in the Asia-Pacifi c region as well as the entire international
community. On the other hand, given the rapid advance in globalization, no
single country can defend its own security by itself any longer. In order to
resolutely secure the lives and peaceful livelihood of its people under any
situation and contribute even more proactively to the peace and stability of
the international community, the Legislation for Peace and Security, which
enables seamless responses, is essential.

G Therefore, the Government submitted two bills related to the Legislation
for Peace and Security to an ordinary session of the Diet in 2015. After a
total of about 216 hours of debate at the House of Representatives and the

# 01House of Councilors, the two bills were enacted on September 19, 2015,

and put into force on March 29, 2016.

G Going forward, the Ministry of Defense (MOD) / the Self-Defense Forces
(SDF) will appropriately fulfi ll its duties and continue to make thoroughgoing
preparations in all ways possible while securing the safety of uniformed

Prime Minister Abe responds to interpellations at

SDF personnel and meticulously conducting verifi cation efforts, as well as the House of Councilors Special Committee
education and training. on the Legislation for Peace and Security

[Photo courtesy of the Cabinet Public Relations Offi ce]


-----

The fi rst fl ight of the Advanced
Technology Demonstrator (X-2)
(April 2016)

G On October 1, 2015, ATLA was established as an extra-ministerial organization, by
bringing together and consolidating equipment procurement related departments
regarding procurement, research and development in the Ministry of Defense (MOD).
This has been implemented as a part of MOD reform along with the integration of
duties related to actual unit operations into the Joint Staff.

G ATLA has been established to aim at: (1) implementation of unifi ed project
management throughout the life cycle from an integrative perspective; (2) smooth
and prompt refl ection of the operational needs of units to the equipment to be
procured; (3) active engagement in new areas (such as further internationalization
of defense equipment and investment in cutting edge technology research); and
(4) simultaneous achievement of acquisition reform and
maintaining and strengthening defense production and

# 02technological bases.

G Currently, ATLA actively promotes various measures
such as research and development (R&D) for ensuring
technological superiority including the R&D on the
Advanced Technology Demonstrator (X-2), project
management with respect to equipment subject to a focus,
and defense equipment and technology cooperation with
other countries.


The logo of ATLA


Minister of Defense Nakatani and Commissioner of ATLA Watanabe setting up
the doorplate of the Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Agency


-----

G Since the beginning of 2016, North
Korea has repeatedly conducted
provocations, such as its fourth
nuclear test in January 2016 and
repeated launches of ballistic missiles
since February including the launch
of a ballistic missile disguised as a
“satellite.”

G The MOD/SDF, in close coordination with the
relevant ministries and agencies and countries
such as the United States and the Republic of Korea
(ROK), is taking all possible measures to ensure
the peace and security of Japan, which include the
collection and analysis of necessary information
related to North Korea’s activities, surveillance of
such activities, and mobilization and deployment of
Aegis destroyers and PAC-3 units.

Aegis destroyer being deployed

# 03

T-4 taking off to conduct a radiation survey PAC-3 unit deployed to Ishigaki Island


-----

**gy**

The 2016 Kumamoto Earthquake

G During the Kumamoto Earthquake in April 2016, in addition to the major earthquake with an epicenter in the Kumamoto region in
Kumamoto Prefecture (maximum M7.3), a total of over 1,600 earthquakes (larger than intensity of 1) occurred centering around
Kumamoto Prefecture and Oita Prefecture. The Kumamoto Earthquake caused enormous damage to the affected areas, including
the collapse of buildings and facilities and the destruction of transportation infrastructure and lifelines.

G Responding to the disaster relief dispatch request from the Governors of Kumamoto and Oita Prefectures, the MOD/SDF conducted
lifesaving operations and livelihood support for the victims (transportation of goods, provision of food and water, bathing services, and
emergency medical support) by forming a GSDF, MSDF and ASDF joint task force and deploying approximately 814,000 personnel
(accumulated number). In this mission, SDF Ready Reserve Personnel were also called to carry out the livelihood support.

# 04

Lifesaving activities continued overnight SDF Ready Reserve Personnel boarding onto the ASDF C-130H
at the Naha Air Base

A private ship, Hakuo, which is on contract with the MOD to make use
of the PFI Act, was used as a recreation facility for the victims at
the Yatsushiro Port in Kumamoto Prefecture

The Kanto-Tohoku Heavy Rainfall Disaster in September 2015

G The Kanto-Tohoku Heavy Rainfall Disaster occurred in September 2015 caused heavy rain and associated large scale damage
mainly in the northern Kanto region and the southern Tohoku region. In particular, in Ibaraki, Tochigi, and Miyagi Prefectures,
enormous damage occurred due to the collapse of the river embankment, overtopping, and water leakage.

G Responding to the disaster relief dispatch request from the
Governors of the three prefectures mentioned above, the MOD/
SDF sent approximately 7,540 personnel (accumulated number)
to conduct rescue operations of isolated individuals and other
operations. Particularly, in Joso City and its surrounding areas
in Ibaraki Prefecture where extended areas were fl ooded due
to the overfl ow from the Kinugawa River, evacuation assistance
using boats, fl ood control activities using sandbags, water supply
activities, bathing service assistance, and epidemic control
operations were conducted, in addition to the rescue operation of
isolated individuals.


-----

In light of the “Proactive Contribution to Peace” based on the principle of international cooperation, the MOD/SDF has
implemented approximately 40 international peace cooperation activities globally such as in Asia, the Middle East, Africa, and
Central America, and dispatched approximately 55,000 SDF personnel (accumulated number). Currently, Japan continues to
dispatch SDF units to the counter-piracy operations off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden as well as to UNMISS, and
actively contributes to the peace and stability of international community in cooperation with other countries.

Counter-Piracy Operations Off the Coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden

For Japan, which depends on maritime transportation to import most of the resources and food as a maritime nation, it is crucial to
ensure the safety of maritime traffi c. For this reason, Japan dispatches destroyers and P-3C fi xed wing patrol aircraft, and carries
out warning and surveillance activities as well as escorting navigating vessels, based on the Anti-Piracy Measures Act enacted in
July 2009. These measures are taken in order to deter piracy off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of Aden as well as ensuring the
safety of the navigation of ships from various countries including Japan.

(As of June 2016, two destroyers and two P-3C fi xed wing patrol aircraft are being dispatched)

A destroyer (far right) escorting a ship and P-3C patrol aircraft

United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS)

Peace and stability in South Sudan, which gained its independence
in July 2011, is very important for the stability of Africa, and it
is a crucial issue to be handled by the international community.
Responding to the dispatch request from the United Nations to
UNMISS, Japan has dispatched engineering units and staff offi cers
since November 2011 to contribute to the peace and stability of the
country by carrying out the development of infrastructure such as
roads and the shelters of internally displaced persons.

(As of June 2016, approximately 350 personnel are dispatched as
engineering unit and staff offi cers)

SDF personnel carrying out an infrastructure improvement operation (road repair)

# 05

SDF personnel conducting support for internally SDF personnel interacting with local residents
displaced persons


-----

**gy**

G In October 2015, the SDF fl eet review was held by the MSDF at Sagami Bay (Kanagawa
Prefecture), which attracted approximately 34,000 visitors, including visitors who attended
the review and the rehearsal. Naval vessels from the naval forces of various countries
including the United States, Australia, France, India, and the ROK participated in the fl eet
review. Together with these participating vessels, the Japan-Australia joint exercise and
the Japan-ROK search and rescue joint exercise were carried out.

G The aim of a fl eet review is to raise the morale of SDF units and personnel with the Prime
Minister, the supreme commander of the SDF, in attendance. Simultaneously, it also aims

# 06

|epen the understanding trust of the people|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|trust of the people ing the SDF and serves opportunity to promote ational goodwill and se exchanges. op review, a fl eet review, an air review are hosted ally in rotation by the GSDF, F, and ASDF respectively. 16, the GSDF troop review e conducted.|||
||||
|||SDF personnel listening to instructions given by Prime Minister Abe|


and trust of the people
regarding the SDF and serves
as an opportunity to promote
international goodwill and
defense exchanges.

-  A troop review, a fl eet review,
and an air review are hosted
annually in rotation by the GSDF,
MSDF, and ASDF respectively.
In 2016, the GSDF troop review
will be conducted.

SDF personnel listening to instructions given by Prime Minister Abe

(From the front right) Prime Minister Abe, Deputy Prime Minister Aso, and Minister
of Defense Nakatani are rendered a manning of the rail at the fl eet review

Destroyers navigating in alignment


ASDF’s Blue Impulse carrying out P-1 patrol aircraft shooting IR fl ares*
a demonstration fl ight -  Interference to avoid infrared-guided missiles


-----

**Security Environment**
**Surrounding Japan**


**Overview** **Chapter 1** P. 2


The security environment surrounding Japan has become increasingly severe, with various challenges and destabilizing
factors becoming more tangible and acute.

G Security challenges and destabilizing factors in the Asia-Pacifi c region including the area surrounding Japan are becoming more serious.
There has been a tendency towards an increase in and prolongation of so-called “gray-zone” situations, that is, neither pure peacetime nor
contingencies, over territory, sovereignty, and maritime economic interests. In addition, there has been a noticeable trend among neighboring
countries to modernize and reinforce their military capabilities and to intensify their military activities.

G In particular, North Korea’s further progress with nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles development, coupled with repeated provocative
rhetoric and behavior that disregard the international community, constitute serious and imminent threats to the security of the region
including Japan and of the international community.

G Additionally, as China’s reinforcement of its military capabilities without transparency, along with active maritime advancement, rapidly shift
the regional military balance, China’s attempts to change the status quo in the East and South China Seas based on its own assertions as
well as its risk of causing unintended consequences due to misunderstanding or miscalculation have become security concerns to the region
including Japan and to the international community.

G In a global security environment, there is a growing risk that unrest or a security problem in a single country or region could immediately
explode into a challenge or destabilizing factor for the entire international community. The activities of international terrorist organizations
continue to gain momentum. Today, the threat of terrorism is not confi ned to the Middle East and North Africa, but is expanding globally. The
outcomes of Russia’s changes to the status quo in Ukraine have taken on an aspect of being entrenched. At the same time, China’s unilateral
acts that alter the status quo and heighten tension in the South China Sea have left challenges for the international response, in the midst of
China’s continued attempt to further create a fait accompli. With cyber attacks becoming more sophisticated and skillful, there are increasing
risks to the stable use of cyberspace.

G These security challenges and destabilizing factors in the international community are complex, diverse, and wide-ranging, and it is becoming
ever more diffi cult for a single country to deal with them on its own.

G Furthermore, territorial disputes over the Northern Territories and Takeshima, both of which are inherent parts of the territory of Japan, remain unresolved.

Recent Security Related Issues around Japan


reinforcement of military Prime Minister Abe offering fl owers at the site of the terror
forces without transparency attacks in Paris in November 2015 [photo courtesy of the

Cabinet Public Relations Offi ce]

North Korea’s series of Intensification of Russian
militarily provocative military activities
rhetoric and behavior

North Korea’s further progress with
nuclear weapons and missiles development

China’s broad and rapid
reinforcement of military
forces without transparency

China’s rapid expansion/
intensification of activities
in the East China Sea and
attempts to change the status quo

Sea lanes leading to Japan

Continuation of frequent advancements

Changes in the China-Taiwan military balance to the Pacific Ocean by the Chinese military
(in favor of the Chinese side)

Tendency towards increase in and

China’s changes of the status quo and creation prolongation of gray-zone situations
of a fait accompli in the South China Sea

**Based on the GTOPO30 (USGS) and ETOPO1 (NOAA) models.**


Fiery Cross Reef. The runway construction is believed to have been
completed following rapid and large-scale land reclamation (as of May


2016). [CSIS Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative / DigitalGlobe]


-----

Digest

**European Region**

**The United StatesArmy:** approx. 28,000 personnel **Chapter 2** P. 9

Navy: approx. 7,000 personnel
Air Force: approx. 29,000 personnel U.S. Forces

G The patterns of U.S. involvement in the world are changing signifi cantly in a new security environment, including a shift in the global balance Marines: approx. 1,000 personnel Army: approx. 487,000 personnel

Navy: approx. 323,000 personnel

of power beginning with the military rise of China, attempts to change the status quo by force or coercion in Ukraine and the South China Sea, Total: approx. 64,000 personnel

Air Force: approx. 307,000 personnel

(Total in 1987:

and the intensifi cation of the activities of international terrorist organizations such as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). While faced approx. 354,000 personnel) Marines: approx. 183,000 personnel
with a severe fi nancial situation, the United States is anticipated to continue to play a role in the peace and stability of the world by drawing U.S. European Command Total: approx. 1,301,000 personnel

(Total in 1987:

on its world-leading, comprehensive national power. approx. 2,170,000 personnel)

G It is regarded that the United States sees violent extremist organizations such as ISIL and Al Qaeda as short-term security threats, and nations U.S. Central Command
attempting to threaten the existing international order or the interests of the United States and its allies as mid- to long-term security threats.Asia-Pacific Region U.S. Northern

Command

Army: approx. 37,000 personnel

G The United States intends to maintain the pivot to the Asia-Pacifi c region, continuing to rebalance towards the region to deepen relations with Navy: approx. 43,000 personnel
its allies and other countries in the Asia-Pacifi c region and to enhance both the quantity and quality of U.S. assets deployed to the region. U.S. Africa Command U.S. Pacific Command Air Force: approx. 27,000 personnelMarines: approx. 24,000 personnel
Mindful of China’s recent moves to unilaterally change the status quo and create a fait accompli in the South China Sea, the United States has Total: approx. 131,000 personnel U.S. SouthernCommand
indicated that it would continue its Freedom of Navigation Operations to protect the rights and freedoms under international law.(Total in 1987:

approx. 184,000 personnel)

G The United States promotes the Third Offset Strategy to develop military technologies in new fi elds to maintain and increase the superiority
of the U.S. Forces, deeming that its military superiority is gradually eroding in light of recent trends, including China and other countries’
enhanced military capabilities. The Third Offset Strategy is aimed at gaining technological, organizational, and operational superiority in order
to strengthen deterrence using conventional assets against great powers, and outlines that priority would be given to investing in humanmachine collaboration and combat teaming.


Notes: 1. Source: Documents published by the U.S. DoD (as of September 30, 2015), etc.


U.S. Forces Deployment Status and the Recent Trend of the U.S. Forces in the Asia-Pacifi c Region2. The number of personnel deployed in the Asia-Pacific region includes personnel deployed in Hawaii and Guam.



**[Japan]**

-  Deploys F-22, MV-22/CV-22 Osprey, P-8, and Global Hawk

-  Deploys second TPY-2 radar

-  Additionally deployed one Aegis ship (normal ship) (June 2015)

-  Switched one Aegis ship (normal ship) with Aegis BMD destroyer
(March 2016)

-  Additionally deploys two Aegis BMD destroyers (one already

Seoul deployed in October 2015 and one to be deployed in summer 2017)

ROK

Japan **[Guam]**

-  Rotationally deploys submarines

-  Rotationally deploys bombers

Okinawa -  Established a facility for aircraft

carrier’s temporary port of call

-  Deploys unmanned

Philippines Guam reconnaissance aircraft (RQ-4) Hawaii

Manila

**[Philippines]**

-  Signed the Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement (EDCA) for enhancing the presence
of the U.S. Forces, etc. (April 2014)

-  Announced US$79 million assistance and provision of one patrol vessel and one survey
vessel (November 2015)

Singapore -  Implements joint patrol activities (March 2016–)

Indonesia -  Agreed on five locations such as Air Force bases, etc. to serve as hubs for implementing

defense cooperation based on EDCA (March 2016)

Jakarta -  Regularly deploys A-10 ground attack aircraft, etc. (April 2016–)

**[Singapore]**

-  Rotationally deploys Littoral Combat Darwin **[Australia]**
Ships (LCS) (To deploy four LCSs by At the November 2011 U.S.-Australia Summit, an agreement was reached on the following initiatives:
end of 2017. The first ship started -  Rotational deployment of the Marines to northern Australia
rotation in April 2013 and the -  Increased rotational deployment of U.S. Air Force aircraft in northern Australia トンガ
second ship in December 2014.) Australia

-  Rotationally deployed P-8
(December 2015) In June 2013, U.S. Secretary of Defense Hagel announced a plan to deploy 60% of

-  Signed enhanced defense the assets of the U.S. Navy and Air Force in the Asia-Pacific region as well as
cooperation agreement proceed with the rotational deployment in the region and deployment of equipment.
(December 2015) Canberra

-  A map created by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) is used


-----

**y** **g** **p**


**North Korea** **Chapter 2** P. 18


**General Situation**


G North Korea seems to be maintaining and reinforcing its so-called asymmetric military capabilities. It has repeated provocative rhetoric and
behavior militarily, including conducting a nuclear test in January 2016 and repeating ballistic missile launches since February 2016. Such
military activities by North Korea heighten tension on the Korean Peninsula and constitute a serious and imminent threat to the security not
only of Japan but also of the region and the international community. Therefore, it is necessary for Japan to pay utmost attention to them.

**Development of Weapons of Mass Destruction and Missiles**


G North Korea conducted its fourth nuclear test in January 2016. It launched a ballistic missile
disguised as a “Satellite” in February 2016 and has continued to repeatedly launch ballistic
missiles since March 2016.

G North Korea is deemed to be developing nuclear weapons as an indispensable deterrent for
maintaining the existing regime.

G North Korea asserts that the nuclear test conducted in January 2016 was a hydrogen bomb
test. However, it is doubtful that a general hydrogen bomb test was conducted, considering the
magnitude of the earthquake. In either case, North Korea’s activities to develop the hydrogen
bomb must continue to be monitored.

G In light of the technological maturity reached through North Korea’s previous four nuclear tests
and other factors, it is possible that North Korea has achieved miniaturization of nuclear weapons
and has developed nuclear warheads. It is believed that, with the passage of time, there would
be a greater risk of North Korea deploying a ballistic missile mounted with a nuclear warhead
that includes Japan in its range.

G North Korea’s launch of a ballistic missile disguised as a “Satellite” in February 2016 used a
“Taepodong-2” variant, which seemed to be a similar type of the ballistic missile launched in
December 2012. It is assessed that North Korea’s long-range ballistic missiles’ technological
reliability had been advanced by this launch. It is believed that a test launch of long-range
ballistic missiles can contribute to the advancement of North Korea’s entire ballistic missile
program and to the diversifi cation of attack measure.

G North Korea is deemed to be continuing to develop submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs), announcing in April 2016 that it once
again conducted a successful test launch of an SLBM. At the military parade in October 2015, a new missile thought to be the “KN08”
was showcased with a different-shaped warhead (the missile is reportedly called
“KN14”) from the previous version. This is likely intended to diversify North Korea’s
attack capabilities using ballistic missiles and improve their survivability.

G Should North Korea succeed in extending the range of ballistic missile capabilities,
miniaturizing nuclear warheads and mounting them on a ballistic missile, as well
as have a false sense of confi dence and recognition that it secured strategic
deterrence against the United States, this could lead to increases in and the
escalation of military provocations by North Korea in the region and could create
situations that are deeply worrying also for Japan.

G In the case of the ballistic missile launches since 2014, North Korea has launched
multiple ballistic missiles using a Transporter-Erector-Launcher from locations
and at timings as it chooses. The launches have demonstrated the improvements
in the operational capabilities of North Korea’s ballistic missile units, including
surprise attack capabilities. In this regard, the North Korean ballistic missile threat
is increasing further.


-----

G North Korea demonstrated that the Musudan it fi rst attempted to launch in April 2016 had its certain capability as an intermediate-range missile

Digest

in the June 2016 launch. In March 2016, North Korea disclosed the implementation of ballistic missile re-entry environmental simulations, a
ground jet test of a high-power solid fuel missile engine, and a ground jet test of a new-type high-power engine of an intercontinental ballistic
missile (ICBM). North Korea has shown readiness to acquire technologies to make practical use of new intermediate- and long-range ballistic
missiles and make them more sophisticated, presenting serious concerns for Japan and other relevant countries.

G North Korea’s further development of weapons of mass destruction and missiles, coupled with its repeated provocative rhetoric and behavior
that disregard the international community, constitutes a serious and imminent threat to the security of the region including Japan and of the
international community.

Range of North Korean Ballistic Missiles

New York

(Approx. 6,000 km) 10,000 km
Taepodong-2

(Variant: Approx. 10,000 km+) Washington, D.C.

Chicago

Musudan (Approx. 2,500–4,000km)

Taepodong-1 (Approx. 1,500 km+) 6,000 km Denver

Nodong (Approx. 1,300 km)

4,000 km San Francisco

Anchorage

Scud ER (Approx. 1,000 km) 1,500 km

Los Angeles

1,300 km

Taepodong district

Beijing Pyongyang Tokyo Hawaii

Tongch’ang-ri district 1,000 km

Okinawa

Guam

The United States Geological Survey: GTOPO30

- The figure above shows a rough image of the distance each missile can reach from Pyongyang for the sake of convenience.

**Domestic Affairs**


G North Korea held the Seventh Congress of the Korean Workers’ Party (KWP) for the fi rst time in 36 years in May 2016. Kim Jong-un was
appointed as KWP Chairman. Setting out that it was a “nuclear weapons state,” Chairman Kim Jong-un demonstrated to those in and outside
of the country that North Korea was ready to continue with its nuclear and missile development, including upholding the “new strategic
line” policy of economic development and the building of nuclear force. Prior to the Congress, North Korea conducted provocations at
unprecedented frequency and content, including the launch of ballistic missiles.

G The holding of the KWP Congress may be an indication that North Korea has shifted into high gear by establishing the “state”-run governance
system centered on the party and led by KWP Chairman Kim Jong-un, in terms of its organization, personnel, among other dimensions, both
in name and in substance. However, due to an atrophy effect created by the frequent executions, demotions, and dismissals of senior offi cials,
there is likely growing uncertainty, including over the possibility of North Korea turning to military provocations without making adequate
diplomatic considerations.

**Relations with Other Countries**


G The explosion of landmines in the Republic of Korea (ROK)’s area of the demilitarized zone (DMZ) in August 2015 deeply stirred tensions between
the ROK and North Korea that included shelling. Since January 2016, tensions between the two sides have heightened due to North Korea’s
nuclear test and ballistic missile launches, as well as provocative rhetoric and behavior in protest against the U.S.-ROK combined exercise.

G China is a vital political and economic partner for North Korea and maintains a degree of infl uence on the country. Meanwhile, North Korea
went ahead with a nuclear test and ballistic missile launches despite China’s request for the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. In this
light, it is possible that North Korea-China relations are cooling.


-----

**y** **g** **p**


**China** **Chapter 2** P. 41


**General Situation**


G There are high expectations for China to recognize its responsibility in the international community, accept and comply with international
norms, and play an active role in a more cooperative manner on regional and global issues.

G While advocating “peaceful development,” China continues to act in an assertive manner, particularly over maritime issues where its interests
confl ict with others’, including its attempts to change the status quo by coercion based on its own assertions incompatible with the existing
order of international law. These actions include dangerous acts that could cause unintended consequences. China is poised to fulfi ll its
unilateral demands without compromise, which has included making steady efforts to turn these coercive changes to the status quo into a fait
accompli, raising strong concerns over China’s future direction.

G During the fi fth plenary session of the 18th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party in October 2015, the idea of “sweeping lawbased governance of the country” was presented. China is thus anticipated to continue addressing corruption within the party and the military.

G China is believed to be enhancing its asymmetric military capabilities to deter military forces of other countries from approaching and advancing
to China’s surrounding region, and to inhibit their military activities in the region (so-called “A2/AD (anti-access/area-denial)” capabilities).

**Military Affairs**


G China has broadly and rapidly reinforced its military forces, and furthermore, rapidly expanded and intensifi ed its activities at sea and in
airspace, including the East and South China Seas. Japan has great concerns over such Chinese military activities, together with the lack of
transparency in its military affairs and security issues, and must keep utmost attention to them. These activities also raise security concerns
for the region and the international community. It is strongly hoped that China will increase transparency concerning its military affairs by such
efforts as disclosing specifi c information pertaining to its defense policies and military capabilities.

G China’s announced national defense budget has increased at a rapid pace, recording double-digit annual growth nearly consistently since
FY1989. The nominal size of China’s announced national defense budget has grown approximately 44-fold in 28 years since FY1988 and
nearly 3.4-fold in 10 years since FY2006.

G China is currently carrying out reforms of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) which some see as being the largest in the country’s history.
These reforms have recently taken shape at a rapid pace, including: the establishment of the PLA Army Headquarters, Rocket Force, and
Strategic Support Force; the replacement of the four general departments that were the headquarters for the entire PLA; and the creation of
fi ve new theaters of operations.

G China is thought to be strengthening
its “A2/AD” capabilities through

Changes in China’s Announced Defense Budget

and long-range cruise missile 9,500

China offi cially admitted the building 7,500
of a domestic aircraft carrier for the 6,500

6,000

5,000

company to purchase 24 Su-35 2,5002,000

500

|ion yuan)|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|Col11|Col12|Col13|Col14|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Defense budget (in 100 million yuan) Year-on-year growth rate (%)||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||


89 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16

fi ghters, which are said to become (FY)
next-generation fi ghters. Note: This basically shows the defense budget within central fiscal expenditures. Note that the FY2002 budget was calculated on the assumption that the disclosed rate

and amount of growth represent increases from the actual defense expenditure in FY2001, because the FY2002 budget was not disclosed and discrepancies
arise when the disclosed rate and amount of growth are applied to the initial budget of the previous year. In FY2015 and FY2016, only the defense budget within
the basic expenditures of the central government (part of the central fiscal expenditures) was announced. The FY2015 defense budget within central fiscal
expenditures was calculated by adding the defense budget within the basic expenditures of the central government and the local relocation expenditure amount,
etc. released separately at a later date.


-----

Digest


**Activities in Japan’s Surrounding Waters and Airspace**


G The number of Chinese naval surface
vessels advancing to the Pacific

to the open ocean. contiguous zone north of Kitadaito Island (AGI)

Islands. It is of serious concern
that recently China has unilaterally

Recent Major Chinese Activities in Waters near Japan (The wakes shown are an illustration)

Chinese naval vessels have sailed the following areas (*①-⑤, ⑦-⑨ several times): Guam
①Sailed through Soya Strait; ②Sailed through Tsugaru Strait; ③Sailed through
Tsugaru Strait from the Sea of Japan to the Pacific Ocean, and then transited Osumi
Strait from the Pacific Ocean to the East China Sea etc.; ④Conducted round-trip
passages in waters outside of the contiguous zone south of the Boso Peninsula (AGI);
⑤Sailed through Osumi Strait; ⑥Sailed between Amamioshima Island and
Yokoatejima Island; ⑦Sailed between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island
to the Pacific Ocean; ⑧Sailed the Pacific Ocean southwest of the main island of
Okinawa; ⑨Sailed between Yonaguni Island and Nakanokami Island; ⑩Sailed in
Japan’s territorial waters near Kuchinoerabu Island; and then ⑪Sailed within Japan’s Okinotori Island
contiguous zone north of Kitadaito Island (AGI)

Standoffs between Chinese and

3 Philippines/Vietnamese vessels in the

Kitadaito Island South China Sea, and other activities

4 11

10 Okinawa 8

Tokyo 6 7

Kuchinoerabu 9
Island 5 12 South China Sea

East China Sea Senkaku Taipei

2 Sea of Japan Islands

1 Ningbo

- In January 2013, a Jiangkai I-class frigate is suspected to ⑫ Near the Senkaku Islands:
have directed a fire-control radar at a helicopter based on an - Since December 2008, government vessels have intruded into Japan’s territorial waters; intermittently since
MSDF destroyer in the East China Sea. September 2012; and repeatedly with what appear to be cannons since December 2015.

- In January 2013, a Jiangwei II-class frigate directed fire- - In November 2015 and June 2016, an AGI conducted round-trip passages in waters outside of the contiguous
control radar at an MSDF destroyer in the East China Sea. zone south of the Senkaku Islands.

- In June 2016, a frigate entered the contiguous zone north of the Senkaku Islands.

escalated activities in waters near Japan, such as activities that are seen as actions based on their own assertions related to the Senkaku
Islands and further expansion of its naval vessels’ reach to include the Senkaku Islands.

G As regards Chinese government vessels, their intrusion into Japanese territorial waters is becoming routinized. Government vessels
carrying weapons that appear to be cannons have begun to intrude into Japanese territorial waters, and they are increasingly larger in size.
China is seen to be steadily strengthening an operational posture intended to use Chinese government vessels to intrude into Japanese
territorial waters.

G In recent years, the number of scrambles by the ASDF against Chinese aircraft has increased dramatically. Recently, Chinese PLA aircraft have
also been seen intensifying activities near the Senkaku Islands, fl ying in the southward direction. Utmost attention must continue to be paid to
these activities.

G One of the objectives of China’s maritime activities is likely to weaken the control of other countries over the islands to which China claims
territorial sovereignty, while strengthening the claim of its territorial sovereignty, through various surveillance activities and use of force at sea
and in airspace surrounding the islands.

G China is known to be building 12 new offshore platforms in addition to the existing 4 platforms on the Chinese side of the Japan-China
median line of the East China Sea since June 2013 for the drilling of oil and natural gas. Japan has repeatedly lodged protests against China’s
unilateral development and demanded the termination of such work.

**Situation of Activities in the South China Sea and “Far Seas”**


G Since 2014, China has pressed ahead with rapid and large-scale land reclamation works on seven features in the Spratly Islands. China
has built military facilities such as batteries and has developed infrastructures that could be utilized for military purposes, such as runways,
hangars, harbors, and radar facilities.

G In the Paracel Islands, China has similarly carried out land reclamation and infrastructure construction on features and promoted their use for
military purposes. On Woody Island, China is known to have extended the runway, deployed J-11 and other fi ghters, and deployed arms likely
to be surface-to-air missiles.

G The Chinese Navy is thought to be shifting its naval forces towards “offshore waters defense and open seas protection,” and is steadily
increasing its capabilities to conduct operations in more distant seas such as the Indian Ocean in recent years.

G China has reached an agreement with Djibouti to build facilities there for providing logistics support to its military forces. China also supports
the construction of port infrastructure in Indian Ocean countries. In this regard, the Chinese Navy could further build up its capabilities to
conduct operations in the Indian Ocean and other distant waters.


-----

**y** **g** **p**


**Russia** **Chapter 2** P. 71


G Russia, while facing a severe economic situation, is making continued efforts to modernize its military forces. Russia also tends to intensify
the activities of its military forces and expand their area of activity.

G As regards the situation in Ukraine, the outcomes of Russia’s changes to the status quo by force or coercion have taken on an aspect of being
entrenched, and the sense of being threatened by Russia’s activities is increasing especially in the West. Russia’s military intervention in Syria is
drawing attention as a manifestation of the achievements of its series of military reform as well as a move to increase its international infl uence.

G The newly revised National Security Strategy construes that Russia has an increasingly greater role in a multipolarizing world, and commits to
giving continued priority to the role fulfi lled by Russia’s military force and to ensuring strategic deterrence and preventing military confl ict by
maintaining a suffi cient level of nuclear deterrent capability and the Russian Armed Forces (RAF).

G Russia continues to station the RAF in the Northern Territories and has been increasing its activities in the territories under de facto occupation.

**Southeast Asia** **Chapter 2** P. 90


G In recent years, Southeast Asian countries have increased January 2015 March 2015 May 2016

air force equipment such as fourth-generation modern
fi ghters and submarines.

G In the South China Sea, competing claims with China over
sovereignty and other issues have heightened tension
in the region. Against this backdrop, the international
community’s deep concern over the unilateral changes
to the status quo and their creation of a fait accompli is

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|


January 2015 March 2015 May 2016

Facilities such as
a 3,000 m-runway
are being built on
the reef.

September 2015 May 2016

quickly becoming ever more widespread. Some countries Subi Reef where rapid and large-scale reclamation is under way
involved are making efforts to settle the issues in [CSIS Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative / DigitalGlobe]
accordance with international law.* -  In July 2016, in the arbitral proceedings pursuant to the United Nations Convention on the Law of

the Sea between the Philippines and China over the South China Sea, a fi nal ruling was rendered
in which nearly all of the Philippines’ submissions were ruled in favor of the Philippines.

**Trends in Regional Confl ict and International Terrorism** **Chapter 3** P. 115


G The confl icts occurring in recent years in various parts of the world have arisen due to various problems, including ethnicity, religion, territory,
and natural resources. In many cases, areas where internal or regional confl icts have created or expanded a governance vacuum have become
a hotbed of the activities of terrorist organizations. In addition, some organizations operate across national borders and regions, and continue
to pose imminent security challenges to the international community.

G There has been a rise in young people who sympathize with the extremism of international terrorist organizations, including ISIL that has
gained strength in Iraq and Syria, against a backdrop of societal disapproval and other issues. In an increasing number of cases, these people
have joined the activities of international terrorist organizations and conduct “home-grown” and “lone-wolf” terrorism activities in their home
countries. As evidenced by the simultaneous terrorist attacks in Paris and the terrorist attack in Jakarta, terror threats are spreading, not only
in the Middle East and Africa, but also throughout the rest of the world. Furthermore, in light of the terror attack in Dhaka, Bangladesh, in July
2016, it can be said Japan is in a situation where it needs to squarely address the threat of international terrorism as its own challenge.

G Some international terrorist organizations are capable of implementing terror attacks in locations far from their bases and use cyberspace and
other means to form global networks within and outside their organization, or use advanced public relations strategies to skillfully promote
themselves, recruit fi ghters and call for terror attacks.


-----

Digest

**Maritime** **Chapter 3** P. 141


G In the East and South China Seas, it has become increasingly common for countries to
unilaterally assert their rights or take actions, based on their own assertions which are
incompatible with the existing international law and order.

G The United States continuously conducts its Freedom of Navigation Operations in order to
counter excessive claims over maritime interests asserted by coastal states in the South
China Sea.

G China aims to build up the Chinese Navy’s capacity for continuously executing operations
in more distant waters. China is building facilities for providing logistics support to the
military in Djibouti, a country facing the Gulf of Aden. Additionally, China supports the
construction of port infrastructure in Indian Ocean countries.

G The Arctic states have been proactively promoting efforts to secure their interests in
resource development and use of the sea route. Countries such as Russia are promoting
efforts to deploy new military capabilities. As regards non-Arctic states, China has shown
active involvement in the Arctic Ocean, deploying a polar research vessel to the ocean.


U.S. Navy missile destroyer USS Lassen which conducted a Freedom
of Navigation Operation in October 2015 [U.S. DoD website]


**Outer Space** **Chapter 3** P. 148


G Major countries are making efforts to enhance the capabilities of a variety of satellites and launch them for the purpose of enhancing
C[4]ISR* functions. Such satellites include image reconnaissance satellites, satellites gathering radio wave information, military communication
satellites, and positioning satellites.

G Meanwhile, Chinese, Russian, and other countries’ development of anti-satellite weapons and scattering of space debris have come to be
seen as a threat to the satellites of each nation. The risk to the stable use of outer space has become one of the critical security challenges
facing countries. -  C[4]ISR: Command, control, communication, computer, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance

**Cyber** **Chapter 3** P. 153


G It is deemed that actors wishing to cause harm to nations, etc. have all realized that attacking through cyberspace is often easier than
attacking directly using physical means.

G Cyber attacks have frequently been carried out against communications networks of government organizations and military forces of various
countries. With the suggested involvement of government organizations such as those of China, Russia, and North Korea, cyber attacks are
becoming more sophisticated and skillful by the day, and cybersecurity has become one of the most important security issues for countries.

**Military Science and Technology as well as Defense Production and**

**Chapter 3** P. 159

**Technological Bases**


G Scientifi c and technological advancements are triggering signifi cant and revolutionary changes also in the military area. In light of the capability
enhancements made by China and other countries, the United States promotes the Third Offset Strategy to secure military superiority.

G In the United States, a variety of DoD-related agencies provide funds including large-scale funding for research undertaken by entities such
as companies and universities.

G Western countries are increasing competitiveness through realignment of their defense industry as well as promoting equipment technology
cooperation among their allies and partners, in order to adapt to the escalation of development and production costs of equipment due to their
growing sophistication and complexity


-----

**Japan s Security and Defense Policy**
**and the Japan-U.S. Alliance**


**National Security Strategy** **Chapter 1** P. 169


I The “National Security Strategy” developed in December 2013 expresses
Japan’s fundamental principle of national security, which is that Japan

Relations among NSS, NDPG, MTDP, and Annual Budget

will continue to adhere to the course that it has taken to date as a NSS Basic policy for national security centered
peace-loving nation and to contribute even more proactively in securing (approx. 10-year time frame)
the peace, stability and prosperity of the international community, while based on NSS
achieving its own security as well as peace and stability in the Asia- Prescribe future defense force and target levels
Pacifi c region, as a “Proactive Contributor to Peace” based on the of defense force that Japan should achieve
principle of international cooperation. achieve target levels of defense force

I In order to achieve this principle, the strategy defi ned Japan’s national Indicate (limits of) five-year total expenditures
security, such as the maintenance of sovereignty and independence, and quantity of major equipment
defending territorial integrity, ensuring the safety of life, person and appropriate budget, develop specific projects
properties of its nationals, economic development, and the maintenance
and protection of the international order based on rules and universal values. appropriate annual budget as necessary

Basic policy for national security centered

NSS

around diplomatic and defense policies
(approx. 10-year time frame)

based on NSS

Prescribe future defense force and target levels

NDPG

of defense force that Japan should achieve
(approx. 10-year time frame)

achieve target levels
of defense force

Indicate (limits of) five-year total expenditures

MTDP

and quantity of major equipment

appropriate budget,
develop specific projects

Examine based on the current situations,

Annual budget

appropriate annual budget as necessary

I Based on that, the strategy clearly defi nes the security environment
surrounding Japan and national security challenges, and specifi es the strategic approaches centering on diplomatic and defense policies that
Japan should implement, such as the establishment of a comprehensive defense architecture to protect Japan.

**National Defense Program Guidelines** **Chapter 2** P. 173


I The “National Defense Program Guidelines” developed in December 2013 based on the National
Security Strategy defi nes basic policies for Japan’s future defense, the role of its defense
capabilities, and objectives for specifi c Self-Defense Force (SDF) equipment.

I Japan’s Basic Defense Policy
The guideline specifi es (1) Japan’s own efforts, (2) strengthening of the Japan-U.S. Alliance,
and (3) active promotion of security cooperation as the basic principles from the perspective of
proactive contribution to peace based on international cooperation. Submarine unit

I Building a Dynamic Joint Defense Force
To build a Dynamic Joint Defense Force, the MOD conducts capability assessments based on
joint operations and builds a dynamic joint defense force, for the enhancement of deterrence and
response capability by pursuing further joint operations, improving the mission-capable rate of
equipment and its employment to conduct activities, as well as developing defense capabilities
adequate both in quality and quantity that underpin various activities.

I Role of the Defense Forces Fighter aircraft (F-35A)
G The following points will be emphasized as effective means of deterrence and response to
various situations: (1) ensuring the security of the sea and airspace surrounding Japan; (2) response to an attack on remote islands;
(3) response to ballistic missile attacks; (4) responses in outer space and cyberspace; and (5) responses to major disasters.

G Promoting training and exercises, defense cooperation and exchanges, securing of maritime security, international peace cooperation
activities, and capacity building assistance in order to stabilize the Asia-Pacifi c region and to improve the global security environment.

I Structure of the Self-Defense Forces
The “appendix” specifi es the target levels of the main formation and equipment.

I Foundation to Maximize Defense Capability
Also strengthen the foundations underpinning the defense force.


-----

Digest

**Medium Term Defense Program** **Chapter 2** P. 183


I The “Mid-Term Defense Program” (FY2014-FY2018) developed in December 2013 based
on the “National Defense Program Guidelines” specifi es the review of major units, major
projects concerned with the capability of the SDF, policies to strengthen the Japan-U.S.
Alliance, the maintenance scale of main equipment (“appendix”), and required expenses.

I Reorganization of the Major SDF Units
G The Ground Self-Defense Force (GSDF): Establish the Ground Central Command,
transform two divisions and two brigades into two rapid deployment divisions and two
rapid deployment brigades, and establish a coast observation unit and area security units

G The Maritime Self-Defense Force (MSDF): Retain four escort fl otillas (mainly consisting
of one helicopter destroyer (DDH) and two Aegis-equipped destroyers (DDG)) and fi ve Amphibious vehicle (AAV7)
escort divisions (consisting of other destroyers), and increase the number of submarines

G The Air Self-Defense Force (ASDF): At Naha Air Base, increase the number of fi ghter squadrons to two, and newly organize one airborne early
warning squadron

**Build-Up of Defense Capability in FY2016** **Chapter 2** P. 189


I In 2016, based on the National Defense Program Guidelines
and the Mid-Term Defense Program, and as the third year of
their implementation, Japan is steadily carrying out defense
development efforts to build up its defense capability.

I Japan will improve its defense capabilities in order to
seamlessly and dynamically fulfi ll its defense responsibilities,

response to a variety of security situations, and (2) supporting (KC-46A; reference image)
stability in the Asia-Pacifi c region.

**Defense-Related Expenditures** **Chapter 2** P. 190


I In 2016, based on the increasingly severe security environment, in order to strengthen the posture of protecting the life and property of the people
and Japan’s territorial land, sea, and air, Japan has increased defense-related expenditure, as in 2015 (increased 0.8% from the previous year)

Trend in Defense-Related Expenditures Over the Past 15 Years


50,000

46,000

49,392
49,262

48,760

48,607

48,297 48,221

47,815 47,838

47,903 47,426

47,028

46,826

46,804

46,625
46,453

14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28

Note: Does not include SACO-related expenses, portion meant to reduce the burden on the local community out of the U.S. forces realignment expenses, and expenses associated with
the acquisition of a new government aircraft. The total defense expenditures when including these items are 4,955.7 billion yen for FY2002, 4,952.7 billion yen for FY2003,
4 902 6 billi f FY2004 4 856 0 billi f FY2005 4 813 6 billi f FY2006 4 801 3 billi f FY2007 4 779 6 billi f FY2008 4 774 1 billi


-----

**p** **y** **y** **p**


**Human Foundation and Organization that Supports**

**Chapter 2** P. 194

**the Defense Force**


I For the Ministry of Defense (MOD)/SDF to exercise its defense capability effectively to the full extent, it is vitally important to enrich and enhance
the human resource foundation supporting it. Also, the various activities of the MOD/SDF are hard to implement without understanding and
cooperation by each and every person and local governments. Therefore it is necessary to further deepen the trust between local communities
and people, and the SDF.

I Recruitment and Employment
G Due to the declining birthrate and the popularization of higher education, the general recruitment
condition of uniformed SDF personnel is increasingly severe. In light of this, the SDF is recruiting
personnel with superior abilities and a strong desire to enlist from all over Japan under various
categories. There are also systems in place such as the SDF Reserve Personnel system, under
which they engage in their respective occupations in peacetime and serve as uniformed SDF
personnel in cases such as the issuing of defense call-up orders.

Female SDF personnel/pilot

I Promotion of the Careers of Female Personnel
G The MOD/SDF is implementing the “Action Plan for Promoting the Active Participation of Female
Employees and Work-Life Balance,” which incorporates three reforms–“Working style reform,”
“Reform to realize a successful career with a balanced life between childrearing and nursing,
etc.,” and “Reform for promoting successful female personnel,” (the development of internal
crèche facilities, etc.) in order to promote the work-life balance of the personnel in a unifi ed
manner whilst further expanding the recruitment and promotion of female personnel.

G As the result of reviewing the deployment restriction of female SDF personnel and lifting the
restriction preventing women from working in fi ghter squadrons, anti-tank helicopter units and
missile boats, female uniformed SDF personnel can now be assigned to all posts of the MSDF
except for submarines, and all posts of the ASDF.

I Measures Aimed at Ensuring Effective Use of Human Resources
Measures are being implemented with regard to personnel system reform, in order to respond
to the advancement of equipment as well as diversifi cation and internationalization of SDF
missions, from the perspective of ensuring the robustness of the SDF and making effective use
of human resources under the constrained budget.

New SDF members undergoing training

**Legislation for Peace and Security** **Chapter 3** P. 208


I The Legislation for Peace and Security was passed and enacted in September 2015 and came into force in March 2016.
I With the security environment surrounding Japan becoming increasingly severe, the Legislation for Peace and Security has historical
signifi cance in further ensuring the peace and security of Japan through enhancing the deterrence and making contributions to the peace and
stability of the region and the international community more proactively than ever before, and has been highly rated and supported by many
countries and organizations in the world.

I Revision of the Self-Defense Forces Law
G Establishment of the provisions for measures to rescue Japanese nationals overseas – In addition to the existing mission of “transportation of Japanese
nationals and others overseas,” “rescue measures,” including guarding and rescue of Japanese nationals and others overseas, became possible.

G Establishment of the provisions for the protection of weapons and other equipment of the units of the U.S. Armed Forces and armed forces of
other foreign countries – Enable SDF personnel to protect the weapons and other equipment of the units of the U.S. Armed Forces and armed
forces of other foreign countries that are, in cooperation with the SDF, currently engaged in activities that contribute to the defense of Japan.

G Expansion of the provision of supplies and services to the U.S. Armed Forces – Expand the range of scenes where the provision of supplies and
services is possible as well as the scope of supplies and services available.

I Law Concerning Measures to Ensure Peace and Security of Japan in Situations that Will Have an Important Inf uence on Japan’s Peace
and Security (Revision of the Law Concerning Measures to Ensure Peace and Security of Japan in Situations in Areas Surrounding Japan)

G The name of situations that will have an important infl uence on Japan’s peace and security has been changed from “situations in areas
surrounding Japan” to “situations that will have an important infl uence.”

G “Armed forces of other foreign countries engaged in activities contributing to the achievement of the objectives of the U.N. Charter,” etc.
were added as the armed forces, etc. responding to situations that will have an important infl uence on Japan’s peace and security subject to
Japan’s support. The law revision expanded the types of supplies and services the SDF can provide in situations that will have an important


infl uence on Japan’s peace and security and also set forth the measures to avoid integration with the use of force by a foreign country.


-----

I Amendment to the International Peace Cooperation Act

Digest

G “Internationally coordinated operations for peace and security” (humanitarian relief support and safety-ensuring tasks not under the
control of the United Nations) were added as operations Japan can participate in. In addition to the satisfaction of the Five Principles for
Participation, Japan can participate in these operations based on U.N. resolutions or at the request of the United Nations, or other prescribed
organizations.

G The so-called “safety-ensuring operations” and the so-called ‘kaketsuke-keigo” operations, etc. were added as tasks in U.N. peacekeeping operations,
etc., and the authority to use weapons was also reviewed. Prior Diet approval is required, in principle, for the “safety-ensuring operations.”

I Revision of the Legislation for Responses to Armed Attack Situations
G “Survived-Threatening Situation[(*1)]” was newly added to the situations to which Japan has to respond under the Armed Attack Situations
Response Act.

G Necessary revisions were made to relevant laws to make it possible to issue an order for defense operations to respond to a “SurvivedThreatening Situation” for the SDF’s primary mission of the defense of Japan, and also to require prior Diet approval for this, in principle, in the
same manner as for defense operations in the case of the armed attack situations, etc.

I Enactment of the International Peace Support Act (New)
G The International Peace Support Act is a newly enacted law that enables Japan to conduct cooperation and support operations, search and rescue
operations and ship inspection operations for the armed forces of foreign countries engaged in operations for peace and security of the international
community in situations threatening the international peace and security that the international community is collectively addressing[(*2)].

G The operations of armed forces of foreign countries need to have competent U.N. resolutions as well as meet some other requirements in
order for Japan to provide support. The Act also sets forth measures in order to avoid “integration” with the use of force by a foreign country,
such as those not allowing the SDF to conduct support activities “in the scene where no combat operations are conducted at that time” in
situations threatening the international peace and security that the international community is collectively addressing.

G Prior Diet approval is required without exception, and re-approval is necessary in the case of a lapse of more than two years since the
commencement of the response measures.

I Revision of the Act for Establishment of the National Security Council
G Responses to “Survived-Threatening Situation,” “situations that will have an important infl uence on Japan’s peace and security” and
“situations threatening international peace and security that the international community is collectively addressing” were added as the items
for deliberation.

G “Rescue measures for Japanese nationals and others overseas,” and “decisions on and changes in implementation plans for the implementation of
safety-ensuring operations or “kaketsuke-keigo” operations were added as the items the National Security Council must deliberate without fail.

*1 A situation where an armed attack against a foreign country that is in a close relationship with Japan occurs and as a result threatens Japan’s survival and poses a clear
danger to fundamentally overturn the people’s right to life, liberty and pursuit of happiness
*2 Situations that threaten peace and security of the international community, and the international community is collectively addressing the situations in accordance with
the objectives of the U.N. Charter to remove the threat, and Japan, as a member of the international community, needs to independently and proactively contribute to
these activities


Key Points regarding the Legislation for Peace and Security


Images of Situations and Conditions

Transportation of Japanese nationals overseas, etc. Support activities (including logistics support) in situations Response to armed attack situations, etc

[Self-Defense Forces Act] that will have an important influence on Japan’s peace [Legislation for Responses to Situations]
Rescue of Japanese nationals overseas, etc. (New) and security (Expansion) Responses to “Survived-Threatening Situation” (New)

[Act Concerning Measures to Ensure Peace and Security ・ “Use of force” permitted under the “Three New Conditions”

Protection of SDF’s weapons/other equipment [Self-Defense Forces Act] (Revision of the Act Concerning Measures to Ensure Peace and of Japan in Situations that will Have an Important Influence on Japan’s Peace and Security]
Protection of weapons/other equipment of the U.S. and Security of Japan in Situations in Areas Surrounding Japan)
other countries’ armed forces (New)

Provision of supplies and services to the U.S. Armed ・ Clarification of the purpose of the revisionthe purpose of the Act） （Revision of (1) When an armed attack against Japan occurs or The “Three New Conditions”when an armed attack

・Forces in peacetime Expand situations where supplies/services can be provided, such as the guarding of facilities of the U.S. Armed Forces stationed in Japan [Self-Defense Forces Act] (Expansion) ・・ Support activities for armed forces of foreign countries Expansion of the scope of support activities(not only the U.S.) (2) When there is no other appropriate means available to repel the attack and against a foreign country that is in a close relationship with Japan occurs and as a result threatens Japan’s survival and poses a clear danger to fundamentally overturn people’s right to life, liberty and pursuit of happinessensure Japan’s survival and protect its people

Ship Inspection Operations (Expansion) (3) Use of force limited to the minimum extent necessary

[Ship Inspection Operations Act]

・ Enable ship inspection operations in
situations that the international community is

International Peace Cooperation Activities collectively addressing for international peace and security

[International Peace Cooperation Act]

U.N. PKO (Addition)

・ Additional roles by Japanese Corps in operation
(e.g. security of specified areas including protection Support activities (including logistics support) to armed
of local population) forces of foreign countries in situations that the
・ Review of authority to use weapons (small arms) to international community is collectively addressing for
better align with current U.N. standard international peace and security (New)

[International Peace Support Act (New)]

Internationally coordinated operations for peace The exercise of the right of collective self-defense is not
and security permitted for the purpose of the so-called defense of a foreign
(Multinational cooperation outside U.N. PKO framework) country, namely, for the purpose of turning back an attack

made against a foreign country.

Reorganizing the Agenda Items of the National Security Council (NSC) [Act for Establishment of the National Security Council]


-----

**p** **y** **y** **p**


**Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements** **Chapter 4** P. 228


I Based on the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty, the Japan-U.S. Security
Arrangements, together with Japan’s own efforts, constitute the cornerstone
for Japan’s security.

I The Japan-U.S. Alliance, centering on bilateral security arrangements,
functions as “public goods” that contribute to the stability and prosperity,
not only of Japan but also of the Asia-Pacifi c region and the world at large.

I As the security environment surrounding Japan becomes increasingly
severe, and the United States, at the same time, maintains and strengthens
its engagement and presence in the Asia-Pacifi c region, it has become
more important than ever to strengthen the Japan-U.S. Alliance for the
security of Japan. Prime Minister Abe shakes hands with U.S. President Obama on the occasion of his
attendance at the APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting in November 2015

[Photo courtesy of the Cabinet Public Relations Offi ce]


**Outline of the New Guidelines** **Chapter 4** P. 230


I Defense Cooperation and the Objectives of the Guidelines
The new Guidelines newly specifi ed the matters to be emphasized
in security and defense cooperation. The objectives of the new
Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation are retained in
line with the approach of the 1997 Guidelines.

I Strengthened Alliance Coordination
Establishment of the Alliance Coordination Mechanism to be utilized
from peacetime; development and update of bilateral plan.

I Seamlessly Ensuring Japan’s Peace and Security
The new Guidelines present directions for achieving “seamless”
cooperation, from peacetime to contingencies.

I Cooperation for Regional and Global Peace and Security
The new Guidelines set forth specifi c forms of Japan-U.S.
cooperation for regional and global peace and security.


I Outer Space and Cyberspace Cooperation
The new Guidelines newly incorporate cooperation in outer space
and cyberspace.

I Bilateral Enterprise
The new Guidelines, in order to enhance the effectiveness of
bilateral cooperation, newly incorporate initiatives in the three
areas of defense equipment and technology cooperation,
intelligence cooperation and information security, and educational
and research exchanges that serve as the foundation of security
and defense cooperation.

I Procedures for the Review
The new Guidelines newly incorporate the implementation of the
regular evaluation.


**Initiatives to Build the Foundation for Strengthening the Alliance** **Chapter 4** P. 238


I Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting
The Japan–U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting (June 4, 2016)

G Regarding the arrest of a member of the civilian component in Okinawa,
the Ministers confi rmed their intent to continue to work closely together to
devise a set of effective prevention measures, including the review of the
Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) implementation practices related to U.S.
personnel with SOFA status, including the civilian component.

G The Ministers agreed that they oppose unilateral attempts to change the
status quo by force in the East China Sea and the South China Sea.

G In light of the developments regarding North Korea, the Ministers agreed to
maintain close Japan-U.S. cooperation.

G The Ministers affi rmed their intent to continue efforts to ensure the
effectiveness of the new Guidelines.

G The Ministers agreed to further deepen bilateral cooperation for defense

The Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting in Singapore (June 2016)

equipment and technology.


G The Ministers agreed to continue to cooperate in mitigating the impact
Oki


-----

I Major Initiatives for Strengthening the Alliance

Digest

G In order to respond to the increasingly severe security environment, Japan and the
United States will establish a seamless cooperation structure in all phases from
peacetime to contingencies, including cooperation in “gray zone” situations, while
enhancing the Japanese and U.S. presence in the Western Pacifi c. The two countries
are continuing to promote the expansion of joint training and exercises as well as joint
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) activities, and also the expansion
of the joint use of facilities and areas of both countries that serve as the bases for
these activities.

G In November 2015, based on the new Guidelines, the two governments established
the Alliance Coordination Mechanism (ACM) that enables bilateral information
sharing and coordination at various levels from peacetime, and upgraded the Bilateral
Planning Mechanism (BPM) for the development and update of bilateral plans.


SDF members on the lookout in joint fi eld training exercises, Orient
Shield, with the U.S. Army


**Stationing of the U.S. Forces in Japan** **Chapter 4** P. 253


I Signif cance of the Presence of the U.S. Forces in Japan
For the Japan-U.S. Alliance to adequately function as a deterrence that contributes to Japan’s defense as well as to the peace and stability
of the Asia-Pacifi c region, it is necessary to secure the presence of the U.S. Forces in Japan and to maintain a posture to respond swiftly and
expeditiously to emergencies. For this purpose, based on the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty, Japan allows the stationing of the U.S. Forces in
Japan, which is a core part of the Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements.

I Host Nation Support (HNS)
The Government of Japan, while paying adequate attention to its tight fi scal conditions, has been providing HNS from the perspective that
HNS is of extreme importance in supporting the smooth and effective operation of the U.S. Forces in Japan. In April 2016, the new Special
Measures Agreement (SMA) related to HNS took effect.

I Realignment of the U.S. Forces in Japan
Realignment of the U.S. Forces in Japan is extremely important in mitigating the impact on local communities, such as those in Okinawa, while
maintaining the deterrence capabilities of the U.S. Forces. The MOD plans to proceed with the U.S. Forces realignment and other initiatives
while making continuous efforts to gain understanding and cooperation from local communities accommodating facilities and areas of the
U.S. Forces in Japan.

I Stationing of the U.S. Forces in Okinawa
G The relocation of Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) Futenma to the Camp Schwab Henokosaki area (Nago City) is the only solution to avoid
the continued use of MCAS Futenma while maintaining the deterrence capabilities of the U.S. Forces in Japan, and will fully contribute to
mitigating the impact on Okinawa. The return of MCAS Futenma is also expected to be followed by further growth of Okinawa through the
reuse of the area. Thus, the Government of Japan is making all-out efforts to realize the relocation of MCAS Futenma.

G In December 2015, the Governments of Japan and the United States agreed on an early return of part of the land of MCAS Futenma as well
as on an early return of part of the land of Makiminato Service Area.

G Through the Consultation between the Central Government and Okinawa Prefecture, established in January 2016 to discuss ways to
mitigate the impact on Okinawa and further develop Okinawa, the Government of Japan is holding discussions with Okinawa prefectural
government on the relocation and return of MCAS Futenma and the early return of a major portion of Northern Training Area. As part of its
initiatives to mitigate the impact on Okinawa in a tangible manner, the Government of Japan is also addressing issues such as the return of
land areas south of Kadena Air Base, the reduction of U.S. troops stationed in Okinawa and its relocation to Guam and the training relocation
of MV-22 Osprey aircraft.

I Stationing of the U.S. Forces in Regions Other than Okinawa
In regions other than Okinawa, the MOD is implementing measures to consolidate facilities and areas of the U.S. Forces in Japan and to
proceed with the realignment of the U.S. Forces in Japan. Such measures are aimed at securing the stable presence of the U.S. Forces while
maintaining its deterrence abilities and trying to mitigate the impact on local communities.

I Initiatives toward Prevention of Incidents and Accidents Caused by U.S. Forces Personnel
On July 5, 2016, the Governments of Japan and the United States released the Japan-United States Joint Statement on Reviewing Implementation
Practices of the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) related to U.S. Personnel with SOFA Status, including the Civilian Component.


-----

**Property of the People as well as Securing Property of the People as well as Securing**
**Territorial Land, Water, and AirspaceTerritorial Land, Water, and Airspace**


**Organizational Structure Bearing Defense Capability** **Chapter 1** P. 278


I Reorganization of the Ministry of Defense (MOD) was implemented in October 2015 based on the “Direction of the Ministry of Defense Reform”
(August 2013).

G Unifi cation of work relating to actual operations into the Joint Staff

G Establishment of the Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Agency as a new extra-ministerial organization that brings together and
consolidates departments in the MOD related to the procurement of equipment

G Reform of the Internal Bureaus for strengthening the policy making function and the defense capability build-up function

**Effective Deterrence and Response** **Chapter 1** P. 283

**Ensuring Security of Sea and Airspace Surrounding Japan**


I The Self-Defense Forces (SDF) persistently engages in warning and surveillance activities in
the waters and airspace surrounding Japan in peacetime so that it can respond to various
contingencies immediately and seamlessly.

I In 2015, SDF confi rmed intrusions of Chinese government ships into Japanese territorial seas.
In addition, SDF confi rmed activities by Chinese Navy vessels including passage through the
southwestern islands and several activities near the contiguous water zone of Japan.
Due to those situations, the MOD/SDF is working to strengthen collaboration with relevant
government ministries and agencies, by sharing information with the Japan Coast Guard.

I In September 2015, a Russian aircraft (assumed) intruded into Japanese airspace off the MSDF P-3C patrol aircraft (upper) conducting warning
coast of the Nemuro Peninsula, to which the ASDF responded by scrambling its fi ghters. and surveillance, and ASDF E-767 airborne warning and
In FY2015 the ASDF aircraft scrambled 873 times. Of these, the number of times that the control system (AWACS) aircraft (lower)
ASDF aircraft scrambled against Chinese aircraft was 571, which set a record high since
the MOD began releasing the number of scrambles by country and region.
The MOD/SDF continues its utmost efforts in warning and surveillance in both the sea and
airspace around Japan and also engages in strict counter-measures to airspace intrusion.

F-15 fi ghter scrambling


Number and Breakdown of Scrambles since the Cold War


(Times)

1,000 **943**

**944**

Russia China Taiwan Other countries total **873**

**812** **810**

800

**464**

**567**

600

**415** **571**

**425**

**386**

400 **306**

**311** **299** **96** **156**

**220** **237**

200 **158** **31** **38** **359** **473**

**264** **247** **248** **288**
**193** **197**

**124**

0

1984* 1989 1993 1998 2003 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 (FY)

Note: The peak of the cold war


-----

**Defense of Japan’s Remote Islands**


Digest

**Defense of Japan’s Remote Islands**

I In order to respond to attacks on the remote islands, it is important to position
troops and so forth in accordance with the security environment, and also
to detect signs at an early stage and to obtain and secure maritime and air
superiority through persistent intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
(ISR) conducted by the SDF from peacetime. If signs of attack are detected in
advance, troops will be swiftly deployed and concentrated in an area expected
to be invaded ahead of the deployment of enemy units, and, deter and remove
enemy attacks through the joint operation combining all of the three services
(the GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF). In case of an invasion of the islands, the SDF

suppresses the enemy force by ground attack from aircraft and vessels, and then
implements operations to retake the islands through the amphibious landing of
GSDF units and other initiatives operations to retake.

I For defense posture buildup in the southwestern region, in January 2016, the ASDF
newly established the 9th Air Wing, while the GSDF newly formed the Yonaguni
coast observation unit in Yonaguni in March of the same year. Going forward, the
SDF will station an security unit in the remote islands area in the southwestern
region, establish an “Amphibious Rapid Deployment Brigade” (tentative name)
equipped with a full function for amphibious operations, and acquire fi xed wing
patrol aircraft (P-1), patrol helicopters (SH-60K), and other equipment.

I For the purpose of ensuring capabilities for swift and large-scale transportation
and deployment of units, the improvement of Osumi class transport LSTs
(Landing Ship, Tank) and obtainment of V-22 Ospreys will be carried out.


The ASDF 9th Air Wing Commander receiving the fl ag of
the State Minister of Defense Wakamiya

Western Army Commanding General receiving the fl ag of
the Coast Observation Unit from the Minister of Defense Nakatani


Conceptual Image of Defending Japan’s Offshore Islands


Overall air defenseOverall air defense

Secure and maintain marine
superiority and air superiority Aerial refuelingAerial refueling

SurfaceSurface
vesselsvessels

Maritime air supportMaritime air support

Anti-surfaceAnti-surface
warfarewarfare

Strategy to recapture remote islands
in the case of an invasion

SDF troops will be swiftly deployed and concentrated in
an area expected to be attacked ahead of the deployment Close Air SupportClose Air Support
of enemy units and they will try to intercept and defeat
any invasions. Landing

by aircraft

Response in the water

Landing by

Anti-submarine warfareAnti-submarine warfare amphibious

vehicle

Landing
by boat

Enemy submarines Submarine


-----

**Securing Territorial Land, Water, and Airspace**


**Japan’s Defense against Ballistic Missiles**

**and Other Attacks**


I Japan’s BMD is an effective multi-tier defense system with upper tier
interception by Aegis-equipped destroyers and lower tier by Patriot PAC3, both interconnected through the Japan Aerospace Defense Ground
Environment (JADGE).

I In response to North Korea’s ballistic missile launch, which was purported
to be an “earth observation satellite,” in February 2016, the Minister of
Defense issued the Order for destruction measures against ballistic
missiles and the MOD deployed destroyers equipped with SM-3 missiles
and the PAC-3 units. At the same time, every necessary measure
including dispatching the GSDF units to the Southwestern Islands was
also taken in case any debris were to fall from the sky.

GSDF personnel conducting a joint exercise with Fukuoka Prefectural Police

**Initiatives towards Ensuring**

**Maritime Security**


I In order to maintain the order of “Open and Stable Seas” and to
ensure the safety of maritime traffi c, the MOD/SDF promotes
various kinds of initiatives such as conducting counter-piracy
activities as well as providing capacity building assistance
to coastal countries, and conducting joint exercises in close
cooperation with the ally and others.

I With regard to the relationship between Japan and China,
MOD has had meetings the China defense authorities
towards the commencement of the maritime and air
communication mechanism in order to avoid and prevent
unexpected contingencies.


ASDF Patriot PAC-3 deployed in Camp Ichigaya for the destruction
of ballistic missiles etc.

**Response to Attacks by Guerillas,**

**Special Operations Forces and Others**


I Illegal activities by infi ltrated armed agents and sabotage
carried out by guerillas or special operations forces can pose
a serious threat to Japan’s peace and security, even if these
are small-scale infi ltrations and attacks.

I The MOD/SDF conducts joint exercises and training with
relevant government and local government agencies such as
police and the Japan Coast Guard, and strive to strengthen its
cooperation with them.

The Western Pacific Naval Symposium (WPNS) held in Indonesia


**Responses in Space**


I From the perspective of further promoting cooperation in the space domain between the defense authorities of Japan and the United States,
these two countries established the “Space Cooperation Working Group (SCWG)”in April 2015. The SCWG promotes reviews in broader fi elds
such as: (1) promotion of policy-related consultation regarding space, (2) closer information sharing, (3) cooperation for developing and
securing experts, and (4) implementation of tabletop exercises.


-----

**Response to Cyber Attacks**


on cutting-edge technology. Personnel working at the Cyber Defense Group

Digest

**Response to Cyber Attacks**

I The SDF C4 (Command, Control, Communication &
Computers) Systems Command is monitoring MOD/SDF
communications networks around the clock. In addition,
the MOD/SDF is engaged in holistic measures including
the development of intrusion prevention systems and
defense systems for increasing the safety of information and
communication systems, enactment of regulations stipulating
postures and procedures for responding to cyber attacks,
improving the human resources and technological bases, and
promoting information sharing as well as conducting research

**Response to Large-Scale Disasters**


I When large-scale disasters natural disasters occur, the SDF,
incooperates with local governments, engages in various
activities such as search and rescue of disaster victims and
missing ships or aircraft, fi ghting fl oods, offering medical
treatment, preventing epidemics, supplying water, and
transporting personnel and goods, etc.

I During the Kanto-Tohoku Heavy Rainfall Disaster in September
2015, in Ibaraki, Tochigi, and Miyagi Prefectures, the SDF

Rescue activities using a boat following the Kanto-Tohoku Heavy Rainfall Disaster in September 2015 conducted lifesaving operations and evacuation assistance

using boats etc., mobilizing approximately 7,540 personnel
accumulated number. Responding to the Kumamoto
Earthquake disaster in April 2016, in Kumamoto and Oita
Prefectures, approximately 814,000 personnel accumulated
number conducted lifesaving operations and livelihood support
for the victims (transportation of goods, provision of food and
water, bathing service, medical treatment assistance, etc.).

Search activities in Minamiaso following the 2016 Kumamoto Earthquake

**Transportation of Japanese Nationals Overseas, etc.**


I The SDF will protect Japanese nationals overseas, etc., in the
country to which it has been dispatched, and safely guide them
to aircraft, ships, and vehicles and transport them. The SDF
maintains operational readiness, with the GSDF designating
helicopter unit and unit personnel in charge of lead and
transport Japanese evacuees, the MSDF designating vessels
such as transport ships (including boarded aircraft), and the
ASDF designating airlift units and personnel for dispatch.

I Since the transportation of Japanese nationals overseas
requires close coordination between the GSDF, MSDF, and
ASDF, joint exercises are carried out in peacetime and the SDF
participates in the annual multinational joint exercise “Cobra The exercise for transporting Japanese nationals overseas carried out in Cobra Gold
Gold” in Thailand.


-----

**Securing Territorial Land, Water, and Airspace**


**Active Promotion of Security Cooperation** **Chapter 2** P. 311


I In today’s international community, it is extremely diffi cult for any country to ensure its own national security only by itself, and it has become
inevitable that countries sharing strategic interests deal with the issues in a coordinated manner. Moreover, as the roles of military forces
have diversifi ed, there are increasing opportunities for such forces to play an important role in promoting confi dence-building and friendly

|relationships between nations such as supporting post-confl ict recon I Amid the situation where the necessity and potentiality of internatio the standpoint of “Proactive Contribution to Peace” based on the to the peace, stability and prosperity of Japan, the Asia-Pacifi c regi SDF enhances bilateral and multilateral defense cooperation and e cooperation activities, and other relevant efforts.|struction. nal cooperation in the security area are increasing, the MOD/SDF, from principle of international cooperation, is required to actively contribute on, and the entire international community. For this reason, the MOD/ xchanges, and at the same time actively promotes international peace e 2016) MMoonnggoolliiaa RReeppuubblliicc CChhiinnaa ooff KKoorreeaa More than 5 exchanges More than 3 exchanges MMyyaannmmaarr 2 exchanges LLaaooss 1 exchange TThhaaiillaanndd VViieettnnaamm PPhhiilliippppiinneess Cambodia MMaallaayyssiiaa SSiinnggaappoorree IInnddoonneessiiaa Timor-Leste AAuussttrraalliiaa etween defense authorities held ration America (excl. the U.S.) conventional Europe arious means Middle East and Africa quipment and Former Soviet Union countries long with this South Asia Pacific n the process Southeast Asia r establishing Mongolia The Third ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM Plus) held in Malaysia China Republic of Korea gh Dialogue such as its|
|---|---|
|Achievements in High-Level Defense Exchanges (January 2015 – Jun||
|UUnniitteedd KKiinnggddoomm GGeerrmmaannyy FFrraannccee IIttaallyy Number of bilateral agreements and IInnddiiaa memorandums in the field of defense concluded 20 Agreement 15 Memorandum, etc. 10 5 0 Before FY2010- FY2013- FY2009 FY2012 FY2015 Number of bilateral dialogues and consultations b Toward Strategic International Defense Coope 100 I With regard to 9d0efense exchanges and cooperation, in addition to bilateral dialogu8e0s and cooperation exchanges, Japan has combined v such as joint ex7e0rcises and capacity building assistance, defense e technology coo6p0eration to create deeper cooperative relationship. A initiative, multila50teral defense cooperation and exchanges are also i of developing t4o0ward strategic international defense cooperation fo order within the3 0region. 20 I Initiatives under the Multilateral Security Framework and throu 10 G Japan has been working to strengthen multilateral cooperation||


America (excl. the U.S.)

Europe

Middle East and Africa

Former Soviet Union countries

South Asia

Pacific

Southeast Asia

Mongolia


20 Republic of Korea

I Initiatives under the Multilateral Security Framework and through Dialogue

10

G Japan has been working to strengthen multilateral cooperation such as its

0

participation in the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM) Plus in November FY2005 FY2006 FY2007 FY2008 FY2009 FY2010 FY2011 FY2012 FY2013 FY2014 FY2015 (FY)
2015 and the holding of the Japan-ASEAN Defense Vice-Ministerial Forum in
September of the same year.

G Japan also actively engages in capacity building assistance in order to actively
create stability within the region and improve the global security environment.


-----

of India concerning the transfer of defense equipment and technology and the Agreement A scene from the capacity building assistance in Timor-Leste

Digest

I Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with Other Countries
G Australia: In November 2015, the Japan-Australia Foreign and Defense Ministerial
Meeting was held. In December of the same year, new initiatives for strengthening JapanAustralia security and defense cooperation were approved in the Summit meeting

G ROK: The Japan-ROK Defense Ministerial Meeting was held in the ROK in October 2015,
for the fi rst time in four years and nine months

G India: In December 2015, during the Japan-India Summit Meeting, the two leaders
signed Agreement between the government of Japan and the government of the Republic

between the government of Japan and the government of the Republic of India concerning provided by three countries - Japan, the United States, and Australia
security measures for the protection of classifi ed military information

G China: The Japan-China Ministerial Meeting was held in November 2015 for the fi rst time in four years and fi ve months

G Indonesia: In December 2015, the fi rst Japan-Indonesia Foreign and Defense Ministerial Meeting was held

G The Philippines: The Agreement concerning the Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology was signed in February 2016

G United Kingdom: The second Japan-U.K. Foreign and Defense Ministerial Meeting was held in January 2016

G Canada: The Japan-Canada Vice-Ministerial “2+2” Dialogue was held in April 2016


SDF personnel participating in multinutional exercise
Khan Quest, in Mongolia


Komodo 2016 in which a destroyer Ise participated The ASDF’s and the United States Air Force’s aircrafts
conducting formation fl ying during the Japan-U.S.-Australia
joint exercise Cope North Guam


**Ensuring Maritime Security**


I For Japan, as a major maritime state, strengthening the maritime order based on fundamental
principles such as the rule of law and the freedom of navigation, as well as ensuring safe maritime
transport, is the foundation for its peace and prosperity. For this reason, in cooperation with the
relevant countries, the MOD/SDF has engaged in anti-piracy operations, as well as promoting
various initiatives including assistance for capacity building in this fi eld for those coastal states
alongside the sea lanes, and making the most of various opportunities to enhance joint training
and exercises in waters other than those in the immediate vicinity of Japan.

SDF destroyer providing direct escort to a cargo ship

I For counter-piracy operations, Japan has participated in CTF151 and carried out it mission in
cooperation with other participating countries.

**Efforts to Support International Peace Cooperation Activities**


I United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS)
Currently, Japan dispatches an Engineer Unit approximately 350
personnel and staff offi cers to engage in activities corresponding
to the need of UNMISS such as improvement of main roads in
South Sudan.

I Cooperation to the UN Peacekeeping Operations in the Area
of Human Resources Development
Japan has dispatched SDF personnel as lecturers to PKO SDF personnel engaging in road construction SDF personnel teaching how to operate

for UNMISS heavy equipment operation as part of the

Centers in different countries and instructors for the Project for ARDEC activities
Africa Rapid Deployment of Engineering Capabilities (ARDEC). In
addition Japan co-hosted the United Nations Training of Trainers (TOT) with the United Nations.

**Initiatives for Arms Control, Disarmament and Non-Proliferation**


I Japan plays an active role in international initiatives for arms control, disarmament, and nonproliferation in regard to weapons of mass
destruction, such as nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons, as well as missiles.


-----

**Securing Territorial Land, Water, and Airspace**


**Measures on Defense Equipment and Technologies** **Chapter 3** P. 356


**Promotion of Research and Development for**

**Ensuring Technological Superiority**


I Japan conducts research and development on defense equipment that integrate
dual-use technologies in order to ensure technological superiority. In April 2016,
the fi rst fl ight of the Advanced Technology Demonstrator (X-2) was carried out.

I Considering application of defense equipment, the MOD’s own funding program
called “Innovative Science & Technology Initiative for Security” (competitive
funding) was launched in FY2015 to discover ingenious research conducted
by universities, public research institutes and companies etc., and to nurture
promising research. In FY2015, nine research projects were selected.

Advanced Technology Demonstrator (X-2)

**Efforts toward Project Management, etc.**


I The Department of Project Management was set up in the Acquisition, Technology &
Logistics Agency with the aim to manage the acquisition process of defense
equipment throughout its lifecycle. The Department works to realize effective and
effi cient acquisition of defense equipment with strategic perspective, by selecting
twelve programs as subject for acquisition management.

I The MOD intends to reduce the procurement cost and ensure stable procurement
by the procurement of defense equipment and services based on long-term
contracts, improved effi ciency in the maintenance of equipment, bulk purchase and
other methods.
C-2 (one of the selected programs for acquisition management)

**Defense Equipment and Technology Cooperation**


I Based on the Three Principles on Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology,
Japan promotes defense equipment and technology cooperation with other countries
in order to contribute to maintenance and enhancement of defense production and
technological bases, as well as promoting peace and international cooperation.

I In order to ensure maintenance bases of Japan-U.S. common equipment, Japan has
carried out a few initiatives such as promoting the involvement of Japanese industries
in the manufacturing process and the establishment of common maintenance bases
in preparation for the F-35A acquisition, and maintaining both the GSDF’s and the
United States Marine Corp’s Osprey aircraft in GSDF Camp Kisarazu.

Engineers from the japanese maintenance company (Fuji Heavy Industries
Ltd.) checking the structure of the U.S. Marine Corps Ospreys I In November 2015, with Australia, Japan submitted the review result of the

Australian Future Submarine Program. (In April 2016, the Government of Australia
made a decision on a French company to be their international partner for the
Submarine Program)

I With India, the Agreement between the Government of Japan and the Government
of India concerning the Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology was
signed in December 2015, and it was expressed that potential and future projects
including US-2 should be sought.

I With the Philippines, the Agreement between the Government of Japan and the
Government of the Philippines concerning the Transfer of Defense Equipment and

TC-90 under consultation with the Philippines to transfer Technology Agreement was signed in February 2016, and in May 2016 it was

agreed to put the transfer of MSDF’s training aircraft TC-90 to the Philippine Navy


into practice


-----

Digest


**Strategy on Defense Production and Technological Bases**


I In light of Japan’s recent severe fi scal condition, the realignment of Western defense industries, and the advance in international joint
development and production projects, the “Strategy on Defense Production and Technological Bases” was adopted in June 2014. The Strategy
showed various measures for maintaining and strengthening defense production and technological bases, courses of action for each area of
defense equipment, etc.

**Interaction with Local Communities and Japanese Citizens** **Chapter 4** P. 374

**Collaboration with Local Communities**


I The MOD/SDF conducts a range of cooperation activities to support the life of
citizens, further deepening the mutual trust between local communities/citizens
and the SDF, as well as largely contributing to the maintenance and activation of
local communities.

The GSDF personnel carrying out the disposal of MSDF aircraft in the mission of emergency transportation

The ASDF Blue Impulse fl ying over Hakodate Station
at the Hokkaido Shinkansen Launch Event

unexploded ordinance from a remote island


**A Variety of Public Relations Activities**


I The MOD/SDF conducts activities to widely inform nationals of the current circumstances of the SDF. For example, as part of the commemoration
of the SDF anniversary, the SDF Marching Festival is held at Nippon Budokan arena every year. In addition, a troop review, a fl eet review, and
an air review are hosted in rotation by the GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF respectively. In 2015, the SDF fl eet review was held at Sagami Bay.

The FY2015 SDF Marching Festival The FY2015 Fleet Review


-----

**Part**
###### I

Security Environment
Surrounding Japan

**Chapter 1**
**Overview**

**Chapter 2**
**Defense Policies of Countries**

**Chapter 3**
**Issues in the International**
**Community**


-----

**Chapter** **Overview**
**1**


**Section 1** **Trends in the International Community**


The security environment surrounding Japan has
become increasingly severe, with various challenges and
destabilizing factors becoming more tangible and acute.
Even after the end of the Cold War, interstate
confl icts remain in the periphery of Japan. While
nations with large military forces are concentrated in
this region, a regional cooperation framework in the
security realm has not been suffi ciently institutionalized.
Opaque and uncertain factors such as territorial disputes
and reunifi cation issues remain. There has been also
a tendency towards an increase in and prolongation of
so-called “gray-zone” situations, that is, neither pure
peacetime nor contingencies over territory, sovereignty,
and maritime economic interests.[1] In addition, there has
been a noticeable trend among neighboring countries
to modernize and reinforce their military capabilities
and to intensify their military activities. In this regard,
security challenges and destabilizing factors in the AsiaPacifi c region including the area surrounding Japan are
becoming more serious.
In particular, North Korea’s further progress in
nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles development
through its fourth nuclear test and ballistic missile
launches, coupled with repeated provocative rhetoric
and behavior that disregard the international community,
constitute serious and imminent threats to the security
of the region including Japan and of the international
community. Additionally, while China’s reinforcement
of its military capabilities without transparency, along
with active maritime advancements, has been rapidly
shifting the regional military balance, China’s attempts
to change the status quo in the East and South China Seas
based on its unique assertions which are incompatible


with the existing order of international law, have become
security concerns to the region including Japan and to
the international community, including the likelihood of
increasing the risk of causing unintended consequences
due to misunderstanding or miscalculation.
In a global security environment, interdependence
among countries has expanded and deepened with
globalization and rapid advances in technological
innovations. At the same time, there is a growing risk
that unrest or a security problem in a single country
or region could immediately develop into a challenge
or destabilizing factor for the entire international
community. The activities of international terrorist
organizations, including the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL),[2] continue to gain momentum. Today, the
threat of terrorism is not confi ned to the Middle East and
North Africa, but is expanding globally. Furthermore,
while Russia has still been subjected to the sanctions by
the international community, the outcomes of Russia’s
changes to the status quo by force or coercion through
so-called “hybrid warfare”[3] in Ukraine have taken on
an aspect of being entrenched, and it is expected that
the international community will make further efforts to
improve the situation. Simultaneously, China’s unilateral
acts that alter the status quo and heighten tension, such
as large-scale and rapid land reclamation in the South
China Sea, establishment of outposts there, and their
use for military purposes, have left challenges for the
international response, in the midst of China’s continued
attempt to further create a fait accompli. In addition,
the recent spate of cyber attacks has become more
sophisticated and skillful by the day, with government
involvement suspected in various attacks. In this context,


So-called “gray-zone” situations concisely describe a broad range of situations, that is, neither pure peacetime nor contingencies. For example, they could involve the following circumstances:
1) Confl icting assertions between states, etc., over territory, sovereignty, economic interests including maritime interests, and other forms of rights and interests;
2) Not relying only on diplomatic negotiation among parties for a party to make its country’s assertions or demands, or to have the other party accept said assertions or demands; and
3) Showing physical presence frequently, or attempting or making changes to the status quo in an area related to the dispute by using armed organizations or other means to the extent that it does not constitute
armed attack, in order to appeal a party’s assertion or demand or to force acceptance of it.

ISIL has become the common term in the documents of the international community, including United Nations Security Council resolutions.

While various explanations have been offered for so-called “hybrid warfare,” in this white paper, the term is used to mean “aggression conducted by methods that are diffi cult to identify defi nitively as ‘armed


-----

there are increasing risks to the stable use of cyberspace.
Under these circumstances, the United States, while
faced with a difficult financial situation, has made it clear
that it would continue to give greater focus to the AsiaPacific region in its strategies, including the National
Security Strategy, and strengthen its relations with allies
in the region (rebalance to the Asia-Pacific region). In
addition, the United States has made a clear commitment
to continue playing a leading role in tackling global
security challenges, based on the recognition that it is
the only country capable of leading the international
community. Furthermore, with expanding and deepening
interdependence, major countries have a growing shared
interest in building a more stable international security
environment. Countries with a shared interest in resolving
issues are increasingly collaborating to take proactive
responses to achieve regional and global stability. For
example, the international community is working together
to protect the existing international order based upon law,
including an open, free, and peaceful maritime order. The
coalition and countries such as Russia are conducting
military activities against ISIL as part of the “War on
Terror.” Countries are also engaged in diplomatic efforts
at the summit level to find solutions to the ever more
complex and divisive regional conflicts.
The multi-polarization of the world continues as a
result of shifts in the balance of power due to the extension
of the international influence of countries such as China,
India, and Russia on the political, economic, and military
fronts, and the relative change of influence of the United
States. Increases in demand for natural resources, energy,
and food stemming from economic growth in emerging
countries and a larger middle class are expected to
further intensify the international competition for these
resources. Against this backdrop, changes in or denial of
the existing regional and international order, or assertions
and activities to secure economic interests could become
more tangible and acute. This in turn could lead to
increases in “gray-zone” situations and regional conflicts
in the future.


Additionally, the rapid spread of the Internet and
information and communications technology (ICT)
networks, including social media – one of the key factors
of globalization – have given non-state actors a much
greater ability to disseminate their opinions and assertions
as well as mobilize supporters, and by extension, have
significantly increased their influence on countries and
the international community. For example, criticism of a
nation sent out by an individual, or extremism disseminated
by an international terrorist organization, have tended to
propagate and spread explosively or be transmitted across
the world by ICT networks. Controlling these activities
have become increasingly challenging even for countries
like authoritarian nations with strong control over their
people, as well as for the international community that
strives to contain the operations of international terrorist
organizations. As a result, countries have been forced to
pay greater consideration to public opinion on domestic
governance and management of state affairs. At the same
time, the international community is faced with more
complex issues which need to be resolved and which are
increasingly difficult to address.
In addition, it is believed that national security
decision-making is more complex than ever before, as
some nations have important economic relationships
despite differences in fundamental values and strategic
interests as seen in the case of Europe and Russia with
regard to the Ukraine issue in 2014, as well as the response
of Europe, ASEAN member states, and other countries
to China’s proposal to establish the Asian Infrastructure
Investment Bank (AIIB) in 2015.
The security challenges and destabilizing factors
in the international community which has these
characteristics are complex, diverse, and wide-ranging,
and it is becoming ever more difficult for a single
country to deal with them on its own. In this context, it is
increasingly important for countries which share interests
in regional and global stability to cooperate and actively
respond to security challenges. Cross-cutting government
efforts are also critical to overcome these challenges.


-----

**Section 2** **Asia Pacifi c Security Environment**


The Asia-Pacifi c is a unique region with a concentration
of large-scale military forces. Recently, the shift in the
global balance of power stemming from the increase
in power of China and other nations is having an acute
impact on military trends in the region. Under this
situation, countries in the region have made efforts
to enhance and strengthen specifi c and practical
intra-regional coordination and collaboration with a
particular focus on non-traditional security fi elds such as
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief. On the other
hand, this region abounds in political, economic, ethnic,
and religious diversity. Also, views on security and
perceptions of threats are different by country. Therefore,
a regional cooperation framework in the security realm
has not been suffi ciently institutionalized, and longstanding issues of territorial rights and reunifi cation
continue to remain in the region.
In the Korean Peninsula, the Korean people have
been divided for more than half a century, and the
faceoff continues between the military forces of the
Republic of Korea (ROK) and North Korea. There are
issues concerning Taiwan and the South China Sea.
Furthermore, with regard to Japan, territorial disputes
over the Northern Territories and Takeshima, both of
which are inherent parts of the territory of Japan, remain
unresolved.
On top of this, recent years have seen a continued
tendency towards the prolongation of “gray-zone”
situations, raising concerns that they may develop into
more serious situations in the absence of a clear path
towards the resolution of the situations.
In North Korea, it is deemed that following the change
of regime that made Chairman of the Korean Workers’
Party (KWP) Kim Jong-un the leader of the country, the
regime continues to strengthen and tighten its grip to
make KWP Chairman Kim Jong-un the sole leader. North
Korea is military-focused and deploys a massive military
force. It is also furthering its development, deployment,
transfer, and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs), including nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles, and it maintains a large-scale special operations
force. Through these activities, North Korea continues
to maintain and strengthen asymmetrical military


capabilities.[4] In particular, it is regarded that North Korea
has further advanced its entire ballistic missile program,
including new ballistic missiles, through technological
verifi cation conducted by launching a series of ballistic
missiles. In addition, recently, North Korea has not
only engaged in research and development of ballistic
missiles, but has also intensifi ed activities to increase their
operational capabilities, including surprise attack. North
Korea has conducted nuclear tests in defi ance of calls of
restraint from the international community, and is believed
to be seeking to acquire hydrogen bombs to further
enhance its nuclear forces. Considering the technological
maturity reached through the past four nuclear tests, it is
possible that North Korea has successfully miniaturized
nuclear weapons for warheads and enabled them to be
equipped on ballistic missiles. With the passage of time,
there will likely be a growing risk that North Korea
would deploy ballistic missiles mounted with a nuclear
warhead that have ranges covering Japan. North Korea
has repeated provocative rhetoric and behavior against
related countries including Japan, especially in 2013,
emphasizing that Japan is within the range of its missiles,
referring to specifi c Japanese cities. Such North Korean
military trends constitute a serious and imminent threat
to the security not only of Japan but also of the entire
region and the international community. North Korea’s
abduction of Japanese nationals, a grave issue concerning
the sovereignty of Japan and the lives and security of the
Japanese people, is yet to be resolved. A solution will
require concrete actions by North Korea.
Today, China has signifi cant infl uence in the
international community. Accordingly, China is strongly
expected to recognize its responsibility in the international
community, accept and comply with international norms,
and play an active role in a more cooperative manner in
regional and global issues. In the meantime, China has
been continuously increasing its defense budget at a
high level, and has been rapidly reinforcing its military
capabilities in a wide range of areas, without suffi cient
transparency. In particular, China is believed to be
making efforts to strengthen its asymmetrical military
capabilities to prevent military activities by other
countries in the region, denying access and deployment


Asymmetrical military capabilities, in this context, refer to means of attack different from those of an opponent with superior conventional military capabilities. Such measures are exploited to compensate for


-----

of foreign militaries to its surrounding areas (so-called
“Anti-Access/Area-Denial” [“A2/AD”] capabilities[5]),
and recently, pursuing large-scale military reforms
designed to build its joint operations structure with actual
combat in mind. In addition, China is rapidly expanding
and intensifying its activities both in quality and quantity
in the maritime and aerial domains in the region,
including in the East and South China Seas. In particular,
China has continued to take assertive actions with regard
to issues of conflicts of interest in the maritime domain,
as exemplified by its attempts to change the status quo
by coercion, and has signaled its position to realize its
unilateral assertions without making any compromises.
As for the seas and airspace around Japan, China has
intruded into Japanese territorial waters frequently by
its government ships, and has engaged in dangerous
activities that could cause unintended consequences, such
as its vessel’s direction of fire control radar at a Japan
Maritime Self-Defense Force (MSDF) destroyer, the
flight of fighters abnormally close to SDF aircraft, and
its announcement of establishing the “East China Sea Air
Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ)” based on its own
assertion thereby infringing the freedom of overflight
over the high seas. In the South China Sea, China has
continued to take unilateral actions that change the status
quo and heighten tension, including large-scale and
rapid reclamation of multiple features, establishment of
outposts there, and their use for military purposes, based
on China’s unique assertions which are incompatible
with the existing order of international law, and has made
steady efforts to create a fait accompli. In addition, a
Chinese fighter is alleged to have flown abnormally close
to and conducted an intercept of a U.S. Forces aircraft.
These Chinese activities represent security concerns of
the region encompassing Japan, and of the international
community. For this reason, China is urged to further
increase transparency regarding its military and enhance
its compliance with international norms. It is a key task
to further strengthen mutual understanding and trust
by promoting dialogue and exchanges with China, and
make further progress on measures to build trust, such as
measures to avoid and prevent unintended consequences
in the maritime domain.
Russia, while perceiving the buildup of an affluent
nation as its task for the present, attaches importance
to becoming an influential power in a multipolarizing
world, based on the deployment of its new economic,


cultural, and military might. Russia has promoted the
strengthening of the readiness of its Armed Forces and
the development and induction of new equipment, while
continuing to give priority to its nuclear force. Recently,
a confrontational relationship has developed between
Russia and such countries as the United States and
European nations over Ukraine which Russia deems is
part of its sphere of influence. Meanwhile, Russia took
actions intended to expand its international influence,
including military interventions in Syria. Russia faces a
severe economic situation due to falling crude oil prices, a
plunging ruble, and the impacts of EU and U.S. economic
sanctions, among other factors. Even as expenditure
cuts are thus made in a wide range of areas, Russia has
striven to secure defense spending with priority and has
continued to modernize its Armed Forces. Recently,
Russia has intensified its military activities not only in
the Asia-Pacific region, but also in the Arctic, Europe, the
periphery of mainland United States, and the Middle East,
and has been expanding the area of activities. In the Far
East, the Russian Armed Forces have conducted largescale exercises. Furthermore, Russia’s changing of the
status quo by force or coercion in Ukraine has heightened
the threat of Russian “hybrid warfare,” especially in
Europe, and is perceived as a global issue that could
affect the entire international community, including Asia.
As seen above, in the Asia-Pacific region, where the
security environment has increasingly grown severe, the
presence of the U.S. Forces remains extremely important
in order to achieve regional stability. Accordingly, Japan
and other countries, such as Australia and the ROK, have
established bilateral alliances and partnerships with the
United States, and allow the stationing and rotational
deployment of the U.S. Forces in their territories. In
addition, the U.S. Forces have recently taken measures
to further strengthen their presence. As regards the
responses to the unilateral changes in the status quo
by force or coercion based on unique assertions, the
international community centered around countries in the
region are making concerted efforts to protect the existing
international order based on law.

See>> Fig. I-1-2-1 (Major Military Forces in the Asia-Pacific Region
(Approximate Strength))

Opportunities for bilateral defense exchanges between
countries in the region have increased in recent years.
Multilateral security dialogues, including the ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF), the ASEAN Defense Ministers’


Anti-Access (A2) is a concept introduced by the United States. It refers to capabilities, usually long-range, designed to prevent an opposing force from entering an operational area. Area-Denial (AD) refers to capabilities,
usually of shorter range, designed to limit an opposing force’s freedom of action within the operational area. Weapons used for A2/AD include ballistic missiles, cruise missiles, anti-satellite weapons, air-defense systems,


-----

|Russian Fa|80,000 troops (12) 260 vessels - 600,000 tons 350 aircraft r East|
|---|---|

|orth Korea|1,020,000 troops (27) 780 vessels - 560 aircraft 104,000 tons|
|---|---|


Fig. I-1-2-1 Major Military Forces in the Asia-Pacific Region (Approximate Strength)

**80,000 troops (12)** **260 vessels - 600,000 tons** **350 aircraft**

**Russian Far East**

**China** **1,020,000 troops (27)** **780 vessels -** **560 aircraft**

**North Korea** **104,000 tons**

**1,600,000 troops (151)**
**10,000 marines (2)** **ROK**

**495,000 troops (56)**
**29,000 marines (3)**

**880 vessels -**
**1,502,000 tons** **240 vessels -**

**211,000 tons**

**620 aircraft**

**2,720 aircraft** **Japan**

**U.S. Forces in the ROK**

**140,000 troops (15)**

**17,000 troops (5)**

**137 vessels -**

**80 aircraft** **469,000 tons**

**410 aircraft**

**U.S. Forces in Japan**

**Taiwan** **18,000 troops (1)**

**130,000 troops (15)** **130 aircraft**
**10,000 marines (3)**

**U.S. 7th Fleet**

**390 vessels -**
**210,000 tons** **30 vessels -**

**510 aircraft** **394,000 tons**

**50 (carrier-based)**
aircraft

The United States Geological Survey: GTOPO30; and the United States
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration: ETOPO1

Notes: 1. Source: “The Military Balance 2016,” documents published by the U.S. DoD, etc.
2. Figures for Japan indicate the strength of each SDF as of the end of 2015; the number of combat aircraft is the sum of ASDF aircraft (excluding
transport aircraft) and MSDF aircraft (fixed-wing aircraft only).

3. Figures for the U.S. ground forces in Japan and the ROK are those of the Army and Marine Corps personnel combined.

4. Combat aircraft include Navy and Marine aircraft.

5. Figures in parentheses show the total number of central units, such as divisions and brigades. That of North Korea shows only divisions. That of
Taiwan includes military police as well.

6. The number of U.S. 7th Fleet vessels and aircraft indicates those which are forward-deployed in Japan and Guam.

7. Figures of combat aircraft of the U.S. Forces, Japan and the U.S. 7th Fleet include only fighters.

Legend

Ground forces Naval vessels Combat aircraft
(200,000 troops) (200,000 tons) (500 aircraft)


Meeting-Plus (ADMM Plus), conferences hosted by nongovernmental institutions with the participation of relevant
defense ministers, and bilateral and multilateral joint


exercises are held. Promoting and developing such multilayered approaches among countries is also important to
ensure stability in the region.


-----

**Section 3** **Global Security Issues**


A range of regional confl icts still exists across the globe,
which have complex and diverse backgrounds and forms.
Especially in the Middle East and Africa, against the
backdrop of the turmoil, civil war, and regional confl ict
that followed the “Arab Spring,” there is an increase in
areas which lack national governance. In many cases,
international terrorist organizations made inroads in
these areas, expanded their organizations, and intensifi ed
their activities. These cases have made regional confl icts
more complex, making it increasingly challenging for
nations and regional organizations with confl icts in their
regions to address and resolve them, as well as for the
international community. On the other hand, climate
change and competition between sovereign nations
to secure resources and energy could become more
tangible, and cause regional disputes. They have become
new factors that affect the global security environment.
Furthermore, even as the various functions of military
forces are utilized more to conduct prompt rescue
activities in response to large-scale natural disasters and
outbreaks of infectious diseases, the presence of countries
with weak governance has made it more diffi cult to deal
with risks such as the explosive outbreak and spread of
infectious diseases.
The proliferation of WMDs, such as nuclear,
biological, and chemical (NBC) weapons, and of ballistic
missiles that serve as the means of delivery of WMDs
is still viewed as a signifi cant threat to the international
community. In particular, there are continuing concerns
about the acquisition and use of WMDs by non-state
actors, such as international terrorist organizations. In
this regard, the international community continues to
pursue efforts to counter terrorism activities that utilize
nuclear materials and other radioactive substances.
Meanwhile, with regard to Iran’s nuclear program, the
United States, the European Union (EU), among other
countries have imposed sanctions against Iran, while
engaging in discussions with the country. In 2015, a fi nal
agreement was reached on the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action, containing provisions on Iran’s implementation
of measures to restrict uranium enrichment activities and
ban the production of weapons-grade plutonium. Also, in
response to North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic missile
issues, a new United Nations Security Council resolution
was adopted following North Korea’s nuclear test
and ballistic missile launches in 2016, which includes
sanctions that ban the export and import of all items that
could contribute to North Korean nuclear and ballistic


missile programs. In addition, initiatives which focus
on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament are under
way, such as the new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty
(New START) entering into force between the United
States and Russia in 2011.
Furthermore, there has been a growing tendency for
the threat of international terrorism to spread rapidly. The
diversifi cation of actors that carry out acts of terrorism,
coupled with the increasing complexity of regional
confl icts, have made the prevention of terrorism even
more challenging. Similar to ISIL, terrorist organizations
with abundant funding and powerful and sophisticated
military capabilities continue to step up their activities.
Through ingenious public relations strategies using
the Internet and other tools, they communicate their
extremism and gain multiple followers and new members
around the world. In addition, the United States,
European nations, and elsewhere face concerns over
the threat of so-called “home-grown” and “lone-wolf”
terrorism – namely, acts of terrorism perpetrated in the
home country singlehandedly or by a small number of
people, including those who experienced combat in a
confl ict area and returned to their home country, or those
who have become infl uenced by extremism. As shown by
the terror attacks in Paris in 2015 and the terror attacks
in Brussels in 2016, the threat of international terrorism
is not confi ned to the Middle East and North Africa, and
is spreading globally. In view of incidents including the
terrorist attack in Dhaka, Bangladesh in July 2016, it
can be said that Japan is in a situation where it needs to
squarely address the threat of international terrorism as
its own challenge.
Securing the stable use of not only conventional
areas of activity – sea and airspace – but also new areas of
activity such as outer space and cyberspace is becoming
a signifi cant security challenge for the international
community. Further developments in military and science
technology and the recent dramatic advances in ICT are
increasing the dependence of social infrastructure and
military activities on outer space and cyberspace. On the
other hand, the development of anti-satellite weapons by
nations and the increasing number of cyber attacks, in
some of which the involvement of government agencies
is suspected, are heightening the risks to the stable use
of outer space and cyberspace. In recent years, concrete
initiatives have been under way in various countries
aimed at strengthening an entire country’s capabilities
to respond to cyber attacks including private companies


-----

as well as acquiring capabilities to monitor threats to
satellites and other space assets. There is also an effort in
the international community to promote the rule of law,
including establishing a code of conduct in outer space
and cyberspace. With regard to the maritime domain,
which has been regarded as a fundamental means for
supporting international trade, piracy acts have taken
place in various parts of the world, and there have been
cases where countries unilaterally assert their rights
and take actions based on their own assertion that is
inconsistent with the existing order of international law,
thereby unduly infringing the freedom of navigation
on and flight over the high seas. Recently, China has
made further efforts to create a fait accompli through
unilateral acts that alter the status quo and heighten
tension, such as large-scale and rapid land reclamation
in the South China Sea, establishment of outposts there,
and their use for military purposes. In response to these
situations, the international community has been taking
various measures such as continuing to conduct antipiracy operations in relevant waters including off the
coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden, collaborating
to protect the existing international order based on law
including an open, free, and peaceful maritime order, and
implementing initiatives designed to avoid and prevent
unintended consequences in the maritime domain.
As seen above, the international community today
faces complex, diverse, and broad security challenges


and destabilizing factors. Along with deterrence and
handling of armed conflicts, the roles of military forces
in responding to these challenges are becoming so
diverse that they include a broad spectrum of activities
from conflict prevention to reconstruction assistance.
Moreover, as opportunities for military forces to play
such important roles increase, comprehensive responses
are required that combine military capacity with other
capacities such as diplomacy, law enforcement and
justice, intelligence, and the economy.
Developments in science and technology, as
represented by the great leaps forward in ICT in recent
years, have also had spillover effects on the military.
The United States and other developed countries
put emphasis on research and development of new
technologies including those for precision guidance,
unmanned vehicles, and stealth capability, while actively
seeking international joint development and production
to address rising development and production costs and
the deterioration of the national fiscal situation. On the
other hand, states and non-state actors without cuttingedge technology are anticipated to develop and acquire
WMDs and asymmetrical means of attack such as cyber
attacks, while acquiring the technologies of developed
countries in an illicit manner. How these trends in
military science and technology will unfold is expected
to have significant effects on military strategies and
military balance in the future.


-----

**Chapter** **Defense Policies of Countries**
**2**


**Section 1** **The United States**


**1 Security and Defense Policies**


Following the end of the wars in Afghanistan and
Iraq, the patterns of U.S. involvement in the world are
changing signifi cantly in a new security environment,
including a shift in the global balance of power
beginning with the military rise of China, attempts to
change the status quo by force or coercion in Ukraine
and the South China Sea, and the intensifi cation of the
activities of international terrorist organizations such as
the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). While
faced with a severe fi nancial situation, the United States
is anticipated to continue to play a role in the peace and
stability of the world by drawing on its world-leading,
comprehensive national power.
The National Security Strategy (NSS) released
in February 2015 underscores that the United States
would continue to play a leading role in tackling a
variety of challenges, such as the threat of terrorism, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs),
and cyber attacks, as well as advance a rules-based
international order and take collective action with its
allies and partners, while continuing to pursue the
four national interests outlined in the 2010 NSS: (1)
the security of the United States, its citizens, and U.S.
allies and partners; (2) a strong, innovative, and growing
U.S. economy that promotes prosperity; (3) respect for
universal values at home and around the world; and (4)
a rules-based international order that promotes peace,
security, and opportunity.
As is outlined in its strategy documents,[1] the United
States intends to maintain the pivot to the Asia-Pacifi c
region, continuing to rebalance towards the region to
deepen relations with its allies and other countries in the
Asia-Pacifi c region and to enhance both the quantity and
quality of U.S. assets deployed to the region. Mindful of
China’s recent moves to unilaterally change the status quo


and create a fait accompli in the South China Sea through
reclaiming land, building bases there, and utilizing them
for military purposes, the United States has indicated that
it would continue its Freedom of Navigation Operations
(see Part I, Chapter 3, Section 3-3 [p. 144]) to protect the
rights and freedoms under international law.
Concurrently, the United States deals with security
issues outside of the Asia-Pacifi c region. In response
to the attacks in Iraq and Syria since 2014 by ISIL and
other organizations, the United States, since August
2014, has led Operation Inherent Resolve (OIR), a
military operation against ISIL that includes airstrikes
(the activities of the military operation of the coalition
against ISIL led by the United States are discussed in the
next chapter, Section 1). With regard to Afghanistan, in
October 2015, President Barack Obama revised the plan
to withdraw U.S. troops by the end of 2016, announcing
a new plan to maintain the current strength of 9,800
troops in 2016 and have 5,500 troops stationed in 2017
and beyond. Furthermore, in order to strengthen the
deterrent of the U.S. Forces in Europe facing a large
infl ux of refugees and an increasingly tense situation

A U.S. Marine Corps personnel stands watch during Operation Inherent Resolve
(military operation against ISIL) in Iraq in March 2016 [U.S. DoD website]


The pivot to the Asia-Pacifi c was fi rst codifi ed in a strategy document in “Sustaining U.S. Global Leadership: Priorities for 21st Century Defense” released in January 2012. Since then, the policy of rebalancing i


-----

in Ukraine due to Russia, the FY2017 budget request
of the Department of Defense (DoD) has increased the
budget related to the European Reassurance Initiative[2] to
approximately US$3.4 billion, over four times more than
the previous fiscal year’s allocation.
Looking ahead, the focus will be on how the
changes in the situation in the Middle East and Europe
and the outcome of the presidential election in November
2016 will impact existing U.S. policies, including the
Rebalance to the Asia-Pacific region.
In other efforts, the United States also promotes the
Third Offset Strategy (see Section 4 [p. 12]) to develop
military technologies in new fields to maintain and
increase the superiority of the U.S. Forces, deeming that its
military superiority is gradually eroding in light of recent
trends, including China and other countries’ enhanced
“Anti-Access/Area-Denial” (“A2/AD”) capabilities.
Additionally, the U.S. Forces makes active efforts
to secure talent and improve its working environment
as part of the Force of the Future[3] being implemented
since Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter took office
in February 2015. In December 2015, the U.S. Forces
decided to open all positions to women personnel on the
condition that they meet the requirements of the position.

- 1  Understanding of Security


explicitly refers to Russia, Iran, North Korea, and China
as “revisionist states” that attempt to revise key aspects
of the international order and are acting in a manner that
threatens U.S. national security interests.[4] The strategy
notes that there are increasing concerns about interstate
war compared to the past ten years, and that violent
extremist organizations such as ISIL are becoming
imminent threats. In his State of the Union address in
January 2016, President Obama placed greater emphasis
on the threat posed by failing states than by “evil empires,”
and vowed that ISIL and Al Qaeda pose a direct threat
to U.S. citizens. In February 2016, Defense Secretary
Carter identified that five issues were taken into account
in compiling the DoD budget request, namely, Russia,
China, North Korea, Iran, and terrorism, especially ISIL.
Considering all of these aspects together, it is
regarded that the United States sees violent extremist
organizations such as ISIL and Al Qaeda as short-term
security threats, and nations attempting to threaten the
existing international order or the interests of the United
States and its allies as mid- to long-term security threats.

- 2  Defense Strategy


The QDR released in March 2014 states that three pillars,
which are interrelated and mutually reinforcing, would
be emphasized in order to embody priorities outlined in
the Defense Strategic Guidance including rebalancing
to the Asia-Pacific region and maintaining a strong
commitment to stability in Europe and the Middle East,
namely: protect the homeland; build security globally;
and project power and win decisively.[5]
The QDR states that across the three pillars, the
U.S. Forces are capable of simultaneously implementing
the following undertakings, and if deterrence fails at
any given time, the U.S. Forces could defeat a regional
adversary in a large-scale multi-phased campaign, and
deny the objectives of—or imposing unacceptable costs
on—another aggressor in another region.[6]


In the NSS released in February 2015, President Obama
outlined that today the United States and the international
community face challenges, including a rising risk of
attacks on the United States and its allies due to violent
extremism and the terrorist threat, escalating challenges
to cybersecurity, aggression by Russia, and the outbreak
of infectious diseases. President Obama went on to state
that the United States has a unique capability to mobilize
and lead the international community to meet these
challenges, and that strong and sustained U.S. leadership
will safeguard U.S. security interests.
The National Military Strategy released in July 2015


This initiative reassures allies and partners of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) that the United States is committed to their security and territorial integrity. The initiative includes measures such
as increasing the presence of the U.S. Forces in Europe, conducting further bilateral and multilateral training and exercises with NATO allies and other countries, and strengthening the prepositioning of U.S.
equipment in Europe.

The concrete measures proposed in the Force of the Future concept include: increasing opportunities for internships at the DoD for university students; promoting public-private exchanges (e.g., allowing
talented engineers from the private sector to engage in specific projects of the DoD for a specified period only, or allowing DoD personnel to work in the private sector and bring advanced technologies back to
the DoD); extending paid maternity leave; adding flexibility to be able to stay on a post at a station for family reasons; and enabling the receipt of pension without working for at least 20 years as was required.

In July 2015, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Joseph Dunford testified at his nomination hearing at the Senate that the greatest security threat was Russia due to its nuclear capabilities and aggressive
behavior. He stated that if he had to rank countries in the order of their threat level, second would be China due to its growing military power, presence in the Pacific region, and its interest in such pursuits.

The three pillars constitute primarily of the following:

(1) Protect the homeland: Maintain the capability to deter and defeat attacks on the United States. Protection of the homeland includes assisting U.S. civil authorities in protecting U.S. airspace, shores, and
borders, and in responding effectively to domestic disasters.

(2) Build security globally: Continue a strong U.S. commitment to shaping world events in order to deter and prevent conflict and to assure the allies and partners of the shared security.

(3) Project power and win decisively: The U.S. Forces deter acts of aggression in one or more theaters by remaining capable of decisively defeating adversaries, while projecting power to provide humanitarian
assistance and disaster relief.

The 2010 QDR stated that the U.S. Forces possess the capability of countering attacks by two countries while also being able to conduct a wide range of operations. The 2012 Defense Strategic Guidance
states that the United States maintains forces that are able to fully deny a capable state’s aggressive objectives in one region while being capable of denying the objectives of—or imposing unacceptable costs


-----

1) Defending homeland
2) Conducting sustained, distributed counterterrorist
operations
3) Deterring aggression and assuring allies through
forward presence and engagement in multiple regions
Furthermore, in order to achieve the three pillars, the
DoD seeks innovative approaches to how it fights, how
it postures its force, and how it leverages its asymmetric
strengths and technological advantages. More specifically,
the QDR mentions positioning additional forwarddeployed naval forces in critical areas, such as the AsiaPacific region, and deploying new combinations of ships,
aviation assets, and crisis response forces.
The QDR states that the Joint Force would: rebalance
for a broad spectrum of conflict; rebalance and sustain
its presence and posture abroad; rebalance capability,
capacity, and readiness; and equip itself with advanced
capabilities and readiness while scaling back the U.S.
Forces. The QDR notes that even as budget and other
resource cuts are made, the DoD would give priority to
the following capability areas that are in close alignment
with the pillars of the defense strategy: (1) missile defense;
(2) nuclear deterrence; (3) cyber; (4) space; (5) air/sea;
(6) precision strike; (7) intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance (ISR); (8) counter terror and special
operations; and (9) resilience.[7]

- 3  Rebalance to the Asia-Pacific Region


Japan and the Republic of Korea (ROK), while enhancing
its presence in Southeast Asia. Furthermore, the QDR
states that the centerpiece of the DoD commitment to
the rebalance to the Asia-Pacific region is to update and
enhance security initiatives with its allies in the region,
including Japan. Additionally, the QDR notes that by
2020, the U.S. Forces would station 60% of the assets
of the Navy and Air Force in the Asia-Pacific region.
Concrete examples of the enhancement of the U.S. Force
presence in the Asia-Pacific region include enhanced
presence of the U.S. Forces in Australia, including
through the rotational deployment of the U.S. Marine
Corps to Northern Australia and increased access of U.S.
Air Force aircraft to Australian Defence Force (ADF)
facilities and areas in Northern Australia.[8]
In addition, the United States has repeatedly
conducted joint military exercises and provided military
technologies and assistance to Southeast Asian countries
to build trusting relationships and strengthen the
readiness of these countries. The Asia-Pacific Maritime
Security Strategy that the DoD released in August 2015
recognizes the importance of the Asia-Pacific region
and its maritime territories, and identifies the DoD’s
maritime objectives as: (1) safeguard the freedom of the

President Obama announces maritime security assistance for the Philippines in November 2015

[Website of the U.S. Embassy in Manila]


As indicated by the Defense Strategic Guidance, the
QDR, and the NSS, the United States places emphasis
on the Asia-Pacific region and is continuing a policy to
enhance its presence in the region. In November 2011,
President Obama delivered a speech to the Australian
Parliament, clearly stating, for the first time, that he
would give top priority to the U.S. presence and mission
in the Asia-Pacific region. The President indicated that
the United States would maintain its strong presence in


The capability areas constitute primarily of the following:

(1) Missile defense: Increasing the number of Ground-Based Interceptors, deploying an additional radar in Japan, increasing the reliability, efficiency, and discrimination capabilities of interceptors, studying the
best location for deploying Ground-Based Interceptors

(2) Nuclear deterrence: Continuing to invest in modernizing delivery systems, warheads, command and control, and nuclear weapon infrastructure

(3) Cyber: Forming a Cyber Mission Force by late September 2018 comprised of National Mission Teams (13 teams), Cyber Protection Teams (68 teams), Combat Mission Teams (27 teams), and Support Teams
(25 teams) (a total of 133 teams)

(4) Space: Diversifying and expanding the coverage of Space Situational Awareness, accelerating initiatives to counter adversary space capabilities including ISR and precision strike

(5) Air/sea: Countering A2/AD threats by investing in combat aircraft, including fighters and long-range strike, survivable persistent surveillance, resilient architectures, and undersea warfare

(6) Precision strike: Procuring advanced air-to-surface missiles and a long-range anti-ship cruise missile to improve the joint ability of U.S. Forces to attack airspace defended by the adversary

(7) ISR: Making focused investments in systems that will function effectively in airspace defended by the adversary and areas that the U.S. Forces are denied entry or free maneuver, expanding use of space
ISR systems

(8) Counter terror and special operations: Increasing the Special Operations Forces (SOF) to 69,700 personnel, mobilizing more SOF to support the Joint Force to counter a range of challenges across the globe

(9) Resilience: Improving the ability to maintain and restore the functions of air, naval, ground, space, and missile-defense capabilities against attacks, dispersing land and naval expeditionary forces, investing
in capabilities to repair runways more quickly

In November 2011, U.S. President Obama and then Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard jointly announced U.S.-Australia Force Posture Initiatives that include: (1) the rotational deployment of the U.S.
Marine Corps to Darwin and other areas in Northern Australia for around six months every year where they would conduct exercises and training with the ADF; and (2) increased access of U.S. Air Force
aircraft to ADF facilities and areas in Northern Australia, which would offer greater opportunities for joint training and exercises. The joint initiatives are described as part of the efforts to embody the basic
concept of the force posture of the U.S. Forces in the Asia-Pacific region, which intends to pursue “a more geographically distributed, operationally resilient, and politically sustainable military presence.”


-----

seas; (2) deter conflict and coercion; and (3) promote
adherence to international law and standards. To achieve
these objectives, the strategy states that the United States
would deploy the U.S. Forces’ finest capabilities, assets,
and personnel to the Asia-Pacific region and support the
strengthening of maritime security capabilities of its
allies and partners.
Based on this concept, in November 2015, the United
States announced assistance totaling US$259 million
over the course of FY2015 and FY2016 to strengthen
the maritime security capabilities of the Philippines,
Vietnam, Indonesia, and Malaysia. Accordingly, in the
same month, President Obama announced the provision
of US$79 million in assistance, one patrol vessel, and
one survey vessel to the Philippines. In December 2015,
Defense Secretary Carter and Minister of Defense Ng
Eng Hen of Singapore signed an enhanced defense
cooperation agreement to deepen their bilateral defense
relationship. Furthermore, it was affirmed that the United
States plans to simultaneously deploy to Singapore up to
four Littoral Combat Ships (LCS)[9] by the end of 2017,
with the second rotation now ongoing.
In connection with Japan, the United States has
made steady progress with the deployment of P-8 patrol
aircraft to Kadena Air Base, temporary assignment
of unmanned reconnaissance aircraft Global Hawk
to Misawa Air Base, deployment of a second TPY-2
radar[10] in Japan to the Kyogamisaki Communications
Site, and the additional deployment of Aegis ballistic
missile defense ships to Yokosuka.[11]
The United States has underscored the importance
of its commitment to the Asia-Pacific region not only to
its allies and partners but also to China. The 2014 QDR
states that the United States would sustain dialogue with
China to improve the ability to cooperate in practical areas
such as counterpiracy, peacekeeping, and humanitarian
assistance/disaster relief operations. At the same time,
the United States would manage the competitive aspects
of U.S.-China relations in ways that improve regional
peace and stability consistent with international norms
and principles.



- 4  Third Offset Strategy

In November 2014, then U.S. Secretary of Defense
Hagel announced the Defense Innovation Initiative and
expressed his expectation that it would develop into a
third offset strategy. Since the 1950s, the United States
has invested in the development of military technologies
in new fields in which adversaries do not have capabilities.
Through a strategy of acquiring asymmetrical means
to offset an adversary’s capabilities,[12] the United States
has maintained military operational and technological
superiority. Today, however, such U.S. superiority is
gradually eroding as a result of potential adversaries
modernizing their military forces and acquiring advanced
military capabilities, and with technologies proliferating.
The United States notes that this initiative was established
to newly identify innovative ways to sustain and expand
U.S. superiority, utilizing limited resources.
U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense Bob Work,
who is leading the work of establishing this initiative,
states that the third offset strategy is aimed at gaining
technological, organizational, and operational superiority
over adversaries, in order to strengthen deterrence
using conventional assets against great powers, taking
Russia and China into account. He states that to this
end, investments would be made with priority on
human-machine collaboration and combat teaming.[13]
In addition, Deputy Secretary Work explains that the
competitive environments have changed significantly due
to innovations in commercial technologies, and in order
to follow and make use of commercial technologies, the
United States must work more closely with the private
sector. He further notes that the proliferation of technology
could cause loss of superiority in a short timeframe.
The FY2017 budget request sets forth the
advancement of this initiative. The budget request
identifies that the priority technology areas include:
assured positioning, navigation, and timing; large
displacement unmanned undersea vehicles; high speed
strike weapons; and arsenal plane.[14, 15]


9 Fast and agile vessels designed to defeat asymmetrical threats with A2 capability in near-shore environments.

10 Radar whose purpose is to detect and track ballistic missiles (also called “X-band radar” as it operates in the “X-band” frequency). The United States notes that the additional deployment of this radar to Japan
would provide enhanced early warning and tracking capability of any missile launched from North Korea.

11 In April 2014, then U.S. Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel announced that two more Aegis ballistic missile defense ships would be deployed to Japan by 2017. One of the ships, the USS Benfold Aegis destroyer,
was deployed to Yokosuka in October 2015. The other, USS Milius Aegis destroyer, will be deployed to Yokosuka in summer 2017. In March 2016, the United States deployed the USS Barry Aegis destroyer with
ballistic missile defense capabilities to Yokosuka, which replaced the USS Lassen Aegis destroyer lacking ballistic missile defense capability.

12 Secretary Hagel stated that the previous two “offset strategies” were as follows: (1) in the 1950s, the United States offset the conventional capacity of the former Soviet Union by using the nuclear deterrent;
and (2) in the 1970s, while the nuclear capabilities of the former Soviet Union achieved parity with those of the United States, the United States gained superiority over the former Soviet Union by acquiring new
systems, such as extended-range precision-guided missiles, stealth aircraft, and ISR platforms.

13 According to the explanation by Deputy Secretary Work in his address in November 2015, specific examples include investments in: (1) learning machines; (2) human-machine collaboration; (3) assisted human
operations; (4) human-machine combat teaming; and (5) networked autonomous weapons.

14 An arsenal plane turns an old aircraft into a platform and uses it as a “flying launch pad” to launch a variety of payloads.

15 The FY2017 budget request allocates approximately US$12.5 billion for science and technology, including US$2.1 billion for basic research and approximately US$3.0 billion for the Defense Advanced Research


-----

The DoD said it would work to increase the number of
personnel engaged in nuclear forces of the Air Force
and Navy, improve the inspections regime, and improve
career management, among other activities.

See>> Part I, Chapter 3, Section 2-1 (Nuclear Weapons)

- 6  FY2017 Budget



- 5  Nuclear Strategy

While President Obama aims to realize a world without
nuclear weapons, he notes that this will not be realized
in the near future, and that a nuclear deterrent will be
maintained as long as nuclear weapons exist.
The Nuclear Posture Review (NPR) released in
April 2010 states that the nuclear security environment
is changing, and that nuclear terrorism and nuclear
proliferation are an imminent threat today. Furthermore,
it points to the necessity of working on the issue of
ensuring strategic stability with existing nuclear powers,
in particular Russia and China.
The NPR presents five key objectives based on
awareness of this security environment: (1) preventing
nuclear proliferation and nuclear terrorism; (2) reducing
the role of U.S. nuclear weapons; (3) maintaining strategic
deterrence and stability at reduced nuclear force levels;
(4) strengthening regional deterrence and reassuring U.S.
allies and partners; and (5) sustaining a safe, secure, and
effective nuclear arsenal.
In June 2013, President Obama delivered a speech
on the reduction of nuclear weapons in Berlin, which
was followed by the release of the Report on Nuclear
Employment Strategy by the DoD on the same day. In
the speech and report, the United States announced that
it would negotiate with Russia to pursue up to a one-third
reduction in U.S. deployed strategic nuclear weapons.
In February 2014, following missteps by nuclear
missile launch officers including possession of illegal
drugs and misconduct related to proficiency tests, then
U.S. Secretary of Defense Hagel instructed an internal
and external review of the entire DoD Nuclear Enterprise
(Nuclear Enterprise Review [NER]). In November 2014,
Secretary Hagel announced the results of the NER,
in the form of a summary of an internal study report
and a report of an external study conducted by retired
military personnel and other reviewers. The NER found
that while the existing nuclear forces of the U.S. Forces
are meeting the demands of their mission, significant
improvements are required to ensure the safety and
effectiveness of the force in the future. The two reports
made recommendations focusing around areas, such as
improving oversight and management issues, increasing
investment in the nuclear deterrent enterprise, and
personnel and training including boosting morale.
Based on these recommendations, the DoD decided to
prioritize funding on actions that improve the security,
ensure modernization of the force, and address shortfalls.


As the budget deficit of the U.S. government is
deepening in recent years, the Budget Control Act
enacted in August 2011 established a significant cut in
government spending by FY2021. In January 2012, the
DoD announced that the reduction in defense spending
in light of the act would amount to about US$487 billion
over the 10 years from FY2012 to FY2021 (about
US$259 billion over the five years from FY2013 to
FY2017). In March 2013, the mandatory sequestration of
government spending including defense spending started
based on the provisions of the Budget Control Act.
Mandatory sequestration for the FY2014 and FY2015
budgets was eased as a result of the Bipartisan Budget
Act of the Democratic and Republican parties passed in
December 2013. Furthermore, mandatory sequestration
for the FY2016 and FY2017 budgets was eased as a
result of the Bipartisan Budget Act passed in November
2015. However, the President and Congress have not
reached any agreement on the handling of mandatory
sequestration in FY2018 and beyond. The resumption
of mandatory sequestration could put the U.S. Forces
at considerably greater risk due to the changes in the
security environment. In this regard, the trends in the
defense budget require continued observation.
For the FY2017 DoD budget request, the DoD
allocated US$523.9 billion[16] for the base budget. For
the overseas contingency operations budget, the DoD
allocated a total of US$58.8 billion. This includes the
quadrupling of the budget for the European Reassurance
Initiative to US$3.4 billion in light of Russian activities
in Eastern Europe and an approximately 1.5-fold increase
in the budget for the operations to counter ISIL in Iraq
and Syria to US$7.5 billion. The key principles of the
defense budget are as follows: (1) seek a balanced force;
(2) sustain readiness amid a severe budget situation;
(3) accelerate the pace of institutional reform; (4) pursue
investments in equipment acquisition and R&D; (5) take
care of the people; and (6) support overseas operations.
On this basis, the budget outlines that the DoD would:
decrease the Army’s end strength to 460,000 active
soldiers from the FY2016 level of 475,000 active soldiers;


-----

continue to fund the overhaul/life extension of the USS The Impact of Budget Sequestration on the
George Washington of the Navy, following on from the Defense Budget
previous fiscal year, and maintain 11 aircraft carriers; (Base budget: $1 billion)
keep the F-35, the KC-46, and the Long-Range Strike 630
Bomber (LRS-B) B-21[17] as the Air Force’s top three 610 FY2013 budget request
modernization programs; and postpone the retirement of 590 Sequester-level
the A-10 aircraft to 2022. 570

See>> Fig. I-2-1-1 (The Impact of Budget Sequestration on the Defense 550
Budget); Fig. I-2-1-2 (Changes in the U.S. Defense Budget)

|budget: $1 billion)|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|FY2013 budget request|||
||FY2013 budget request||
||FY2017 budget request||
|Sequester-level|Sequester-level||
||||
||||
||||
||||
||||


|Fig. I-2-1-2|Changes in the U.S. Defense Budget|
|---|---|
|Defense budget (in $1 million) Year-on-year growth rate (%) ($1 million) (％) 800,000 20 700,000 15 600,000 10 500,000 400,000 5 300,000 0 200,000 –5 100,000 0 –10 12 13 14 15 16(FY) Notes: 1. Figures shown are narrowly defined expenses based on Historical Tables (Outlays), Budget of the United States Government, FY2015. 2. The amount for FY2016 is an estimate.||


The Impact of Budget Sequestration on the
Fig. I-2-1-1
Defense Budget

(Base budget: $1 billion)

630

610 FY2013 budget request

FY2017 budget request

590 Sequester-level

570

550

530

510

490

470
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 (FY)

Created based on the U.S. DoD FY2017 Budget Request.


17 The Long-Range Strike Bomber B-21 is a new long-range bomber that replaces the existing bomber, and is expected to become a main component of U.S. deep battle capabilities provided by conventional and


-----

**2 Military Posture**



- 1  General Situation

In regard to strategic offensive weapons including
nuclear force, the United States is moving ahead with
its reduction based on a new Strategic Arms Reduction
Treaty that came into force in February 2011. In March
2016, it announced that its deployed strategic warheads[18]
stood at 1,481, while its deployed delivery platforms
stood at 741.[19] The United States is studying the concept
of a Conventional Prompt Global Strike (CPGS), as an
effort contributing to the nation’s new ability to reduce
reliance on nuclear weapons.[20]

In regard to Missile Defense (MD), the United States
announced the Ballistic Missile Defense Review (BMDR)
in February 2010. On homeland defense, the review noted
that the United States would use ground-based interceptors
to respond to Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs)
from North Korea and Iran, and that in regard to regional
defense, the United States would expand investments in
MD systems while taking a phased adaptive approach
(PAA) that is tailored to each region and improve the MD
capabilities step by step, working with partner countries
and properly sharing the burden. However, in January
2012, the United States announced that it would continue
investments in MD programs in its homeland and Europe
while reducing the spending for deployable regional MD
systems with a view to increasing reliance on its allies and
partners in the future. Further, in March 2013, the United
States announced that it would additionally deploy groundbased interceptors in the U.S. homeland and mobile radars
for Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD) in Japan in order to
bolster homeland security in response to North Korea’s
nuclear test and the advancement of its long-range ballistic
missile development, while restructuring the program
of the standard missile (SM-3) Block IIB scheduled for
deployment in Europe.
The operation of the U.S. Forces is not controlled
by the individual branches of the broader armed forces,
rather it is operated under the leadership of the Unifi ed
Combatant Commands, comprising leaders from
multiple branches of the armed forces. The Unifi ed
Combatant Commands consist of three commands
with functional responsibilities and six commands with
regional responsibilities.
The U.S. ground forces consist of about 480,000

|U.S. S of De|ecretary fense|
|---|---|

|U.S. Africa Command|U.S. Central Command|U.S. European Command|U.S. Northern Command|U.S. Pacific Command|U.S. Southern Command|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|

|Fig. I-2-1-3|Structure of the Unif eid Combatant Command|
|---|---|
|President : Functional command : Geographic command U.S. Secretary of Defense Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff U.S. Special U.S. Strategic U.S. Transportation Operations Command Command Command U.S. Africa U.S. Central U.S. European U.S. Northern U.S. Pacific U.S. Southern Command Command Command Command Command Command||


Army soldiers and about 180,000 Marines, which are
forward-deployed in Germany, the ROK, and Japan,
among other countries. As described in the Defense
Strategic Guidance, the Army continues its transition to
a smaller yet capable force fully prepared to conduct a
full range of operations worldwide. The Marine Corps
aims to acquire forces capable of responding to any
threat as a “middleweight force,” bridging the seam
between smaller special operations forces and larger
heavy conventional forces.
The U.S. maritime forces consist of about 940
vessels (including about 70 submarines) totaling about
6.2 million tons. The 6th Fleet is deployed in the East
Atlantic Ocean, the Mediterranean Sea, and Africa; the
5th Fleet in the Persian Gulf, Red Sea, and northwest
Indian Ocean; the 3rd Fleet in the eastern Pacifi c; the 4th
Fleet in South America and the Caribbean Sea; and the
7th Fleet in the western Pacifi c and Indian Ocean.
The U.S. air forces consist of roughly 3,600 combat
aircraft across the Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps. In
addition to carrier-based aircraft deployed at sea, part of
the tactical air force is forward-deployed in Germany, the
United Kingdom, Japan, and the ROK.
Moreover, in addressing the increasing threats in
cyberspace, the U.S. Cyber Command (USCYBERCOM)
was founded in order to oversee operations in cyberspace.
The U.S. Cyber Command attained Initial Operational
Capability (IOC) in May 2010 and commended full
capability in November in the same year.[21]

See>> Fig. I-2-1-3 (Structure of the Unifi ed Combatant Command)


18 Warheads that have been equipped in deployed ICBMs and Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missiles (SLBMs) and nuclear warheads equipped in heavy bombers (a deployed heavy bomber is counted as one
nuclear warhead).

19 The fi gure as of March 1, 2016.

20 The concept is designed to cripple the A2 capabilities of an adversary and promptly strike a target anywhere in the world using non-nuclear long-range precision guided missiles that hit targets with high accuracy.

21 As cyber-related units, Army Cyber Command (ARCYBER), Fleet Cyber Command (FLTCYBERCOM), Air Force Cyber Command (AFCYBER), and Marine Corps Forces Cyber Command (MARFORCYBER) have been


-----

The U.S. Pacific Fleet consists of the 7th Fleet,
which is responsible for the Western Pacific and the
Indian Ocean, and the 3rd Fleet, responsible for the East
Pacific and Bering Sea. The U.S. Pacific Fleet in total
controls about 200 vessels. The 7th Fleet is centered on
a carrier strike group with main stationing locations in
Japan and Guam. Their mission is to defend territorial
lands, people, sea lines of communication, and the critical
national interests of the United States and its allies. The
7th Fleet consists of an aircraft carrier, amphibious ships,
and Aegis cruisers and destroyers.
The U.S. Marine Corps Forces Pacific deploys one
Marine Expeditionary Force each in the U.S. mainland
and Japan. Of this force, about 16,000 personnel are
in the 3rd Marine Division and the 1st Marine Aircraft
Wing, which are equipped with F/A-18 fighters and other
aircraft, in Japan. In addition, maritime pre-positioning
ships loaded with heavy equipment and others are
deployed in the Western Pacific.
The U.S. Pacific Air Force has three air forces, of
which three air wings (equipped with F-16 fighters and
C-130 transport aircraft) are deployed to the 5th Air Force
stationed in Japan and two air wings (equipped with F-16
fighters) to the 7th Air Force stationed in the ROK.

See>> Fig. I-2-1-4 (U.S. Forces Deployment Status and the Recent Trend of
the U.S. Forces in the Asia-Pacific Region)



- 2  Current Military Posture in the Asia-Pacific Region

The United States, a Pacific nation, continues to play an
important role in ensuring the peace and stability of the
Asia-Pacific region by placing the Pacific Command, a
joint command consisting of the Army, Navy, Air Force,
and Marine Corps, in the region. The Pacific Command is
a command with regional responsibilities for the largest
geographical area, and its component commands include
U.S. Forces Japan and U.S. Forces Korea. In order to
broaden the perspective of the U.S. Forces and promote
better understanding of the U.S. Forces from allies, the
Pacific Command headquarters accept personnel from
allies in the region. Under this scheme, personnel from
Canada and Australia are currently serving in the Pacific
Command as deputy director level-officials.
The Pacific Command consists of the U.S. Army
Pacific, U.S. Pacific Fleet, U.S. Marine Corps Forces
Pacific, and U.S. Pacific Air Forces, which are all
headquartered in Hawaii.[22]
The Army Pacific’s subordinate commands include
the 25th Infantry Division in Hawaii, the 8th U.S. Army in
the ROK, which is the Army component of the U.S. Forces
in the ROK, and the U.S. Army Alaska. Additionally, the
Army Pacific assigns approximately 2,400 personnel to
commands, such as I Corps Forward and the U.S. Army
Japan Command in Japan.[23]


22 In 2013, the U.S. Army Pacific upgraded the rank of its Commander from lieutenant general to general, and thus the commanders of the Army Pacific, Pacific Fleet, and Pacific Air Forces have all become four stars.

23 The figures of the U.S. Forces mentioned in this paragraph are the numbers of active personnel recorded in the published sources of the U.S. DoD (as of September 30, 2015), and could change according to


-----

|U.S. Forces Army: approx. 487,000 personnel Navy: approx. 323,000 personnel Air Force: approx. 307,000 personnel Marines: approx. 183,000 personnel|Col2|
|---|---|
|Total: approx. 1,301,000 pers (Total in 1987: approx. 2,170,000 pers|onnel onnel|


Fig. I-2-1-4 U.S. Forces Deployment Status and the Recent Trend of the U.S. Forces in the Asia-Pacific Region

**European Region**

Army: approx. 28,000 personnel
Navy: approx. 7,000 personnel
Air Force: approx. 29,000 personnel U.S. Forces
Marines: approx. 1,000 personnel Army: approx. 487,000 personnel

Navy: approx. 323,000 personnel

Total: approx. 64,000 personnel

Air Force: approx. 307,000 personnel

(Total in 1987:

Marines: approx. 183,000 personnel

approx. 354,000 personnel)

U.S. European Command Total: approx. 1,301,000 personnel

(Total in 1987:
approx. 2,170,000 personnel)

U.S. Central Command

**Asia-Pacific Region**

U.S. Northern
Command

Army: approx. 37,000 personnel
Navy: approx. 43,000 personnel
Air Force: approx. 27,000 personnel

U.S. Africa Command U.S. Pacific Command Marines: approx. 24,000 personnel

Total: approx. 131,000 personnel U.S. SouthernCommand
(Total in 1987:
approx. 184,000 personnel)

Notes: 1. Source: Documents published by the U.S. DoD (as of September 30, 2015), etc.
2. The number of personnel deployed in the Asia-Pacific region includes personnel deployed in Hawaii and Guam.

**[Japan]**

-  Deploys F-22, MV-22/CV-22 Osprey, P-8, and Global Hawk

-  Deploys second TPY-2 radar

-  Additionally deployed one Aegis ship (normal ship) (June 2015)

-  Switched one Aegis ship (normal ship) with Aegis BMD destroyer
(March 2016)

-  Additionally deploys two Aegis BMD destroyers (one already

Seoul deployed in October 2015 and one to be deployed in summer 2017)

ROK

Japan **[Guam]**

-  Rotationally deploys submarines

-  Rotationally deploys bombers

Okinawa -  Established a facility for aircraft

carrier’s temporary port of call

-  Deploys unmanned

Philippines Guam reconnaissance aircraft (RQ-4) Hawaii

Manila

**[Philippines]**

-  Signed the Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement (EDCA) for enhancing the presence
of the U.S. Forces, etc. (April 2014)

-  Announced US$79 million assistance and provision of one patrol vessel and one survey
vessel (November 2015)

Singapore -  Implements joint patrol activities (March 2016–)

Indonesia -  Agreed on five locations such as Air Force bases, etc. to serve as hubs for implementing

defense cooperation based on EDCA (March 2016)

Jakarta -  Regularly deploys A-10 ground attack aircraft, etc. (April 2016–)

**[Singapore]**

-  Rotationally deploys Littoral Combat Darwin **[Australia]**
Ships (LCS) (To deploy four LCSs by At the November 2011 U.S.-Australia Summit, an agreement was reached on the following initiatives:
end of 2017. The first ship started -  Rotational deployment of the Marines to northern Australia
rotation in April 2013 and the -  Increased rotational deployment of U.S. Air Force aircraft in northern Australia トンガ
second ship in December 2014.) Australia

-  Rotationally deployed P-8
(December 2015) In June 2013, U.S. Secretary of Defense Hagel announced a plan to deploy 60% of

-  Signed enhanced defense the assets of the U.S. Navy and Air Force in the Asia-Pacific region as well as
cooperation agreement proceed with the rotational deployment in the region and deployment of equipment.
(December 2015) Canberra

-  A map created by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) is used


-----

**Section 2** **Korean Peninsula**


On the Korean Peninsula, people of the same ethnicity
have been divided into two—north and south—for more
than half a century. Even today, the ROK and North
Korea pit their ground forces of about 1.5 million against
each other across the demilitarized zone (DMZ). Peace

**1 North Korea**


- 1  General Situation


and stability on the Korean Peninsula under such security
environment is an extremely important challenge not
only to Japan but also to the entire region of East Asia.

See>> Fig. I-2-2-1 (Military Confrontation on the Korean Peninsula)

economic diffi culties and has depended on the international
community for food and other resources, it seems to be
maintaining and enhancing its military capabilities and
combat readiness by preferentially allocating resources
to its military forces. North Korea deploys most of its
military forces along the DMZ. According to the offi cial
announcement at the Supreme People’s Assembly in
April 2016, the proportion of the defense budget in
the FY2016 national budget was 15.8%. However, it is
believed that this represents only a fraction of the real
defense expenditures.
Furthermore, North Korea seems to maintain and
reinforce its so-called asymmetric military capabilities
by continuing to promote the development of WMDs and
ballistic missiles, including conducting its fourth nuclear
test in January 2016 and repeatedly launching ballistic
missiles in and after February, and by maintaining largescale special operations forces. In addition, North Korea
repeatedly uses provocative rhetoric and behavior against
relevant countries, including Japan. In particular, from
March to April 2013, North Korea underscored that
it would exercise its right to preemptive nuclear attack
against the United States and other countries, and that the
strike zone of its ballistic missiles included Japan, naming
specifi c cities.[5] In November 2014, the North Korean
National Defense Commission released a statement
protesting the adoption of a resolution on North Korea’s
human rights situation by the Third Committee of the
U.N. General Assembly. The statement noted that like
the United States and the ROK, Japan will have to be hit


North Korea has been advocating the building of a strong
socialist state in all areas—ideology, politics, military
affairs, and economy,[1] and it adopts “military-fi rst
(Songun) politics” to realize this goal. The “militaryfi rst (Songun) politics” has been defi ned as a basic form
of socialist politics that leads the great undertaking of
socialism to victory by giving priority to the military
forces in all activities under the principle of militaryfi rst, and strengthening and relying on the actors in the
revolution with the Korean People’s Army (KPA) acting
as the central and main force.[2] Leader Kim Jong-un,
Chairman of the Korean Workers’ Party (KWP),[3] who
is in a position to control the military, noted in his New
Year Address[4] in January 2016: “The People’s Army
should further develop itself into a revolutionary army of
the Party”; and “[The munitions industry sector should]
develop and produce a greater number of various means
of military strike of our own style that are capable of
overwhelming the enemy.” In his report on the work of
the KWP Central Committee at the Seventh Congress
of the KWP in May 2016, the Chairman stated, “It is
necessary to uphold the military-fi rst revolutionary path
as the constant strategic path, and strengthen the might of
the military power in all of its dimensions.” As such, the
Chairman makes references to the importance of military
capabilities and regularly visits military organizations. In
this light, it is conceivable that the Chairman will continue
to attach importance to and rely on the military forces.
Although North Korea has been facing serious


North Korea used to insist that it would open the door to a “powerful and prosperous nation (Kangseong Daeguk)” in 2012, which marked the 100th anniversary of the birth of the late President Kim Il-sung.
Recently, however, North Korea has been using mainly the expression, “powerful and prosperous country (Kangseong Kukka).”

Written decision of the Seventh Congress of the Korean Workers’ Party, “Report on the Work of the KWP Central Committee” (May 8, 2016).

Kim Jong-un was named “Chairman of the Korean Workers’ Party” at the Seventh KWP Congress held in May 2016. For consistency purposes, “Chairman of the Korean Workers’ Party” is used for the title of
Kim Jong-un in this white paper, including for matters predating Kim Jong-un’s appointment as KWP Chairman.

Until 1994, the late President Kim Il-sung gave a “New Year Address” every year on January 1. From after his demise in 1995 to 2012, the KWP’s newspaper “Rodong Shinmun,” the Korean People’s Army’s
newspaper “Korean People’s Army,” and the Kim Il-sung Socialist Youth League’s newspaper “Youth Vanguard” jointly published a joint New Year Editorial.

For example, a comment in the Rodong Shinmun dated March 31, 2013 states that U.S. mainland is located within the range of our attacks along with Yokosuka, Misawa, Okinawa and Guam. In addition, an
article in the Rodong Shinmun dated April 10, 2013 claims that the entire territory of Japan cannot escape from North Korea’s retaliatory attacks, and in this context, the article listed the Japanese cities of


-----

hard and sent to the bottom of the sea.[6] Additionally, an
“important statement” of the Supreme Command of the
KPA released in February 2016 notes its first target of
attack would be the ROK Blue House, while secondary
targets would include U.S. Force bases in the Asia-Pacific
region and the U.S. mainland. In March 2016, North
Korea reiterated provocative rhetoric and behavior this
time against Japan, stating that U.S. Force facilities and
areas in Japan are within the firing range of North Korea’s
strike means, and that North Korea could instantly wipe
out Japan if it is so inclined.[7]
Such military trend in North Korea constitutes a
serious and imminent threat to the security not only of
Japan but also of the entire region and the international
community. Needless to say, North Korea’s possession of
nuclear weapons cannot be tolerated. Sufficient attention
needs to be paid to the development and deployment
of ballistic missiles, the military confrontation on the
Korean Peninsula, and the proliferation of WMDs and
ballistic missiles by North Korea.
Partly because North Korea maintains its extremely
closed regime, it is difficult to accurately capture the
details and intentions of its behavior. However, it is
necessary for Japan to pay utmost attention to them.

- 2  Military Posture


scale special operations forces that can conduct various
operations ranging from intelligence gathering and
sabotage, to guerrilla warfare. Moreover, North Korea
seems to have many underground military-related
installations across its territory.

**(2) Military Capabilities**
The North Korean Army comprises about 1.02 million
personnel, and roughly two-thirds of them are believed
to be deployed along the DMZ. The main body of the
army is infantry, but the army also maintains armored
forces including at least 3,500 tanks and artillery.
North Korea is believed to regularly deploy long-range
artillery along the DMZ, such as 240 mm multiple rocket
launchers and 170 mm self-propelled guns, which can
reach cities and bases in the northern part of the ROK
including the capital city of Seoul. Despite limited
resources, it is deemed that North Korea continues to
selectively reinforce its conventional forces and improve
its equipment, such as main battle tanks and multiple
rocket launchers.[9]
The Navy has about 780 ships with a total displacement
of approximately 104,000 tons and is chiefly comprised
of small naval vessels such as high-speed missile craft.
Also, it has about 20 of the former model Romeo-class
submarines, about 70 midget submarines, and about 140
air cushioned landing crafts, the latter two of which are
believed to be used for infiltration and transportation of
the special operations forces.
The Air Force has approximately 560 combat
aircraft, most of which are out-of-date models made
in China or the former Soviet Union. However, some
fourth-generation aircraft such as MiG-29 fighters and
Su-25 attack aircraft are also included. North Korea has a
large number of outdated An-2 transport aircraft as well,
which are believed to be used for transportation of special
operations forces.
In addition, North Korea has so-called asymmetric
military capabilities, namely, special operations forces
whose size is estimated at 100,000 personnel.[10] In recent


**(1) General Situation**
North Korea has been building up its military capabilities
in accordance with the Four Military Guidelines
(extensive training for all soldiers, modernizing all
military forces, arming the entire population, and
fortifying the entire country).[8]

North Korea’s military forces are comprised mainly
of ground forces, with a total troop strength of roughly
1.19 million. While North Korea’s military forces
are believed to have been maintaining and enhancing
their capabilities and operational readiness, most of its
equipment is outdated.
Meanwhile, North Korea has forces such as large

6 Statement of the National Defense Commission of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea released on November 23, 2014.

7 For example, “Once the fire is lit in the Korean Peninsula, not only the U.S. Forces’ bases of aggression in Japan but everything in Japan that would be used for war would burn down to ashes in an instant” and
“Today, North Korea has the capability not only to instantly wipe out Japan, but also to retaliate by directly striking and demolishing Hawaii and the U.S. mainland as well if it is so inclined” (Rodong Shinmun
dated March 10, 2016). A statement by the spokesperson of the Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of Korea dated March 7, 2016 notes that all bases of aggression in Japan, the Pacific, and the U.S.
mainland are within the firing range of various type strike means of North Korea.

8 The Four Military Guidelines were adopted at the fifth plenary meeting of the fourth KWP Central Committee in 1962.

9 According to “The Military Balance 2014,” North Korea is replacing Soviet-made T-54 and T-55 tanks with the Ch’onma-ho that North Korea independently produced based on the T-62. Furthermore, the
Defense White Paper 2014 that the ROK Ministry of National Defense released in January 2015 refers to North Korea’s development of a new 300 mm multiple rocket launcher, as well as the significant increase
in the number of tanks, armored cars, and multiple rocket launchers in North Korea’s possession. North Korea allegedly fired several rounds from the 300 mm multiple rocket launcher on three instances in
March 2016 and launched a new short-range surface-to-air missile in April 2016.

10 It had been said that North Korea possessed two types of special operations forces: one under the military forces and the other under the KWP. However, it has been reported that these organizations were
consolidated in 2009 and the Reconnaissance General Bureau was established under the auspices of the military forces. The existence of the bureau was officially confirmed in March 2013 when Korean
Central Broadcasting Station reported General Kim Yong-chol as the Director of the Reconnaissance General Bureau. Moreover, James Thurman, then Commander of the U.S. Forces Korea, stated, “North Korea
possesses the world’s largest special operations force of over 60,000” in his speech at the Association of U.S. Army in October 2012. Additionally, the ROK Defense White Paper 2014 notes, “Special operation
forces are currently estimated at 200,000 strong.”


-----

|Col1|ROK|U.S. Forces in Korea|
|---|---|---|
|Approx. 1.19 million personnel|Approx. 628,000 personnel|Approx. 25,000 personnel|
|Approx. 1.02 million personnel|Approx. 495,000 personnel|Approx. 17,000 personnel|
|T-62, T-54/-55, etc. Approx. 3,500|M-48, K-1, T-80 etc. Approx. 2,400|M-1|
|Approx. 780; 104,000 tons|Approx. 240; 211,000 tons|Supporting corps only|
|4 20|12 11 13||
||Approx. 29,000 personnel||
|Approx. 560|Approx. 620|Approx. 80|
|Mig-23 x 56 Mig-29 x 18 ft Su-25 x 34|F-4 x 70 F-16 x 164 F-15 x 60|F-16 x 60|
|Approx. 25 million|Approx. 49 million||
|Army: 5–12 years Navy: 5–10 years Air Force: 3–4 years|Army: 21 months Navy: 23 months Air Force: 24 months||


Fig. I-2-2-1 Military Confrontation on the Korean Peninsula

Orang

General Staff Office
Navy Headquarters Toksan Chaho
Pyongyang Defense Headquarters Kaechon Mayangdo

Taejo

Air Force Headquarters

Pyongyang

Chunghwa

Nampo Hwangju

Uijongbu

U.N. Command Headquarters

Mukho

U.S.–ROK Combined Forces Sagot Seoul

U.S. 2nd Infantry Division

Command Headquarters Suwon
Headquarters of U.S. Forces Korea

Pyeongtaek Osan

U.S. 7th Air Force Headquarters

Kunsan

Taegu

Kwangju

Busan

Mokpo Chinhae

North Korea ROK U.S. Forces in Korea

Total armed forces Approx. 1.19 million personnel Approx. 628,000 personnel Approx. 25,000 personnel

Ground troops Approx. 1.02 million personnel Approx. 495,000 personnel Approx. 17,000 personnel

Army T-62, T-54/-55, etc. M-48, K-1, T-80 etc.

Tanks M-1

Approx. 3,500 Approx. 2,400

Naval vessels Approx. 780; 104,000 tons Approx. 240; 211,000 tons Supporting corps only

Destroyers 12

Navy Frigates 4 11

Submarines 20 13

Marines Approx. 29,000 personnel

Combat aircraft Approx. 560 Approx. 620 Approx. 80

Mig-23 x 56 F-4 x 70

Air Force 3rd and 4th

Mig-29 x 18 F-16 x 164 F-16 x 60

generation fighter aircraft

Su-25 x 34 F-15 x 60

Population Approx. 25 million Approx. 49 million

Army: 5–12 years Army: 21 months

Reference

Term of service Navy: 5–10 years Navy: 23 months

Air Force: 3–4 years Air Force: 24 months

Source: “The Military Balance 2016,” etc.


years, North Korea is seen to be placing importance on
and strengthening its cyber forces.[11]

- 3  WMD and Ballistic Missiles


including decreases in military assistance from the
former Soviet Union due to the collapse of the Cold War
regime, limitations placed on North Korea’s national
defense spending due to its economic stagnation, and the
rapid modernization of the ROK’s defense capabilities. It
is thus speculated that North Korea is focusing its efforts
on WMD and ballistic missile reinforcements in order to
compensate for this shortfall.
North Korea’s development of WMDs and missiles


While North Korea continues to maintain largescale military capabilities, its conventional forces are
considerably inferior to those of the ROK and the U.S.
Forces Korea. This is the result of a variety of factors,


11 The U.S. Director of National Intelligence’s “Worldwide Threat Assessment” of February 2016 notes, “North Korea probably remains capable and willing to launch disruptive or destructive cyber attacks to support
its political objectives.” The annual report “Military and Security Developments Involving the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea” (2015) submitted to Congress by the U.S. DoD also in February 2016 states,
“North Korea probably views OCO [offensive cyber operations] as an appealing platform from which to collect intelligence and cause disruption in South Korea and other adversaries including the United States.”
According to the ROK’s Defense White Paper 2014, North Korea has mobilized over 6,000 cyber warfare personnel and carries out cyber attacks which interfere with the ROK’s military operations and national


-----

is considered to have made further strides through going
ahead with the fourth nuclear test and repeating ballistic
missile launches. Coupled with its provocative rhetoric
and behavior, such as suggesting a missile attack on
Japan, North Korea’s development of WMDs and missiles
poses a serious and imminent threat to the security of the
region including Japan and the international community.
Additionally, such development poses a serious challenge
to the entire international community with regard to the
non-proliferation of weapons, including WMDs.

**(1) Nuclear Weapons**
a. Recent Major Developments related to North Korea’s
Nuclear Development
With regard to the issue of North Korea’s development of
nuclear weapons, six rounds of the Six-Party Talks have
been held since August 2003, aimed at taking peaceful
measures to achieve the verifiable denuclearization on the
Korean Peninsula. At the fourth round of the Six-Party
Talks in 2005, the Joint Statement was adopted, which
focused on the abandonment of “all nuclear weapons and
existing nuclear programs” by North Korea. In 2006, the
Talks were suspended with North Korea launching seven
ballistic missiles and conducting a nuclear test,[12] along
with the U.N. Security Council adopting Resolutions
1695 and 1718 in response. Later, North Korea returned
to the fifth round of the Six-Party Talks. At the sixth
round of the Talks in September 2007, the parties
reached an agreement, which included completion of
the disablement of nuclear facilities in Yongbyon and “a
complete and correct declaration of all (North Korea’s)
nuclear programs” by the end of the year. However,
the implementation of the agreement has not been
completed, and the Six-Party Talks has been suspended
since December 2008.
Subsequently, the U.N. Security Council adopted
Resolution 1874 in June 2009 in response to North
Korea’s ballistic missile launches and nuclear test in
2009,[13] Resolution 2087 in January 2013 in response to
North Korea’s launch of a ballistic missile disguised as
a “Satellite” in December 2012, and Resolution 2094
in March 2013 in response to North Korea’s nuclear
test in February 2013. These resolutions have expanded
and strengthened the sanctions against North Korea. In


addition, in response to North Korea’s nuclear test in
January 2016 and launch of a ballistic missile disguised as
a “Satellite” in February 2016, the U.N. Security Council
adopted Resolution 2270 in March 2016 that included the
further addition and strengthening of sanctions against
North Korea, such as a prohibition on exporting and
supplying aviation fuel to North Korea and a prohibition
on importing coal and iron ore from North Korea.
North Korea announced in 2005 that it manufactured
nuclear weapons, and declared itself a “nuclear weapons
state” in 2012 in its revised constitution. In 2013, North
Korea continued to take steps to boost its standing in the
international community as a “nuclear weapons state.” In
March 2013, it adopted the “new strategic line” policy of
simultaneous economic and nuclear development. North
Korea alleged that even if it does not increase defense
spending, as long as robust nuclear deterrence is achieved
by increasing the effectiveness of its war deterrent and
defense force, North Korea would be able to concentrate
on its economic development and on improving the
people’s livelihood. North Korea reiterated that nuclear
weapons were neither a political bargaining chip nor a
thing for economic transactions. In April of the same
year, North Korea adopted a law “On Consolidating the
Position of Nuclear Weapons State for Self-Defense.”[14]
In March 2016, in response to the new U.N. Security
Council resolution, North Korea issued a statement
saying, “The DPRK will, as ever, firmly hold the banner
of the line of developing the two fronts, further bolster its
self-defensive nuclear deterrence.”[15] During the Seventh
KWP Congress held in May 2016, KWP Chairman Kim
Jong-un delivered a report on the work of the KWP
Central Committee, setting out that North Korea was a
“nuclear weapons state” and stating, “We will consistently
take hold on the strategic line of simultaneously pushing
forward the economic construction and the building of
nuclear force and boost self-defensive nuclear force both
in quality and quantity.”
As regards the objective of North Korea’s nuclear
development, North Korea is deemed to be developing
nuclear weapons as an indispensable deterrent for
maintaining the existing regime in light of the following:
North Korea’s ultimate goal is allegedly the maintenance
of the existing regime;[16] North Korea considers that it needs


12 On October 27, 2006, as a result of the independently collected information and its analysis as well as Japan’s own careful examination of the U.S. and ROK analyses, the Japanese government arrived at the
judgment that the probability of North Korea conducting a nuclear test was extremely high.

13 Given that North Korea announced on May 25, 2009, via the Korean Central News Agency, that it had successfully conducted an underground nuclear test, and in light of the fact that the Japan Meteorological
Agency detected seismic waves with a waveform that differed from an ordinary waveform, which could possibly have resulted from a North Korean nuclear test, the Japanese government believes that North
Korea conducted a nuclear test on that day.

14 According to a Korean Central News Agency report dated April 1, 2013, this law establishes that North Korea is a “nuclear weapons state,” and in order to further consolidate North Korea’s “position of nuclear
weapons state,” it provides for bolstering the nuclear deterrence and nuclear retaliatory strike power both in quality and quantity, safekeeping and management of nuclear weapons and other assets, cooperation
towards the prevention of nuclear proliferation, and the provision of proactive supports for nuclear disarmament.

15 Statement by a spokesperson for the government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea issued on March 4, 2016.


-----

its own nuclear deterrence to counter the nuclear threat of
the United States[17] and is in no position at least in the shortterm to overturn its inferiority in conventional forces visà-vis the United States and the ROK; North Korea asserts
that the Iraqi and Libyan regimes collapsed due to their
lack of nuclear deterrence;[18] and North Korea reiterates
nuclear weapons will never be traded away at negotiations.
b. The Current Status of the Nuclear Weapons Program
Details of the current status of North Korea’s nuclear
weapons program are largely unclear, partly because
North Korea remains an extremely closed regime. In
light of the unclear status of past nuclear developments,
and considering North Korea has already conducted
four nuclear tests including the nuclear test in January
2016, it is conceivable that North Korea could have made
considerable progress in its nuclear weapons program.
With regard to plutonium, a fissile material that can
be used for nuclear weapons,[19] North Korea has suggested
its production and extraction on several instances.[20]
Moreover, in June 2009, North Korea announced that it
would weaponize all of its newly extracted plutonium.[21] In
April 2013, North Korea announced its policy to readjust
and restart all nuclear facilities in Yongbyon, including
the nuclear reactor, the disablement of which was agreed
upon at the sixth round of the Six-Party Talks in September
2007. In November 2013, the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) opined that while lack of inspection makes
it impossible to determine conclusively, multiple activities
were observed from satellite imagery suggesting that the
nuclear reactor was restarted.[22] Furthermore, in September
2015, North Korea stated that all nuclear facilities in
Yongbyon including the nuclear reactor and the uranium
enrichment plant were readjusted and started normal
operation. Because the restarting of the reactor could lead


to the production and extraction of plutonium by North
Korea, such developments are causes of great concern.
As for highly enriched uranium that can also be used
for nuclear weapons, in 2002 the United States announced
that North Korea acknowledged the existence of a
uranium enrichment program for nuclear weapons. Later
in June 2009, North Korea declared the commencement
of uranium enrichment. Furthermore, in November 2010,
North Korea disclosed its uranium enrichment facility to
American nuclear specialists and later announced that
it was operating a uranium enrichment plant equipped
with thousands of centrifuges. The expansion of this
uranium enrichment plant has been suggested in August
2013; in this regard, North Korea could have increased
its enrichment capabilities. The series of North Korean
behaviors related to uranium enrichment indicate the
possibility of the development of nuclear weapons using
highly enriched uranium in addition to plutonium.[23]
With regard to the development of nuclear weapons,
North Korea has conducted nuclear tests in October
2006, May 2009, February 2013,[24] and January 2016.[25]


17 For example, a statement issued by the National Defense Commission of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on March 14, 2014 alleges that the United States threatens and intimidates North Korea
with nuclear strikes, and that North Korea has come to possess nuclear deterrence out of necessity in order to protect the autonomy of its nation and people.

18 For example, a comment in the Rodong Shinmun dated December 2, 2013 contends that the situation in Iraq and Libya teaches an acute lesson that countries under the constant threat of U.S. preemptive
nuclear attack have no choice but to become a victim of U.S. state terrorism, unless the countries have powerful deterrent capability.

19 Plutonium is synthetically produced in a nuclear reactor by irradiating uranium with neutrons, and then extracting it from used nuclear fuel at a reprocessing facility. Plutonium is then used as a basic material
for the production of nuclear weapons. Meanwhile, in order to use uranium for nuclear weapons, it is necessary to extract uranium 235 (U235), a highly fissile material, from natural uranium. This process is
called enrichment. Generally, a large-scale enrichment facility that combines thousands of centrifuges is used to boost the U235 concentration to nuclear weapon levels (over 90%).

20 North Korea announced in October 2003 that it had completed the reprocessing of 8,000 used fuel rods that contain plutonium, and in May 2005 that it had completed extraction of an additional 8,000 used
fuel rods.

21 Then U.S. Forces Korea Commander Walter Sharp testified before the House Armed Services Committee in April 2011 that “we assess North Korea currently holds enough plutonium to make several nuclear
weapons.” The ROK Defense White Paper 2014 estimates that North Korea has approximately 40 kg of plutonium.

22 The “Worldwide Threat Assessment” of the U.S. Director of National Intelligence of January 2014 notes, “North Korea has followed through on its announcement by expanding the size of its Yongbyon enrichment
facility and restarting the reactor that was previously used for plutonium production.” It is said that if the reactor is restarted, North Korea would have the capability to produce enough plutonium (approximately
6 kg) to manufacture approximately one nuclear bomb in one year.

23 The “Worldwide Threat Assessment” of the U.S. Director of National Intelligence of January 2012 states, “the North’s disclosure (of a uranium enrichment facility) supports the U.S. longstanding assessment
that North Korea has pursued uranium-enrichment capability.” The ROK Defense White Paper 2014 notes, “it is also assessed that a highly enriched uranium (HEU) program is underway.”

24 At around 11:59 am on February 12, 2013, the Japan Meteorological Agency detected seismic waves with an epicenter located in the vicinity of North Korea, which had waveforms that differed from an
ordinary waveform and were unlikely those of a natural earthquake. On the same day, North Korea announced via the Korean Central News Agency that it successfully conducted a nuclear test. On this basis,
the government of Japan verified the facts in coordination with other relevant parties, including the United States and the ROK. Based on a comprehensive consideration of the aforementioned information, the
Japanese government determined that North Korea conducted a nuclear test. North Korea announced that it “succeeded in the third underground nuclear test,” “the test was conducted in a safe and perfect
way on a high level with the use of a smaller and light A-bomb, unlike the previous ones, yet with great explosive power,” “physically demonstrating the good performance of the DPRK’s nuclear deterrence that
has become diversified.”

25 At around 10:30 am on January 6, 2016, the Japan Meteorological Agency detected seismic waves with an epicenter located in the vicinity of North Korea, which had waveforms different from an ordinary
waveform and were unlikely those of a natural earthquake. On the same day, North Korea announced via the Korean Central News Agency that it successfully conducted a hydrogen bomb test. Based on a


-----

It is highly likely that North Korea has made strides in
its nuclear weapons program, collecting the necessary
data through these nuclear tests. Although North Korea
asserts that the nuclear test conducted in January 2016
was a hydrogen bomb test,[26] it is doubtful that a general
hydrogen bomb test was conducted, considering the
magnitude of the earthquake.[27] On the other hand, North
Korea has already conducted four nuclear tests in the
past and is anticipated to achieve technological maturity.
In this light, North Korea’s activities to develop nuclear
weapons including the hydrogen bomb require continued
attention. Since the nuclear test in January 2016, North
Korea has continued to reiterate that it would further
strengthen its nuclear assets, and therefore, a situation that
raises serious concerns for the international community is
expected to remain.
It is believed that North Korea seeks to miniaturize
nuclear weapons and develop them into warheads that
can be mounted on ballistic missiles, as part of its nuclear
weapons program. For instance, in March 2016, images
were released showing KWP Chairman Kim Jong-un
meeting with nuclear weapons engineers and others
and observing an object North Korea claims to be a
miniaturized nuclear warhead.[28] In general, miniaturizing
a nuclear weapon small enough to be mounted on a
ballistic missile requires a considerably high degree of
technological capacity. However, considering that the
United States, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom,
France, and China succeeded in acquiring such technology
by as early as the 1960s, as well as the technological
maturity reached through North Korea’s previous four
nuclear tests, among other factors, it is possible that North
Korea has achieved the miniaturization of nuclear weapons
and has developed nuclear warheads.[29] Taking into account
that North Korea has not changed its stance of continuing
its nuclear weapons program, it is believed that with the


passage of time, there would be a greater risk of North
Korea deploying a ballistic missile mounted with a nuclear
warhead that includes Japan in its range. In this regard,
related developments need to be monitored carefully.
North Korea’s nuclear weapons development,
considered in conjunction with North Korean efforts to
enhance ballistic missile capabilities, including extending
the range of ballistic missiles that could become the
delivery vehicles of WMDs, poses a serious and imminent
threat to the security of the region including Japan and
of the international community, and significantly impairs
peace and stability. Therefore, they can never be tolerated.

**(2) Biological and Chemical Weapons**
North Korea is an extremely closed regime. In addition,
most materials, equipment, and technology used for
manufacturing biological and chemical weapons are for
both military and civilian uses, which in turn facilitates
camouflage. For these reasons, details of the status
of North Korea’s biological and chemical weapons
development and arsenals are unclear. However, with
regard to chemical weapons, North Korea is suspected
to have several facilities capable of producing chemical
agents and already a substantial stockpile of such agents.
North Korea is also thought to have some infrastructure
for the production of biological weapons.[30, 31]


**(3) Ballistic Missiles**
As is the case with WMDs, many of the details of North
Korea’s ballistic missiles are unknown, partly owing
to the country’s extremely closed regime. It appears,
however, that North Korea gives high priority to the
development of ballistic missiles out of political and
diplomatic considerations and from the viewpoint of
earning foreign currency,[32] in addition to enhancing its
military capabilities. In March, June, and July 2014 and


26 Regarding the nuclear test conducted on January 6, 2016, North Korea announced: “The first H-bomb test was successfully conducted”; and “The DPRK fully proved that the technological specifications of the
newly developed H-bomb for the purpose of test were accurate and scientifically verified the power of smaller H-bomb.” Prior to this, on December 10, 2015, the Korean Central Broadcasting Station reported
KWP Chairman Kim Jong-un as saying, North Korea has “become a powerful nuclear weapons state that can reverberate the large explosion sound of a hydrogen bomb.”

27 In regard to North Korea’s nuclear test on January 6, 2016, the U.S. Director of National Intelligence’s “Worldwide Threat Assessment” (February 2016) states, “Although we are continuing to evaluate this event,
the low yield of the test is not consistent with a successful test of a thermonuclear device.” Furthermore, in January 2016, the ROK National Intelligence Service reportedly briefed the National Assembly that
because the power and seismic waves of the fourth nuclear test do not match up to those of the previous three nuclear tests, the test was unlikely a hydrogen bomb test.

28 According to the Korean Central Broadcasting Station on March 9, 2016, KWP Chairman Kim Jong-un met with engineers and others from the nuclear weapons research team, provided guidance regarding
the nuclear weapons program, and stated, “The nuclear warheads have been standardized to be fit for ballistic missiles by miniaturizing them.”

29 Over nine years have already passed since North Korea conducted its first nuclear test in October 2006. Furthermore, North Korea has conducted four nuclear tests to date. This timetable for technology
development and the number of tests are reaching levels that are by no means inadequate, even when compared to the processes of developing technologies to miniaturize and lighten nuclear weapons in
the United States, Soviet Union, United Kingdom, France, and China. The ROK’s Defense White Paper 2014 assesses that “North Korea’s ability to miniaturize nuclear weapons also seems to have reached a
considerable level.” In March 2016, the spokesperson of the ROK Ministry of Unification stated during his press conference that, “Considering the timespan since the first nuclear test, we perceive that North
Korea has secured some level of miniaturization technology.” In addition, the spokesperson of the Ministry of National Defense stated, “We assess that North Korea’s miniaturization technology has reached a
considerable level. However, we view North Korea, at this point, does not have a miniaturized nuclear warhead nor has secured actual combat capability of KN08.” In March 2016, North Korea published photos
of the object it claims is a “miniaturized nuclear warhead,” suggesting that it may be mounted on the new KN08 ICBM.

30 For example, the ROK Defense White Paper 2014 points out that, following the commencement of production in the 1980s, it is estimated that North Korea has a stock of 2,500-5,000 tons of various
chemical weapons stored. It also notes that North Korea likely has the capability to produce a variety of biological weapons including anthrax, smallpox, and pest. Moreover, the U.S. DoD’s “Military and Security
Developments Involving the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea” of May 2013 points out that, “North Korea probably could employ CW [chemical weapons] agents by modifying a variety of conventional
munitions, including artillery and ballistic missiles.”

31 North Korea ratified the Biological Weapons Convention in 1987 but has not acceded to the Chemical Weapons Convention.

32 North Korea admitted that it is exporting ballistic missiles to earn foreign currency. (Comment by the Korean Central News Agency on June 16, 1998, and statement made by a North Korean Foreign Ministry


-----

March 2015, North Korea launched short- and mediumrange ballistic missiles believed to be the Nodong and
Scud missiles, and since February 2016, has repeatedly
launched ballistic missiles including the ballistic missile
disguised as a “Satellite.” North Korea often launches
ballistic missiles to conduct military provocations against
relevant countries, including Japan.[33]
a. Toksa
North Korea is thought to be developing a short-range
ballistic missile “Toksa” with its range estimated to be
approximately 120 km.[34] It is deemed that Toksa is the
first ballistic missile owned or developed by North Korea
which adopts a solid fuel propellant.[35]


b. Scud
It is believed that, since the middle of the 1980s, North
Korea has manufactured and deployed Scud B and Scud
C,[36] a variant of Scud B with extended range, and has
exported these ballistic missiles to the Middle East and
other countries. At present, North Korea is considered
to deploy Scud ER (Extended Range) which has an
extended range due to the extension of the scud’s body
as well as the reduction in weight of the warhead, among
other factors. The range of a Scud ER is estimated to
reach 1,000 km,[37] and it is possible that a part of Japan
falls within this range.

|Fig. I-2-2-2|Range of North Korean Ballistic Missiles|
|---|---|
|New York (Approx. 6,000 km) 10,000 km Taepodong-2 (Variant: Approx. 10,000 km+) Washington, D.C. Chicago Musudan (Approx. 2,500–4,000km) Taepodong-1 (Approx. 1,500 km+) 6,000 km Denver Nodong (Approx. 1,300 km) 4,000 km San Francisco Anchorage Scud ER (Approx. 1,000 km) 1,500 km Los Angeles 1,300 km Taepodong district Beijing Pyongyang Tokyo Hawaii Tongch’ang-ri district 1,000 km Okinawa Guam The United States Geological Survey: GTOPO30 * The figure above shows a rough image of the distance each missile can reach from Pyongyang for the sake of convenience.||


Fig. I-2-2-2 Range of North Korean Ballistic Missiles

New York

(Approx. 6,000 km) 10,000 km
Taepodong-2

(Variant: Approx. 10,000 km+) Washington, D.C.

Chicago

Musudan (Approx. 2,500–4,000km)

Taepodong-1 (Approx. 1,500 km+) 6,000 km

Denver

Nodong (Approx. 1,300 km)

4,000 km San Francisco

Anchorage

Scud ER (Approx. 1,000 km) 1,500 km

Los Angeles

1,300 km

Taepodong district

Beijing Pyongyang Tokyo Hawaii

Tongch’ang-ri district 1,000 km

Okinawa

Guam

The United States Geological Survey: GTOPO30


33 An overview of North Korea’s short- and medium-range ballistic missile launches since 2014 is as follows. (1) On March 3, 2014, at around 6:20 am and around 6:30 am, North Korea launched two ballistic
missiles presumed to be Scud missiles in the east-northeast direction from the vicinity of Wonsan in the eastern coast on the Korean Peninsula. It is estimated that both missiles flew approximately 500 km and
fell into the Sea of Japan. (2) On March 26, 2014, from around 2:30 am to 2:40 am, North Korea launched two ballistic missiles presumed to be Nodong missiles in the eastern direction from the vicinity of
Sukchon in the western coast on the Korean Peninsula. It is estimated that both missiles flew approximately 650 km and fell into the Sea of Japan. (3) On June 29, 2014, at around 5 am, North Korea launched
two ballistic missiles presumed to be Scud missiles in the eastern direction from the vicinity of Wonsan in the eastern coast on the Korean Peninsula. It is estimated that the ballistic missiles launched flew a
maximum of approximately 500 km and all fell into the Sea of Japan. (4) On July 9, 2014, from around 4 am to around 4:20 am, North Korea launched two ballistic missiles presumed to be Scud missiles in
the northeast direction from the southwestern area of North Korea (approximately 100 km south of Pyongyang). It is estimated that both of the ballistic missiles launched flew approximately 500 km and fell
into the Sea of Japan. (5) On July 13, 2014, from around 1:20 am to around 1:30 am, North Korea launched two ballistic missiles presumed to be Scud missiles in the northeastern direction from the vicinity
of Kaesong in the southern area of North Korea. It is estimated that both of the ballistic missiles launched flew approximately 500 km and fell into the Sea of Japan. (6) On July 26, 2014, at around 9:35 pm,
North Korea launched one ballistic missile presumed to be a Scud missile in the eastern direction from the western coast of North Korea (approximately 100 km west of Haeju). It is estimated that the ballistic
missile launched flew approximately 500 km and fell into the Sea of Japan. (7) On March 2, 2015, at around 6:30 am and around 6:40 am, North Korea launched two ballistic missiles presumed to be Scud
missiles in the east-northeastern direction from the vicinity of Nampo on the western coast of North Korea. It is estimated that both of the ballistic missiles launched flew approximately 500 km and fell into the
Sea of Japan. (8) On March 10, 2016, at around 5:22 am and around 5:27 am, North Korea launched two ballistic missiles presumed to be Scud missiles in the east-northeastern direction from the vicinity of
Nampo on the western coast of North Korea. It is estimated that both of the ballistic missiles launched flew approximately 500 km and fell into the Sea of Japan. (9) On March 18, 2016, at around 5:54 am,
North Korea launched one ballistic missile presumed to be a Nodong missile in the eastern direction from the vicinity of Sukchon on the western coast of North Korea. It is estimated that the ballistic missile
launched flew approximately 800 km and fell into the Sea of Japan.

34 In March 2007, then U.S. Forces Korea Commander Burwell B. Bell testified before the House Armed Services Committee that, “North Korea is developing a new solid propellant short-range ballistic missile.
Recently, in March 2006, North Korea successfully test-fired the missile. Once operational, the missile can be deployed more flexibly and rapidly than the existing system and North Korea will be able to launch
the missile in a much shorter preparation period.”

35 Generally, solid fuel propellant missiles are considered to be militarily superior because they are filled with a propellant in solid form in airframes and are capable of immediate launches compared with liquid
fuel propellant missiles, making signs of their launches unlikely to be detected in advance. Furthermore, they are relatively easy to store and handle.

36 The ranges of Scud B and Scud C missiles are estimated to be about 300 km and 500 km, respectively.


-----

c. Nodong
North Korea is thought to have started developing longerrange ballistic missiles by the 1990s, including Nodong.
It appears that Nodong, which is believed to be already
deployed, is a liquid fuel propellant single-stage ballistic
missile. It is assessed to have a range of about 1,300 km,
and may reach almost all of Japan.
It is highly probable that Nodong was used in the
launch into the Sea of Japan in 1993. A total of six
ballistic missiles fired from the Kittaeryong district in the
southeastern part of North Korea in July 2006 are believed
to be Scud and Nodong.[38] In July 2009, North Korea
is believed to have launched a total of seven ballistic
missiles from the same district, and it is possible that they
were either Scud or Nodong missiles.[39] Furthermore, the
ballistic missiles presumed to be Nodong missiles that
were launched towards the Sea of Japan in March 2014
marked the first time that the missiles were launched
from the western coast of North Korea in the eastern
direction, across the Korean Peninsula. Accordingly, it is
deemed that North Korea is building up its confidence in
the performance and reliability of its ballistic missiles.[40]
Although the details of Nodong’s performance have
not been confirmed, Nodong may not have the accuracy to
carry out precise strikes on specific target installations, as
this ballistic missile is likely based on Scud technology.
However, it has been suggested that North Korea is
working to increase the Nodong’s accuracy.
d. Taepodong-1
Taepodong-1 is assumed to be a two-stage, liquid fuel
propellant ballistic missile with a Nodong used as its
first stage and a Scud as its second stage. It is estimated
to have a range of at least approximately 1,500 km. The
ballistic missile launched in 1998 is assessed to be based
on Taepodong-1. North Korea is believed to have shifted
its focus to the development of a longer range missile,
and Taepodong-1 may have been a transitory product for
the development of Taepodong-2.


e. Musudan
North Korea is currently developing a new type of
intermediate-range ballistic missile (IRBM) “Musudan.”
It has been suggested that Musudan is a revamped version
of the Russian SLBM SS-N-6 that North Korea acquired
in the early 1990s. It will be loaded onto a TransporterErector-Launcher (TEL), similar to its Scud and Nodong
counterparts, to transport and operate. With the new
missile allegedly having a range of between 2,500 and
4,000 km, it has been suggested that all parts of Japan and
Guam may fall within its firing range.[41]
In April 2016, North Korea is thought to have made
its first attempt to launch a ballistic missile presumed to
be the Musudan but it ended in failure. However, in June
2016, an IRBM presumed to be the Musudan that was
launched from the vicinity of Wonsan in the eastern coast
of North Korea reached an altitude exceeding 1,000 km
(maximum height was 1,413.6 km according to North
Korea’s announcement) and flew approximately 400 km
before falling into the Sea of Japan.[42] With regard to the
situation of this launch, it is believed that the missile
was launched on a “lofted trajectory,” meaning it was
launched at a steep angle to reach a higher altitude than a


38 Of the seven ballistic missiles North Korea launched in total in July 2006, the third missile is believed to be a Taepodong-2 fired from the Taepodong district in the northeastern coastal area.

39 All of the seven ballistic missiles launched were assumed to have landed in the military target practice area, for which a navigation warning was issued by the Japan Coast Guard upon notification by North
Korea on June 22, 2009.

40 On March 18, 2016, North Korea again launched ballistic missiles presumed to be Nodong missiles in a similar manner.

41 In a statement for the Senate Armed Services Committee in March 2009, General Sharp, then Commander of U.S. Forces Korea, testified, “North Korea is now fielding a new intermediate range ballistic missile
capable of striking Okinawa, Guam, and Alaska.” Furthermore, the ROK’s Defense White Paper 2014 notes that, “In 2007, it [North Korea] fielded the Musudan missile (range of over 3,000 km). Following these
deployments, North Korea has gained direct strike capabilities against South Korea, Japan, Guam, and other surrounding countries.”

42 On June 22, 2016, North Korea launched a ballistic missile presumed to be the Musudan at around 5:57 am and around 8:03 am, respectively. The ballistic missile launched at 5:57 am separated into multiple
pieces and fell near the shore of the eastern coast of North Korea. It is estimated that the longest flight distance among the separated pieces was approximately 100 km. The ballistic missile launched at 8:03
am is as stated in the main text. On the following day, June 23, the Korean Central Broadcasting Station announced that the test launch of the “Hwasong-10” surface-to-surface intermediate long-range strategic
rocket was conducted successfully and reported as follows: (1) The test launch was carried out by the high-angle launch system simulating the maximum range of the ballistic rocket; (2) the rocket reached the
maximum height of 1,413.6 km along the planned flight orbit, flew, and accurately landed in the targeted waters 400 km forward; (3) the test launch confirmed the flying kinetic feature of the ballistic rocket
and its stability and maneuverability as well as the technical features of the newly-designed rocket structure and its power system, and verified the heat-resisting property of the warhead in the re-entry stage
and its flight stability; and (4) KWP Chairman Kim Jong-un who visited the site stated, “We have attained definite capability to attack in a full-fledged and realistic way the U.S. Forces in the Pacific operation


-----

normal trajectory, while flying a shorter distance.[43] If this
same ballistic missile presumed to be the Musudan were
launched on a normal trajectory, it is estimated that its
range would correspond to a range between approximately
2,500 and 4,000 km, the previously suggested range of
a Musudan. In this light, it is considered that, through
its launch in June, North Korea demonstrated that its
missile had functions of an IRBM[44] to some level. While
the failures of North Korea’s several Musudan launches[45]
since April 2016 have suggested that there could be
fundamental flaws with the engine and missile body, it
cannot be ruled out that North Korea has striven to solve
the problems through the failures and could have made
some technical gains.
It is very difficult to verify the intention of North
Korea’s military activities because of its closed regime. In
addition, it is believed that North Korea has constructed
underground military facilities across the country, and
the ballistic missiles such as Toksa, Scud, Nodong and
Musudan, would be loaded onto TELs. These make it
difficult to detect in advance individual and specific signs
of the launch of missiles with TELs, such as detailed
launch sites and timings.[46]
f. Taepodong-2
Taepodong-2 is believed to be a missile which uses in
its first stage, four engines, each of which is developed
based on the technologies of Nodong, and the same type
of engine in its second stage. Its range is estimated to
be approximately 6,000 km for the two-stage type,
while the range of its three-stage variant can be more
than approximately 10,000 km assuming that the weight
of the warhead is not over approximately one ton. A
Taepodong-2 is believed to have been launched from the
Taepodong district located in the northeastern coastal
area in July 2006, and was damaged during flight at an
altitude of several kilometers, several tens of seconds
after the launch without separating the first stage, and fell
near the launch site. In the launch of a missile disguised
as a “Satellite” in April 2009, it is thought that North


Korea used a Taepodong-2 or a variant of it from the
same district. It is estimated that the missile crossed over
Japan, and flew more than 3,000 km before falling into
the Pacific Ocean. In April 2012, North Korea conducted
a launch using what is believed to be a Taepodong-2
or its variant from the Tongch’ang-ri district on the
northwestern coast of North Korea, which was disguised
as a “Satellite.” The missile flew over a minute and then
fell into the Yellow Sea by breaking into several pieces.
The launch is thought to have been a failure.[47]
In December 2012, North Korea again conducted a
launch using a Taepodong-2 variant, which was disguised
as a “Satellite,” from the Tongch’ang-ri district. In this
launch, all falling objects are presumed to have fallen
in the expected falling areas where North Korea had
announced before the launch. An object including the
possible third stage propelling device is presumed to have
continued flight while changing its trajectory, and to have
put an object into orbit around the Earth.[48]
In February 2016, North Korea once again
conducted a launch from the Tongch’ang-ri district using
a Taepodong-2 variant, which seemed to be a similar
type of the ballistic missile launched in December 2012,
saying it was launching a “Satellite.” It is assessed that
North Korea’s long-range ballistic missiles’ technological
reliability had been advanced by this launch because it
is estimated that (1) it successfully launched two similar
types of ballistic missiles in a row; (2) the missile flew
in almost the same way as the last launch; and (3) it put
an object into orbit around the Earth.[49] Accordingly, it is
believed that a test launch of long-range ballistic missiles
can contribute to the development of shorter-range
missiles in such ways as increasing the range and payload
capability and improving the circular error probability
(CEP). Also, the separation technology of multi-stage
propelling devices and the technology of posture control
and thrust modulation of long-range ballistic missiles can
be applied to other middle-range and long-range ballistic
missiles that North Korea is newly developing. Therefore,


43 It is not necessarily clear why North Korea launched the missile on a lofted trajectory. However, based on Korean Central Broadcasting Station’s report on June 23, 2016 that “The test-fire was successfully
conducted without giving any slightest effect to the security of surrounding countries,” it is possible that North Korea aimed to minimize the anticipated backlash and criticism from the international community,
including neighboring countries and the United States, should its missile overfly the territories of other countries including Japan. In general, it is considered that ballistic missiles launched on a lofted trajectory
make interception more difficult.

44 IRBM generally refers to a ballistic missile with a range between approximately 3,000 and 5,500 km.

45 On April 28, 2016, North Korea launched a ballistic missile presumed to be the Musudan in the early morning and late afternoon, respectively, but the launches ended in failure. Additionally, in the early morning
of May 31, 2016, North Korea launched an IRBM that could be a Musudan, but it ended in failure. Furthermore, on April 15, 2016, North Korea launched a ballistic missile that ended in failure. It is suggested
that this missile was also a Musudan.

46 According to the U.S. DoD’s “Military and Security Developments Involving the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea” of February 2016, North Korea possesses a maximum of 100 TELs in total for Toksas
and Scuds, a maximum of 50 TELs for Nodongs, and a maximum of 50 TELs for IRBMs (understood as referring to Musudans). Furthermore, according to “IHS Jane’s Sentinel Security Assessment China and
Northeast Asia (2015),” North Korea possesses 700 to 1,000 missiles in total, 45% of which are presumed to be Scud-class, 45% Nodong, and the remaining 10% other intermediate- and long-range ballistic
missiles.

47 After the launch, North Korea announced that “the earth observation satellite failed to enter its preset orbit,” admitting the failure of the launch.

48 It has not been confirmed that the object put into orbit around the Earth is performing communication or is transmitting or receiving any signal to and from the ground. Therefore, it is not assessed that the object
actually functions as a satellite.

49 In the case of the February 2016 launch of a ballistic missile, which North Korea disguised as a “Satellite,” once again no communication or transmission of signals between the object and the ground of any ii


-----

Object likely from the Taepodong-2 variant launched by North Korea that washed ashore and
was discovered in the coast of Tottori Prefecture [Photo courtesy of Tottori Prefecture]

based on its appearance and other features, washed ashore
and was discovered in the coast of Tottori Prefecture. As
of the end of June 2016, the MOD is analyzing the details.
g. KN08
The details of the new missile “KN08” which was
showcased at the military parade in April 2012 and July
2013 are unknown. However, the missile is believed to
be an ICBM.[51] At the military parade in October 2015,
a new missile thought to be the “KN08” was showcased
with a different-shaped warhead from the previous
version.[52] The U.S. DoD reportedly calls the new missile,
considered a variant of the “KN08,” the “KN14.” Whereas
the Taepodong-2 is launched from a fixed launch pad, the
“KN08” and “KN14” are carried by a TEL, making it
difficult to detect signs of their launch in advance, and is
likely intended to increase survivability.
h. Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missile (SLBM)
It has been suggested that North Korea is developing
an SLBM and a new submarine which is designed to
carry the SLBM. In May 2015, North Korea, along with
photos, announced through its media that it conducted a
successful test launch of an SLBM.[53] In January 2016,
a documentary film on the activities of KWP Chairman
Kim Jong-un in December 2015 showed footage of an
ejection test of what is assessed to be an SLBM different
from the one made public in May 2015. In April 2016,


the launch may lead not only to the improvement of other
types of its ballistic missiles including Nodong but also to
the advancement of North Korea’s entire ballistic missile
program including the development of new ballistic
missiles such as Musudan, KN-08 and SLBM and
diversification of attack measure. On the other hand,
it is assessed that further verification of some relevant
technologies would be required for the practical use of
long-range ballistic missiles. For example, concerning
the development of long-range ballistic missiles, North
Korea may plan to verify technology required for
protecting a re-entry vehicle from ultrahigh heating
when the warhead re-enters into the atmosphere through
further flight tests.[50] Furthermore, as launches from
fixed launch pads are vulnerable to external attacks,
North Korea may seek resiliency and survivability
through building underground or silo launch facilities
and launching from TELs.
In June 2016, what appears to be a part of the fairing
of the Taepodong-2 variant launched in February 2016,


50 On March 15, 2016, the Korean Central Broadcasting Station reported that a “simulated test of atmospheric re-entry of a ballistic vehicle” was conducted successfully under the leadership of KWP Chairman
Kim Jong-un.

51 The “Worldwide Threat Assessment” of the U.S. Director of National Intelligence of February 2015 notes that, “[North Korea] has publicly displayed its KN08 road-mobile ICBM twice. We assess that North Korea
has already taken initial steps towards fielding this system, although the system has not been flight-tested.”

52 Jane’s Defence Weekly dated October 13, 2015 notes that the “KN08” showcased at the military parade on October 10, 2015 had a larger third stage than the earlier version, and therefore, could have an
extended range. It also suggests that low quality ablative materials cannot withstand high temperatures during re-entry, and thus, a blunter shape warhead may have been developed to reduce speed to protect
the warhead.

53 An article dated October 28, 2014 published on the website (38North) of the U.S.-Korea Institute at Johns Hopkins University in the United States points out that a new test stand had been set up near the
Sinpo shipyard in northern North Korea, which could be used for the initial stages of research, development, testing, and evaluation of a vertical launch tube system for submarines and surface combatants.
In addition, the ROK Defense White Paper 2014 states that North Korea is believed to be building a new submarine that is capable of carrying ballistic missiles. With regard to the “underwater test-fire” of an
SLBM that North Korea announced, the ROK Ministry of National Defense assessed that the test constituted an “ejection test” in the early stage of development and that another four to five years is needed
to complete the development. Having said so, the Ministry expressed concern that North Korea’s development of an SLBM undermines the stability of Northeast Asia and urges North Korea to immediately
suspend its development. According to “Military and Security Developments Involving the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea” (2015) submitted to Congress by the U.S. DoD in February 2016, North Korea


-----

|Expect|ed Falling Area|
|---|---|


Fig. I-2-2-3 Launch of a Ballistic Missile which North Korea Disguised as a “Satellite” on February 7, 2016

It is estimated that North Korea put

Possible 1st stage propelling device an object* into orbit with an
presumed to have fallen after inclination of approx. 97.5 degrees[(*2)]
separating into multiple pieces

Approx. 0940i

Possible interstage section
between 1st and 2nd stage
propelling devices[(*1)]

Object including possible
3rd stage propelling device

Approx. 0941i

Missile launch

Possible fairing Possible 2nd stage

Approx. 390 km Approx. 500 km propelling device

Approx. 0949i

Expected Expected

Japanese territory Expected

Falling Area Falling Area

Falling Area

Approx. 0930i Approx. 0939i Approx. 0944i

Distance from
Tongch’ang-ri Approx. 500 km
district

Approx. 800 km

Approx. 2,500 km

Notes: 1. It is presumed that the possible 1st stage propelling device exploded into numerous pieces and fell after detachment from the main rocket body including the upper stages.
2. It is assessed that the object does not function as a satellite.

Tongch’ang-ri district

Possible interstage section Expected Falling Area
between 1st and 2nd stages

Possible fairing Expected Falling Area

Object including possible
3rd stage propelling device

Possible 2nd stage
propelling device

It is estimated that North Korea put
an object* into orbit with
an inclination of approx. 97.5 degrees.

Expected Falling Area

-  It is assessed that the object does
not function as a satellite.


-----

**y**

**North Korea’s Launch of a Ballistic Missile which was Disguised as a “Satellite”**

**Column**

**on February 7, 2016**

On February 2, 2016, North Korea, intending to launch an “earth observation satellite” between February 8 and 25, set its expected falling
areas and informed international organizations. Then, on February 6, North Korea notifi ed the organizations that it changed the timeframe of the
launch to between February 7 and 14. On the following day, February 7, at approximately 9:30 am, North Korea launched a ballistic missile in
the southern direction from the Tongch’ang-ri district on the northwestern coast.
It is assessed that the trajectory of this missile was almost the same as the launch in December 2012 (hereinafter referred to as “the
previous launch” in this column) despite some differences such as the falling areas. In addition, it is presumed that through this launch North
Korea put an object into orbit around the Earth. However, it is not assessed that this object actually functions as an artifi cial satellite. (→ For
the detailed fl ight pattern, see Fig. I-2-2-3.)
Launching ballistic missiles and Satellite Launching Vehicles (SLVs) require the same technologies such as those for control of large-size
propelling devices, separation of multi-stage propelling devices, and attitude and guidance control. Therefore, it is assessed that North Korea
was able to demonstrate the technical challenges that have to be met for improving its ballistic missile capabilities through this launch following
the previous launch.
With regard to the shape and the type of the ballistic missile launched by North Korea, considering the status of its ballistic missile
development, the exterior appearance of the ballistic missile unveiled this time by North Korea, and the trajectory in this launch, it is judged that
what North Korea launched this time was a three-stage Taepodong-2 variant that seemed to be a similar type of ballistic missile used in the
previous launch. Should the Taepodong-2 variant be actually used for its purpose as a ballistic missile, its range could extend to over 10,000
km assuming a warhead weight of approximately 1 ton or less.
It is assessed that North Korea has improved the reliability of its ballistic missile-related technology in this launch, based on the following
facts: (1) North Korea launched a similar type of multi-stage ballistic missile that was launched in the previous launch; (2) the missile fl ew in
almost the same way as that in the previous launch; and (3) an object including the possible third stage propelling device continued fl ight after
separation while changing trajectory and put an object into orbit around the Earth in a similar way seen in the previous launch.
It is also estimated that the possible fi rst stage propelling device was divided into pieces after separation from the upper stage devices.
North Korea may intentionally have broken the device in order to prevent others from collecting it because the Republic of Korea (ROK) collected
and analyzed the possible fi rst stage propelling device that fell without signifi cant damage into the sea in the previous launch.
Taking serious note of North Korea’s activities to develop ballistic missiles, Japan will seek to collect and analyze related information and
take all possible measures to protect Japan’s peace and security, cooperating with the whole international community including the United
States, the ROK, and other liked-minded countries.


North Korea announced that it once again conducted a
successful test launch of an SLBM.[54] If the images and
footage released by North Korea are accurate, North Korea
could have succeeded in using the “cold launch system”
in which a missile is ignited after it is ejected into the
air. Based on observations such as the shape of the fl ame
coming out of the missile and the color of the smoke, it
has been suggested that solid fuel may have been used
for the launch in April 2016.[55] In July 2016, North Korea
again launched a ballistic missile presumed to be an
SLBM from the coast of Sinpo. In this regard, continued
attention needs to be paid to related developments. It is
deemed that through developing SLBM, North Korea


intends to diversify its ballistic missile attack capabilities
and improve survivability.

See>> Fig. I-2-2-2 (Range of North Korean Ballistic Missiles)
i. Trends in and Outlook of Ballistic Missile Development
North Korea has made rapid strides in the development
of its ballistic missiles with only a few test launches. It
is believed that an underlying factor was North Korea’s
imports of various materials and technologies from
outside of the country. It is also noted that North Korea
transfers and proliferates ballistic missile airframes and
related technologies, and that it promotes the further
development of missiles using funds procured by such
transfer and proliferation.[56] It is further pointed out that


54 The ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff announced that on April 23, 2016 at around 6:30 pm, North Korea launched a missile presumed to be an SLBM from the Sea of Japan northeast of Sinpo, and that the missile
is believed to have fl own approximately 30 km. The U.S. Strategic Command also announced that on the same day at 6:29 pm JST, it detected and tracked the launch of an SLBM by North Korea from
the Sea of Japan.

55 It is suggested that North Korea’s SLBM is an improved version of the liquid-fueled SLBM “SS-N-6” made in the former Soviet Union.

56 For example, because Nodong is similar in shape to Shahab-3 of Iran and Gauri of Pakistan, analysts point out that Nodong airframes or related technologies may have been transferred. In addition, concerning
the proliferation of WMDs and ballistic missiles by North Korea, the “Worldwide Threat Assessment” of the U.S. Director of National Intelligence of January 2014 pointed out that “North Korea’s export of ballistic
missiles and associated materials to several countries, including Iran and Syria, and its assistance to Syria’s construction of a nuclear reactor, destroyed in 2007, illustrate the reach of the its proliferation
activities.” Moreover, in the report entitled “Military and Security Developments Involving the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,” which was published by the U.S. DoD in March 2014, it was pointed out
that North Korea uses various techniques to circumvent measures taken by each country on the basis of United Nations Security Council Resolutions, including sending cargo through multiple front companies


-----

North Korea conducts tests at transfer destinations and
uses the results. Moreover, because a test launch of a
long-range ballistic missile contributes to improving the
performance of other shorter-range ballistic missiles and
its related technologies could be applied to other new
intermediate- and long-range ballistic missiles being
developed by North Korea, the launch of long-range
ballistic missiles such as Taepodong-2, including the
launches in December 2012 and February 2016, will
likely further advance North Korea’s entire ballistic
missile development.
North Korea continues to claim that it would keep
conducting “satellite launches” and would develop and
launch more capable satellite launch vehicles. It is highly
possible that North Korea will further develop its longrange ballistic missiles by repeating similar launches
under the name of “satellite” launches to carry out further
technical tests to bring its long-range ballistic missiles
to the stage of practical use. It has been suggested that
North Korea is carrying out modification for upsizing
its launch tower in Tongch’ang-ri district.[57] While the
missile launched in February 2016 was similar in size
as the Taepodong-2 variant launched in December 2012,
North Korea could launch larger long-range ballistic
missiles in the future. Should North Korea make further
progress in its longer-range ballistic missile capability
and simultaneously achieve the miniaturization of nuclear
weapons and acquired nuclear warheads and so on, North
Korea may come to have a one-sided understanding that
it secured strategic deterrence against the United States.
Should North Korea have a false sense of confidence and
recognition regarding its deterrence, this could lead to
increases in and the escalation of military provocations
by North Korea in the region and could create situations
that are deeply worrying also for Japan.
North Korea is presumed to have attempted its first
Musudan launch in April 2016, and demonstrated its
certain capability as an IRBM in the June 2016 launch. In
March 2016, North Korea disclosed the implementation
of ballistic missile re-entry environmental simulations,
a ground test of a jet of a high-power solid fuel missile
engine, and a ground jet test of a new-type high-power
engine of ICBM. North Korea has shown readiness
to acquire technologies to make practical use of new
intermediate- and long-range ballistic missiles and make
them more sophisticated, presenting serious concerns for
Japan and other relevant countries.


Additionally, North Korea has intensified not only
its research and development of ballistic missiles, but
also activities intended to increase their operational
capabilities. KWP Chairman Kim Jong-un has repeatedly
instructed military units to conduct realistic military
training that does away with formalistic practices. In the
case of the ballistic missile launches since 2014, multiple
ballistic missiles were launched using TEL in the early
morning and late evening hours from locations which
had never been used in the past. The launches revealed
that North Korea has the capacity to launch ballistic
missiles from locations and at timings as it chooses. The
improvements in the operational capabilities of North
Korea’s ballistic missile units, including surprise attack
capabilities, demonstrate that the North Korean ballistic
missile threat is increasing further.
In this light, coupled with its nuclear issue, North
Korea’s ballistic missile issue has become more realistic
and imminent for the Asia-Pacific region, including
Japan, and for the international community from the
perspective of both the improvement of the capability
and transfer and proliferation, and such developments are
profoundly worrisome.

See>> Fig. I-2-2-3 (Launch of a Ballistic Missile which North Korea Disguised
as a “Satellite” on February 7, 2016)

- 4  Domestic Affairs


**(1) Developments Related to the Kim Jong-un Regime**
After the demise of Chairman of the National Defense
Commission Kim Jong-il in 2011, Kim Jong-un became
the de facto head of the military, party, and the “state”
by assuming the position of Supreme Commander of the
KPA, First Secretary of the KWP, and First Chairman of
the National Defense Commission by April 2012. The
framework of the Kim Jong-un regime was laid out in
a short period of time. Since the transition to the new
regime, there has been a number of announcements
of party-related meetings and decisions, and in May
2016, the Seventh KWP Congress was held for the first
time since the last Congress in October 1980, 36 years
earlier. These developments suggest that the “state” is
run under the leadership of the party. Meanwhile, KWP
Chairman Kim Jong-un underscores the importance of
military strength and makes frequent visits to military
organizations. In this light, the Chairman is anticipated to
continue to attach importance to military strength.


57 Articles dated October 1 and July 29, 2014 published on the website (38North) of the U.S.-Korea Institute at Johns Hopkins University in the United States point out that analyses of satellite images of the
Tongch’ang-ri district show that the launch tower was raised to 55 m, enabling launches of rockets up to 50 m in height, larger than the Taepodong-2 variant (total height approx. 30 m) which was used in


-----

Following the change in regime, KWP Chairman
Kim Jong-un has conducted frequent personnel reshuffles,
including reshuffles of the top three military posts of
the Director of the General Political Bureau, the Chief
of the General Staff, and the Minister of the People’s
Armed Forces. In turn, individuals whom Chairman Kim
Jong-un selected were assigned to the key party, military,
and cabinet posts. In addition, in December 2013, Jang
Song-thaek, Vice-Chairman of the National Defense
Commission and Chairman Kim Jong-un’s uncle, was
executed for “plotting to overthrow the state.” It is believed
that through such measures, the Chairman endeavors
to strengthen and consolidate a monolithic leadership
system.[58] In 2014, the North Korean media stopped
reporting the activities of Kim Kyong-hui, Secretary of
the KWP and Kim Jong-un’s aunt. Meanwhile, the North
Korean media began to report the activities of Chairman
Kim Jong-un’s younger sister, Kim Yo-jong, as a senior
member of the KWP.[59] These developments suggest that
a generational change in the leadership may be taking
place among the Kim dynasty.
At the KWP Congress held in May 2016, Kim Jongun was named to the new post of KWP Chairman. In his
report on the work of the KWP Central Committee, the
Chairman set out that North Korea was a “nuclear weapons
state,” and said the country would consistently uphold the
“new strategic line” policy of economic development and
the building of nuclear force as well as further boost its
self-defensive nuclear force both in quality and quantity.
In this manner, the Chairman demonstrated, both to those
in and outside of the country, North Korea’s readiness to
continue with its nuclear and missile development. Prior
to the Congress, North Korea conducted provocations
at unprecedented frequency and content, including the
launch of ballistic missiles.
The holding of the KWP Congress may be an
indication that North Korea has shifted into high gear
by establishing the “state”-run governance system
centered on the party and led by KWP Chairman Kim


Jong-un, in terms of its organization, personnel, among
other dimensions, both in name and in substance.[60] At
the Supreme People’s Assembly convened in June 2016,
it was decided that the National Defense Commission
would be turned into the State Affairs Commission, and
KWP Chairman Kim Jong-un was named Chairman of
the State Affairs Commission, the new “highest position”
of the “state” replacing First Chairman of the National
Defense Commission. These changes are likely also
manifestations of the governance system moving into full
swing. However, with senior officials unable to dispute
the decisions of KWP Chairman Kim Jong-un due to
an atrophy effect created by the frequent executions,
demotions, and dismissals of senior officials, combined
with the alleged appointment of hardliner Kim Yongchol, Director of the Reconnaissance General Bureau,
to replace Kim Yang-gon, Director of United Front
Department in charge of ROK policy who died of a
car accident in December 2015, there is likely growing
uncertainty, including over the possibility of North Korea
turning to military provocations without making adequate
diplomatic considerations. In addition to this, it has been
suggested that there is declining social control caused by
widening wealth disparities and information coming in
from other countries. In this regard, attention will be paid
to the stability of the regime.

**(2) Economic Conditions**
In the economic domain, North Korea has been facing
chronic stagnation and energy and food shortages in
recent years due to the vulnerability of its socialist
planned economy and diminishing economic cooperation
with the former Soviet Union and East European
countries following the end of the Cold War. Especially
for food, it is deemed that North Korea is still forced to
rely on food assistance from overseas.[61] Following North
Korea’s various provocations including the nuclear test in
January 2016 and launch of a ballistic missile disguised
as a “Satellite” in February 2016, the ROK decided to


58 Following the execution of Jang Song-thaek, Vice-Chairman of the National Defense Commission, the North Korean media repeatedly calls for the strengthening of the “monolithic leadership system” and
“single-minded unity.” For example, an editorial in the Rodong Shinmun dated January 10, 2014 urged the people to stay cautious even of trivial phenomena and elements which erode North Korea’s singleminded unity. In May 2015, it was suggested that Hyon Yong-chol, Minister of the People’s Armed Forces, may have been executed on charges of treason. The ROK National Intelligence Service reportedly
briefed the National Assembly that the Minister was executed in late April 2015. In July 2015, the North Korean media introduced Pak Yong-sik, previous Deputy Director of the General Political Bureau of the
Korean People’s Army, with the title, Minister of the People’s Armed Forces. Additionally, since February 21, 2016, the North Korean media has introduced Ri Myong-su, previous Minister of People’s Security,
as Chief of General Staff Department instead of Ri Yong-gil. Ri Yong-gil was announced as an alternate member of the KWP Politburo at the KWP Congress in May 2016.

59 According to the Korean Central Broadcasting Station, Kim Yo-jong was elected a member of the KWP Central Committee at the KWP Congress held in May 2016. The media has also shown her supporting
KWP Chairman Kim Jong-un on the podium during the celebration parade following the KWP Congress.

60 Elections for members and alternate members of the KWP central leadership agencies (e.g., KWP Central Committee and KWP Politburo) were held during the KWP Congress. Pak Pong-ju, Premier, and Choe
Ryong-hae, KWP Secretary, were newly elected as KWP Politburo Standing Committee members to form a five-member Standing Committee including: Kim Jong-un, KWP Chairman; Kim Yong-nam, President
of the Presidium of the Supreme People’s Assembly; and Hwang Pyong-so, Director of the General Political Bureau. All five members of the KWP Politburo Standing Committee are not genuine military personnel.
Furthermore, the ranks of military personnel have fallen within the KWP Politburo, and Premier Pak Pong-ju has been added as a member of the KWP Central Military Commission. It is pointed out that these
aspects show that a KWP-led governance system is shifting into high gear.

61 In April 2016, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) forecasted North Korea’s total production of principal foods to have been 5.40 million tons and estimated the necessary
imported amount of grains to have been 0.694 million tons between November 2015 and October 2016. North Korea’s total food production fell for the first time since 2010 due to water scarcity and the


-----

completely suspend operations at the Kaesong Industrial
Complex, which makes up over 99% of inter-Korean
trade, and furthermore, countries including Japan and the
United States have strengthened their sanctions. Along
with these measures, if China, North Korea’s largest
trading partner,[62] and other relevant countries rigorously
implement the sanctions of U.N. Security Council
Resolution 2270 adopted in March 2016, an even more
severe economic situation could beset North Korea.
To tackle a host of economic difficulties, North Korea
has made attempts at limited improvement measures and
some changes to its economic management systems,[63] and
promotes the establishment of economic development
zones[64] and the enlargement of the discretion of plants
and other entities over production and sales plans.[65] At
the Seventh KWP Congress held in May 2016, the report
on the work of the KWP Central Committee referred
to the delays in the economic sector and identified
the country’s economic revitalization and raising the
people’s standard of living as the most important tasks.
These all suggest North Korea is placing importance on
the rebuilding of the economy. Nonetheless, North Korea
is unlikely to carry out any structural reforms that could
lead to the destabilization of its current ruling system,
and thus, various challenges confront the fundamental
improvement of its current economic situation.

- 5  Relations with Other Countries


resuming the Six-Party Talks.
In response, North Korea has criticized the United
States, claiming that its “hostile policy” towards North
Korea and lack of trust between them stand in the way of
the peace and denuclearization on the Korean Peninsula,
and asserts that the conclusion of a U.S.-North Korea
peace agreement is necessary to build a relationship
of trust.[66] As such, a significant gap has been observed
between the two parties’ stances. Since the adoption of
the U.N. Security Council Resolution 2087 in January
2013, North Korea, claiming that the “hostile policy”
of the United States has entered a dangerous state, has
contended that there can be no denuclearization on the
Korean Peninsula before the denuclearization of the
world. In this context, it has asserted that there would
be no more talks for the denuclearization on the Korean
Peninsula, while leaving room for dialogue for ensuring
peace and security in the region. The divide between the
two parties’ positions has yet to be bridged. In June 2013,
North Korea, in the form of an important statement by
the spokesperson of the National Defense Commission,
proposed to hold U.S.-North Korea senior-level talks.
However, the United States has remained firm on its
stance that North Korea must first take concrete steps to
show it is headed towards denuclearization, and the talks
have not materialized.
North Korea has reacted sharply to the U.S.-ROK
combined exercise, alleging that such activities were a
manifestation of the U.S. “hostile policy” towards North
Korea. In this regard, North Korea has repeatedly voiced
strong criticisms against the United States and conducted
military provocations such as ballistic missile launches.[67]
When the U.S.-ROK combined exercise was carried
out from March to April 2016, North Korea reiterated
its hardline arguments, stating that its target of attack
included the bases of the U.S. Forces in the Asia-Pacific
region and the U.S. mainland.


**(1) Relations with the United States**
The United States has shown that its stance is to take
steps to convince North Korea to abandon its nuclear
program in close cooperation with other countries,
aiming to resolve the issue through the Six-Party Talks.
The United States consistently makes its position clear
that North Korea needs to comply with the 2005 Joint
Statement of the Six-Party Talks and take specific
measures to improve North-South relations before


62 Trade between China and North Korea accounted for around 64% of North Korea’s total trade in 2015.

63 For example, North Korea conducted a so-called currency revaluation (decreasing the denomination of its currency) at the end of 2009. The currency revaluation is said to have led to economic disorder, such
as price escalation due to shortfall of supply, which in turn increased social unrest.

64 During the plenary meeting of the KWP Central Committee on March 31, 2013, KWP Chairman Kim Jong-un instructed the establishment of economic development zones in each province. Pursuant to these
instructions, the Economic Development Zone Law was enacted in May of that year. In November 2013, the establishment of 1 special economic zone and 13 economic development zones was announced. In
January 2015, it was reported that development plans for 13 economic development zones were established.

65 While the details of the policy are not necessarily clear, it is understood that in the industrial sector, entities would be able to independently make production decisions and conduct sales outside the scope of the
national plan, as well as determine employee remuneration and benefits based on the situation of the entities. In the agriculture sector, an autonomous business system would be introduced at the household
level. It has been said that 1,000 pyeong (1 pyeong = approx. 3.3 m2) of land would be allocated per person, with 40% of the agricultural products going to the state and 60% going to individuals.

66 For example, during the 20th Ministerial Meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum (ARF) held on July 2, 2013, Pak Ui-chun, Minister of Foreign Affairs of North Korea,
delivered an address, stating, “The United States drop of its hostile policy should start from the conclusion of a peace treaty between the United States and the DPRK on the basis of the respect for the latter’s
sovereignty and halt to all sanctions and military provocations against it.”

67 On the occasion of the U.S.-ROK combined exercise carried out from March to April 2013, coupled with the protests against U.N. Security Council resolutions, North Korea repeatedly made hardline arguments
including nullification of the Korean War Armistice Agreement and suggestion of preemptive nuclear attack on the United States. During the U.S.-ROK combined exercise from February to April 2014, North
Korea launched ballistic missiles and fired several rounds from multiple rocket launchers while criticizing the United States. On the occasion of the U.S.-ROK combined exercise held from March to April 2015, i


-----

**(2) Relations with the Republic of Korea**
Relations between the ROK and North Korea worsened
under the administration of President Lee Myung-bak,
spurred by the outbreak of incidents that heightened
North-South military tensions, including the sinking of
an ROK patrol vessel in March 2010[68] and the shelling
incident of Yeonpyeong Island in November of the same
year.[69] Even after the administration of President Park
Geun-hye was inaugurated in February 2013, North
Korea lodged protests against the adoption of U.N.
Security Council Resolution 2087 in January 2013 and
U.N. Security Council Resolution 2094 in March 2013, as
well as to the U.S.-ROK combined exercise conducted in
March to April. North Korea adopted a hardline rhetoric,
including abrogation of all agreements on North-South
nonaggression.[70] Following the U.S.-ROK combined
exercise that was conducted until the end of April 2013,
North Korea gradually softened its provocative rhetoric
and behavior against the ROK. By August, North Korea
agreed to the resumption of the Kaesong Industrial
Complex[71] which had de facto suspended its operations.
In addition, North Korea has held dialogues with the
ROK, including the North-South separated family
reunion meeting which was held for the first time in three
years and four months in February 2014. However, when
the U.S.-ROK combined exercise commenced at the
end of February 2014, North Korea engaged in military
provocations, including intrusion into the ROK’s airspace
using small drones[72] and a large-scale maritime live-fire
drill in an area near the northwest islands of the ROK
covering Baengnyeong Island and Yeonpyeong Island.[73]
In August 2015, landmines exploded in the ROK’s
area of the DMZ, causing serious injuries to two ROK
Force personnel. This incident deeply stirred tensions


between the ROK and North Korea, with the ROK
resuming loudspeaker broadcasts targeting the North
for the first time in approximately 11 years and the
shelling incident between the two sides. However, as
a result of the talks between their senior officials, the
two sides agreed on a joint press release that included
the suspension of loudspeaker broadcasts.[74] In October
2015, a reunion of separated families was held, and
tension temporarily subsided. Nonetheless, no concrete
agreement was announced following the vice-ministeriallevel talks for improving relations. Moreover, after North
Korea conducted a nuclear test in January 2016 and went
ahead with the launch of a ballistic missile disguised as
a “Satellite” in February 2016, the ROK took measures
such as resuming loudspeaker broadcasts targeting
North Korea, deciding to begin formal talks between the
ROK and the United States regarding the deployment
of Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD)
by U.S. Forces Korea,[75] and deciding to completely
suspend operations at the Kaesong Industrial Complex.
In response, North Korea declared the Kaesong Industrial
Complex a military control zone, and announced that it
would expel all ROK nationals from the zone and freeze
their assets. When a U.S.-ROK combined exercise was
carried out from March to April 2016, North Korea
repeated provocative rhetoric and behavior, noting that
the first target of attack would be the ROK Blue House,
resulting in heightened tensions between the ROK and
North Korea. Since the Seventh KWP Congress in May
2016, North Korea has proposed to the ROK to hold
dialogue between their military authorities. However,
the ROK has maintained that it would not agree to
dialogue unless North Korea demonstrates its intention to
denuclearize with actions.


68 On March 26, 2010, the ROK’s naval corvette Cheonan sank near the Northern Limit Line in the Yellow Sea. In May 2010, a joint military-civilian survey group comprising experts from the United States, Australia,
the United Kingdom, and Sweden released survey results indicating that the ROK naval ship had split and sank as a result of a shock wave and bubble effect created by the underwater blast of a torpedo fired
by a small North Korean submarine.

69 On November 23, 2010, North Korea bombarded Yeonpyeong Island as the ROK military engaged in firing exercises off the coast of the island facing the Yellow Sea, causing deaths and injuries on the ROK side
including civilians.

70 In January 2013, North Korea’s Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of Korea issued a statement saying that if the South “takes direct part in the U.N. ‘sanctions,’ the DPRK will take strong physical countermeasures against it.” Furthermore, in February of the same year, the Rodong Shinmun published an editorial saying, “(if ROK tightens sanctions as a countermeasure against the nuclear test, it) will not be able
to avoid deadly retaliation.”

71 In April 2013, North Korea prohibited ROK nationals from entering the Kaesong Industrial Complex (located in the city of Kaesong in southwest North Korea, close to the military demarcation line with the ROK;
many ROK companies operate businesses by employing North Korean workers), which commenced operations in 2004 as a North-South economic cooperation project; subsequently, North Korea withdrew all
North Korean workers and announced the temporary suspension of the project. In May 2013, all personnel from the ROK also withdrew from the Complex.

72 On March 24, March 31, and April 6, 2014, crashed drones were discovered in Paju, Baengnyeong Island, and Samcheok, respectively. In May of the same year, the ROK Ministry of National Defense announced
that a scientific study confirmed that the drones originated from North Korea and that the flights were clear military provocations in violation of the armistice agreement and North-South non-aggression
agreement. North Korea criticized the ROK for fabricating the incidents, and asserts that the facts should be uncovered through a ROK-North Korea joint study.

73 According to an announcement by the ROK Ministry of National Defense, on March 31, 2014, North Korea fired roughly 500 rounds using its multiple rocket launchers and other systems, of which about 100
landed in the ROK’s sea area south of the Northern Limit Line (NLL). The ROK government issued an evacuation order to people living near Baengnyeong Island and other areas, and returned fire with about
300 rounds. No damages in the ROK were reported.

74 On August 25, 2015, the South and the North agreed on a joint press release consisting of six items. The North “expressed regret over the injuries of the soldiers of the South caused by the recent landmine
explosions.” The South agreed that “as long as no abnormal incident occurs...[it would] suspend all loudspeaker broadcasts.” Additionally, the two sides agreed to arrange reunions of separated families and to
hold meetings among authorities to improve inter-Korean relations.

75 A ballistic missile defense system designed to intercept short- and intermediate-range ballistic missiles in their terminal phase from the ground. It captures and intercepts targets at high altitudes outside of the


-----

**(3) Relations with China**
The China-North Korea Treaty on Friendship, Cooperation
and Mutual Assistance, which was concluded in 1961, is
still in force.[76] Currently, China is North Korea’s biggest
trade partner. In 2015, trade volume between China and
North Korea was very high, accounting for approximately
64% of North Korea’s total trade,[77] leading observers to
point to North Korea’s dependence on China.
Meanwhile, with regard to the situation in North
Korea and its nuclear issue, China has expressed support
for the denuclearization on the Korean Peninsula and
early resumption of the Six-Party Talks. In addition,
China endorsed U.N. Security Council Resolutions 2087
and 2094. Following the adoption of the two resolutions,
China issued notices in February and April 2013, stating
that China would thoroughly enforce the embargo of
items set forth in both resolutions. When North Korea
conducted a nuclear test in January 2016 and launched
a ballistic missile disguised as a “Satellite” in February
2016, China initially expressed concerns towards
excessive sanctions, saying a destabilization on the
Korean Peninsula must be avoided. Nevertheless, China
ultimately endorsed U.N. Security Council Resolution
2270 which included a significant strengthening of
sanctions against North Korea.
China is a vital political and economic partner for
North Korea and maintains a degree of influence on the
country. However, North Korea does not necessarily
adopt actions which are in line with the position of China
over nuclear and ballistic missile issues. Furthermore,
Jang Song-thaek, Vice-Chairman of the National
Defense Commission, who played a key role in economic
cooperation with China was executed. Given such
circumstances, North Korea-China relations and China’s
influence on North Korea will continue to be followed.
Since 2014, a possible cooling of North KoreaChina relations in the political and diplomatic domains
has been noted, with mutual visits by senior officials
becoming less frequent and President Xi Jinping paying
a state visit to the ROK without visiting North Korea.
Developments that hinted to the improvement of North
Korea-China relations were observed temporarily. For
example, Choe Ryong-hae, KWP Secretary, visited
China for the “commemorative event for the 70th


anniversary of the victory of the Chinese people’s war
of resistance against Japanese aggression” in September
2015. In October 2015, China’s Liu Yunshan, Politburo
Standing Committee member, visited North Korea
for the commemorative event of the 70th anniversary
of the KWP. During his meeting with Liu Yunshan,
KWP Chairman Kim Jong-un stated that North KoreaChina relations were strategic relations forged by blood
and that the bilateral relationship would be further
strengthened and developed. Nevertheless, North Korea
went ahead with a nuclear test in January 2016 despite
China’s request for the denuclearization on the Korean
Peninsula. In February 2016, North Korea launched a
ballistic missile disguised as a “Satellite” immediately
after Wu Dawei, Special Representative for Korean
Peninsula Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
China, visited North Korea. In this light, it is possible
that North Korea-China relations are cooling once again.
In June 2016, KWP Deputy Chairman Ri Su-yong visited
China and held talks with President Xi Jinping. However,
whereas North Korea requested China’s understanding of
the “new strategic line” policy, China urged self-restraint
and dialogue. It is believed that a significant difference in
view still remains between China and North Korea over
the latter’s nuclear development.

**(4) Relations with Russia**
While North Korea and Russia became estranged with
the end of the Cold War, they signed the Russia-North
Korea Treaty on Neighborly Friendship and Cooperation
in 2000.[78] In August 2011, Kim Jong-il, then Chairman
of the National Defense Commission, visited Russia. A
Russia-North Korea summit was held for the first time
in nine years, and the two sides agreed to cooperate on a
gas-pipeline project, among other matters. In September
2012, after the transition to the Kim Jong-un regime,
the two countries signed an agreement that wrote off
90% of the debt owed to Russia by North Korea, and
in such ways, friendly relations have been maintained
between the two countries. Furthermore, in September
2013, a railway opened for service connecting Khasan,
a coastal area in the Russian Far East, and Rajin Port
in northeastern North Korea. Since 2014, North Korea
has further intensified its diplomacy with Russia, as


76 It includes a provision that if either of the signatories (China and North Korea) is attacked and enters into a state of war, the other would make every effort to immediately provide military and other assistance.

77 North Korea’s total trade here was calculated by summing North Korea’s total foreign trade excluding trade with the ROK released by the Korea Trade-Investment Promotion Agency, and trade between North
Korea and the ROK released by the Ministry of Unification of the ROK.

78 The previous treaty (Soviet-North Korea Friendship and Mutual Assistance Treaty) contained the provision that if either of the signatories (Russia and North Korea) is attacked, the other would immediately provide


-----

exemplified by the mutual visits of many senior officials
as well as advances in economic cooperation.[79]
Concerning North Korea’s nuclear issue, Russia,
along with China, has expressed support for the
denuclearization on the Korean Peninsula and early
resumption of the Six-Party Talks. After the nuclear test
conducted by North Korea in February 2013, Russia
issued a statement that condemned the test but opposed
sanctions that could have implications on normal trade
and economic relations with North Korea. When North
Korea conducted a nuclear test in January 2016 and
launched a ballistic missile disguised as a “Satellite”
in February 2016, Russia condemned North Korea
for violating U.N. Security Council resolutions, while
maintaing a cautious stance towards rigorous sanctions,
saying that an economic collapse in North Korea should
be avoided. Ultimately it agreed to the resolution by way
of limiting the impact on Russia.

**(5) Relations with Other Countries**
Since 1999, North Korea has made efforts to establish
relations with a series of West European countries
and others, including the establishment of diplomatic
relations with European countries[80] and participation in
the ARF ministerial meetings. Meanwhile, it has been
reported that North Korea has cooperative relationships


with countries such as Iran, Syria, Pakistan, Myanmar,
and Cuba in military affairs including arms trade and
military technology transfer. In April 2013, North Korea’s
attempt to export gas masks and other items to Syria was
intercepted by Turkish authorities. In July of the same
year, the North Korean vessel Chong Chon Gang sailing
from Cuba to North Korea was seized by Panamanian
authorities near the Panama Canal. As a result, contents
of cargo that violated U.N. Security Council resolutions
were confiscated, including MiG-21 fighters and a
surface-to-air missile system.
In recent years, North Korea is deemed to be
strengthening its relations with African countries, with
North Korean senior officials paying visits to African
countries.[81] The underlying purposes for enhancing
relations with these countries include the usual objective
of deepening political and economic cooperation. In
addition, it appears that North Korea hopes to acquire
foreign currency by expanding its arms trade and military
cooperation with African countries – activities which
are becoming increasingly difficult due to sanctions
based on U.N. Security Council resolutions and political
turmoil in the Middle East.[82] The possibility that North
Korea’s illegal activities would provide a funding source
for nuclear and ballistic missile development is a cause
for concern.


79 For example, in February 2014, President of the Presidium of the Supreme People’s Assembly Kim Yong-nam visited Russia. In March 2014, Minister for the Development of the Russian Far East Alexander
Galushka visited North Korea, and the two sides signed minutes of talks (protocol) on cooperation in trade, economy, and science and technology. In April 2014, Deputy Prime Minister Yury Trutnev visited North
Korea, and the two sides signed an agreement on trade and economic cooperation between the Ministry of Foreign Trade of North Korea and the government of the Amur Oblast of the Russian Federation. In
May 2014, President Vladimir Putin signed a law which ratified an agreement to write off North Korea’s debts. In September 2014, Minister of Foreign Affairs Ri Su-yong visited Russia. In November 2014,
Minister of the People’s Armed Forces Hyon Yong-chol and Secretary of the Korean Worker’s Party Choe Ryong-hae visited Russia. In 2015, Minister of Foreign Affairs Ri Su-yong and Minister of Foreign Trade
Ri Ryong-nam visited Russia between February and March. In April 2015, Minister of the People’s Armed Forces Hyon Yong-chol visited Russia. In June 2015, Chairman of the Supreme People’s Assembly Choe
Thae-bok visited Russia. In April and October 2015, Minister for the Development of the Russian Far East Galushka visited North Korea. Mutual visits by senior officials continue to be conducted frequently.

80 For example, the United Kingdom and Germany established diplomatic relations with North Korea in 2000 and 2001, respectively.

81 For example, in May 2016, President of the Presidium of the Supreme People’s Assembly Kim Yong-nam attended the inauguration ceremony of the President of Equatorial Guinea. He held talks with the
President, as well as with the leaders of the Republic of Chad, the Gabonese Republic, the Central African Republic, the Republic of Congo, the Republic of Guinea, and the Republic of Mali who were attending
the inauguration ceremony.

82 The final report of the U.N. Security Council’s Panel of Experts assisting the North Korea Sanctions Committee released in February 2015 makes references to possible transactions with an Ethiopian ammunition


-----

**2 The Republic of Korea and the U.S. Forces Korea**



- 1  General Situation


In 2005, the ROK Ministry of National Defense
announced the “National Defense Reform Basic Plan
2006-2020” for “the restructuring of the military from
its current quantitative, conventional form centered on
troops to a qualitative, high-tech military force structure
that is information and technology intensive.”[84] In 2009,
in light of the changes in the situation, such as the missile
launches and nuclear test by North Korea, the Defense
Reform Basic Plan 2009-2020 was announced. The Basic
Plan identifi ed, among other measures, the scaling down
of the initially planned reduction in the force strength and
the possibility of preemptive strikes against North Korean
nuclear and missile facilities. Meanwhile, in response
to the sinking of the ROK patrol ship and the artillery
shelling on Yeonpyeong Island in 2010, in August 2012,
the ROK Ministry of National Defense released the
Defense Reform Basic Plan 2012-2030, incorporating
the enhancement of deterrence against North Korea and
further streamlining of the military.[85] In March 2014,
the Park Geun-hye administration unveiled the Defense
Reform Basic Plan 2014-2030, which envisions longterm defense force enhancements for dealing with
potential threats following the unifi cation on the Korean
Peninsula, while maintaining a readiness posture against
North Korean threats.[86]

- 3  Military Posture of the ROK


In the ROK, the administration of Park Geun-hye was
inaugurated in February 2013. The Park administration
maintains that forging trust through dialogue is most
critical for improving the North-South relations. With
regard to the nuclear issue, the administration sets out
that North Korea’s nuclear development can never be
tolerated and that the ROK would address this issue in
concert with the international community. In August
2013, the ROK unveiled a policy called the “TrustBuilding Process on the Korean Peninsula,” which aims
to realize denuclearization by building trust through
efforts, including humanitarian initiatives and NorthSouth exchanges. The ROK states that it would make
a decisive response to military provocations by North
Korea and emphasizes the importance of building a solid
posture to deter and address the threat of North Korea.
The U.S. Forces, mainly the Army, have been
stationed in the ROK since the ceasefi re of the Korean War.
The ROK has established very close security arrangements
with the United States primarily based on the U.S.-ROK
Mutual Defense Treaty. The U.S. Forces Korea have been
playing a vital role in deterring the outbreak of large-scale
armed confl icts on the Korean Peninsula.

- 2  Defense Policies and Defense Reform of the ROK


The ROK has a defensive weakness, namely, its capital
Seoul, which has a population of approximately 10
million, is situated close to the DMZ. The ROK has set
the National Defense Objective as follows: “to protect the
country from external military threats and invasions, to
support peaceful unifi cation, and to contribute to regional
stability and world peace.” As one of the “external
military threats,” the ROK, in its Defense White Paper,
used to designate North Korea as the “main enemy.”
However, the ROK presently uses the expression, “the
North Korean regime and its armed forces…will remain
as our enemies.”[83]


The ROK’s military capacity is as follows. The ground
forces consist of 22 army divisions and 2 marine divisions,
totaling 520,000 personnel; the naval forces consist of
240 vessels with a total displacement of approximately
211,000 tons; and the air forces (Air Force and Navy
combined) consist of approximately 620 combat aircraft.
In recent years, the ROK has been focused on
modernizing its Navy and Air Force in particular in
order to establish an omnidirectional defense posture
to deal with future potential threats, not least threats
from North Korea. The Navy has been introducing


83 The ROK’s Defense White Paper 2014 describes North Korea as follows: “North Korea poses a serious threat to our security by developing and increasing its large-scale conventional arsenal, nuclear program,
missiles and other weapons of mass destruction, and by continually perpetrating acts of armed provocation such as the attack on the ROK Ship Cheonan and the shelling of Yeonpyeongdo Island. As long as
these threats persist, the North Korean regime and its armed forces, which are the entities who pose these threats, will remain as our enemies.”

84 An act on national defense passed in 2006 obliges the revision and supplementation of the National Defense Reform Basic Plan based on an analysis and assessment of the changes in conditions and the
performance of national defense reform.

85 In order to reorganize the ROK Forces into a structure tailored to the operational environment on the Korean Peninsula, the ROK Ministry of National Defense intends to greatly enhance its operational capability in
the northwestern offshore island region, reorganize the upper command structure in preparation for the transition of the wartime OPCON, gradually promote troop reduction and reorganization, and signifi cantly
expand capabilities to handle missile and cyber warfare. Moreover, in order to build a highly effi cient and advanced defense structure, it will promote streamlining, reorganize the human resource management
system, and improve the military’s welfare and service environment.

86 In order to secure capabilities for responding to existing and potential threats, the ROK Ministry of National Defense plans to install three additional Aegis destroyers, develop and install next-generation


-----

submarines, large transport ships, and domestically built
destroyers. In February 2010, the first mobile force in
the ROK was created.[87] In February 2015, a submarine
command was created. In April 2012, the Air Force
completed the introduction of F-15K fighters which had
been implemented since 2002. The Air Force is currently
promoting a program for the installation of the F-35A as
a next-generation fighter with stealth property.
In October 2012, the ROK government announced
a revision of its missile guidelines stipulating the range
of ballistic missiles it possesses; the revision includes the
extension of their maximum range from 300 km to 800
km to enhance the deterrence against military provocation
by North Korea. In addition, to address North Korean
nuclear and missile threats, the ROK intends to expand
the missile capabilities of the ROK Forces,[88] establish
a system known as “Kill Chain” to conduct swift
preemptive strikes using missiles and other assets,[89] and
develop an indigenous missile defense system (Korea Air
and Missile Defense [KAMD]).[90]
In recent years, the ROK has actively promoted
equipment export, which reached approximately US$3.6
billion on a contract value basis in 2014. Since 2006, the
amount has increased by nearly 14-fold in eight years. It
is reported that export items have diversified to include
communication electronics, aircraft, and naval vessels.[91]
Defense spending in FY2016 (regular budget)
increased by about 3.6% from the previous fiscal year
to nearly KRW 38.7995 trillion, marking the 17th
consecutive year of increases since 2000.

See>> Fig. I-2-2-4 (Changes in the ROK’s Defense Budget)

- 4  U.S.-ROK Alliance and U.S. Forces Korea


Fig. I-2-2-4 Changes in the ROK’s Defense Budget

Defense budget (in 100 million won)

Year-on-year growth rate (%)

(100 million won) (%)

400,000 20

350,000

300,000 15

250,000

200,000 10

150,000

100,000 5

50,000

0 0
11 12 13 14 15 16 (FY)

Notes: 1. ROK Defense White Paper 2014 for FY2011 to FY2015.
2. The Ministry of National Defense website for FY2016.


includes reference to building “a comprehensive strategic
alliance,” which would expand the scope of the U.S.-ROK
alliance from the Korean Peninsula to global and would
widen the partnership of the two countries to encompass
non-military areas. Furthermore, at the 42nd U.S.-ROK
Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) in October 2010,
a joint communiqué was released, which included the
Guidelines for U.S.-ROK Defense Cooperation for
realizing the future vision of the U.S.-ROK Alliance. At
the U.S.-ROK Summit Meeting in May 2013, the two
sides, in a joint declaration commemorating the 60th
anniversary of the conclusion of the U.S.-ROK Mutual
Defense Treaty, affirmed to continue to strengthen their
alliance in order to meet the security challenges of the 21st
century. Through such measures, the two countries have
striven to deepen their relations. In addition to agreements
at the political and strategic levels, in March 2013, the
two countries signed the ROK-U.S. Counter-Provocation
Plan for dealing with North Korea’s provocations.[92]
At the 45th SCM in October 2013, the two countries
approved the Tailored Deterrence Strategy designed to
enhance deterrence against North Korean nuclear and


The United States and the ROK have taken various steps
to deepen the U.S.-ROK alliance in recent years. At the
U.S.-ROK Summit Meeting in June 2009, the two sides
agreed on the Joint Vision for the Alliance of the United
States of America and the Republic of Korea. The vision


87 The primary missions of the Seventh Mobile Corps, which is the first mobile force established in the ROK, are described as the protection of sea lanes, deterrence against North Korea, and support for the
government’s external policies.

88 In April 2012, the ROK Ministry of National Defense announced that the country has developed and already fielded missiles that include cruise missiles able to strike throughout North Korea. In February
2013, the ministry indicated that it would accelerate the development of 800 km-range ballistic missiles, possession of which was made possible by the revision of the missile guidelines in October 2012, and
announced that it has fielded cruise missiles to be launched from vessels or submarines and capable of attacking the entire area of North Korea. Also in October, during an event commemorating the 65th
anniversary of the founding of the armed forces, the ROK Forces displayed to the public for the first time the “Hyeonmu 2” ballistic missile, which is said to have a 300 km range, and the “Hyeonmu 3” surfaceto-surface cruise missile, which is said to have a 1,000 km range. In April 2014, the ROK conducted a successful test launch of a new ballistic missile with a range of 500 km.

89 The ROK Ministry of National Defense explains that the system is capable of detecting and identifying signs of missile launch, determining attack, and actual attacking instantaneously. It is noted that the system
is comprised of ISR capabilities (reconnaissance drone and satellite), striking capabilities (F-35 fighter, air-to-surface missile, and new ballistic missile, etc.), and intercept capabilities (current PAC-2, as well as
PAC-3 and indigenously built anti-air missile).

90 The ROK intends to develop the Kill Chain and KAMD systems by the mid-2020s. Meanwhile, the ROK Ministry of National Defense has denied participation in the U.S. missile defense system, and has
underscored that the ROK was creating its own indigenous systems. The reported reasons include differences in threat perceptions between the United States and the ROK, concern over Chinese backlash, and
cost effectiveness.

91 As for recent examples, in 2012, the ROK concluded an agreement to export three Type 209 submarines to Indonesia as well as an agreement to export four of the new Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
(MARS) vessels to the United Kingdom. In 2014, the ROK concluded an agreement to export 12 FA-50 light attack aircraft to the Philippines.

92 The ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff has announced that the plan contains consultative procedures as well as robust and thorough response methodologies for the United States and the ROK to take joint responses


-----

have reviewed the approach of transitioning from the
existing combined defense arrangement of the U.S. and
ROK Forces, to a new joint defense arrangement led
by the ROK Forces and supported by the U.S. Forces.
Nevertheless, based on the increasing seriousness of
North Korea’s nuclear and missile threats, the two sides
decided at the 46th SCM to re-postpone the transition
of OPCON, and to adopt a conditions-based approach,
i.e., implementing the transition when the ROK Forces
meet conditions such as enhanced capabilities. Although
this new approach does not present a specific deadline
for the transition, the transition of OPCON could be
delayed considerably given that the central challenges to
enhancing the capabilities of the ROK Forces are deemed
to be Kill Chain and KAMD, and that these systems
have mid-2020s as the target completion date. Moreover,
in June 2015, the ROK-U.S. Combined Division was
formally launched. The Commanding General of the 2nd
Infantry Division of the U.S. Forces concurrently serves
as Commanding General of the ROK-U.S. Combined
Division. In peacetime, they hold joint exercises, while
in wartime, units of the U.S. Forces and the ROK Forces
jointly carry out operations.
With regard to the realignment of the U.S. Forces
Korea,[96] an agreement had been reached in 2003 on the
relocation of the U.S. Forces’ Yongsan Garrison located in
the center of Seoul to the Pyeontaek area, south of Seoul,
and on the relocation of the U.S. Forces stationed north
of the Han River to the south of the river. However, the
relocation to the Pyeontaek area had been delayed due to
logistical reasons, including increases in relocation costs.
The decision to postpone the transition of OPCON that
was made at the 46th SCM has in turn necessitated some
U.S. Forces personnel to remain at Yongsan Garrison. In
addition, the two countries decided that the counter-fires
forces of the U.S. Forces Korea would remain in their
location north of the Han River to counter the threat of
North Korea’s long-range rocket artillery. These decisions
have given rise to new factors that force the two countries
to partially revise the plans. Accordingly, while the plans


In response to North Korea’s nuclear test, a U.S. Air Force B-52 conducts a low-level flight
in the vicinity of Osan, ROK with a ROK Air Force F-15K and a U.S. Air Force F-16

[Photo courtesy of the U.S. Air Force]

other WMD threats.[93] At the 46th SCM in October 2014,
the two countries agreed on “Concepts and Principles
of ROK-U.S. Alliance Comprehensive Counter-missile
Operations (4D Operational Concept)” to tackle North
Korean ballistic missile threats. At the 47th SCM in
November 2015, the implementation guidance on the 4D
Operational Concept was approved.[94] Additionally, after
North Korea went ahead with its nuclear test in January
2016, in February 2016 the United States and the ROK
began formal talks regarding deployment of THAAD
to U.S. Forces Korea, and in July 2016 the deployment
was officially decided. In the U.S.-ROK combined
exercise held from March to April 2016, around 290,000
ROK Forces personnel and around 17,000 U.S. Forces
personnel participated, and a record number of troops
and equipment were mobilized, including a carrier strike
group for the first time since 2009.
At the same time, the two countries have worked
to deal with such issues as the transition of wartime
operational control (OPCON) to the ROK and the
realignment of U.S. Forces Korea. Despite these efforts,
however, the two countries are pressed to revise their
plans. For the transition of OPCON to the ROK,[95] the
roadmap for the transfer “Strategic Alliance 2015”
was established in October 2010. Aiming to complete
the transition by December 1, 2015, the two countries


93 According to the Joint Communiqué of the 45th ROK-U.S. SCM, this strategy establishes a strategic framework for tailoring deterrence against key North Korean threat scenarios across armistice and wartime,
and strengthens the partnership between the United States and the ROK to maximize their deterrent effects. However, the details have not been made public.

94 According to the Joint Communiqué of the 46th SCM, the “Concepts and Principles” are designed to detect, defend, disrupt, and destroy missile threats including nuclear and biochemical warheads. However,
the details have not been made public. Furthermore, according to the “Strategic Digest 2015” of the U.S. Forces in the ROK, the “Concepts and Principles” apply from peacetime to war, and will guide operational
decision-making, planning, exercises, capability development, and acquisitions.

95 The United States and the ROK have had the U.S.-ROK Combined Forces Command since 1978 in order to operate the U.S.-ROK combined defense system to deter wars on the Korean Peninsula and to perform
effective combined operations in the case of a contingency. Under the U.S.-ROK combined defense system, OPCON over the ROK Forces is to be exercised by the Chairman of the Korea Joint Chiefs of Staff in
peacetime and by the Commander of the U.S. Forces Korea, who concurrently serves as the Commander of the Combined Forces Command, in a contingency. In 2007, the two countries decided to dissolve the
U.S.-ROK Combined Forces Command in April 2012 and to transition OPCON to the ROK. However, in June 2010, they agreed to postpone the transition timing to December 1, 2015 due to reasons, including
North Korea’s increased military threat.

96 The United States intends to consolidate and relocate the bases of the U.S. Forces Korea which are scattered across the ROK, in order to ensure stable stationing conditions for U.S. Forces Korea and a
balanced development of ROK land. The agreement between the United States and the ROK include: (1) an agreement to conduct the relocation to south of the Han River in two stages (June 2003); and
(2) the withdrawal of 12,500 of the nearly 37,500 personnel out of the ROK (October 2004). The United States has thus been transforming its posture in accordance with these agreements. However, at
the U.S.-ROK Summit Meeting in April 2008, the two countries agreed to maintain the current 28,500 as the appropriate troop level. Since then, the two countries have continued to affirm that maintaining


-----

themselves would be maintained, their completion date
was revised to “strive for completion in a timely manner.”
In May 2016, the ROK Ministry of National Defense
announced that “The relocation to Pyeontaek of most of
the units including the U.S. Forces Korea command is
scheduled to be completed by 2017.” These challenges
are perceived to have significant impact on the U.S.-ROK
defense postures on the Korean Peninsula. In this regard,
relevant developments need to be followed closely.

- 5  Relations with Other Countries


**(1) Relations with China**
China and the ROK have made continuous efforts to
strengthen their relations. Following the inauguration of
the Park Geun-hye government, in June 2013, President
Park held a summit meeting with President Xi Jinping
during her visit to China, and the two sides announced
the Joint Statement on the Korea-China Future Vision.
At the working-level, also in June, the Chairman of the
ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff visited China for the first time
in six years. Further, in December 2013, the first ChinaROK Dialogue on Diplomacy and Security was held
between the directors-general of the foreign and defense
ministries of the two countries, and the two sides agreed
to hold the dialogue regularly. In July 2014, President
Xi Jinping paid a state visit to the ROK and released a
joint statement in which agreement was reached on items,
including promoting bilateral dialogue in the areas of
politics and security and realizing the denuclearization
on the Korean Peninsula. In February 2015, the Minister
of National Defense of China visited the ROK for the first
time in nine years, and in September 2015, President Park
Geun-hye visited China and attended the military parade
that was part of the “commemorative event for the 70th
anniversary of the victory of the Chinese people’s war of
resistance against Japanese aggression.” In this regard, a
trend in deepening the bilateral relations was observed
among government leaders and senior officials.
Meanwhile, outstanding issues have emerged
between China and the ROK. The “East China Sea Air
Defense Identification Zone” (ADIZ) issued by China
in November 2013 overlapped in some areas with the
ROK’s ADIZ. Furthermore, it included the airspace
above the sea areas surrounding the reef, Ieodo (Chinese
name: Suyan Rock), regarding which China and the ROK
have conflicting claims to the jurisdictional authority
over the exclusive economic zone. Against this backdrop,
the ROK government announced the expansion of its own


ADIZ in December 2013 and enforced it from the same
month. In addition, following North Korea’s nuclear
test in January 2016 and launch of a ballistic missile in
February 2016, the ROK began formal talks with the
United States regarding deployment of THAAD by U.S.
Forces Korea, and the deployment was officially decided
in July 2016. China has protested that the deployment of
THAAD to the ROK would undermine China’s strategic
security interests.

**(2) Relations with Russia**
Military exchanges have been under way between the
ROK and Russia in recent years, including exchanges
among high-ranking military officials. The two countries
have also agreed on cooperation in the areas of military
technology, defense industry, and military supplies. At the
ROK-Russia Summit in September 2008, they agreed to
upgrade the bilateral relations to a “strategic cooperative
partnership.” In March 2012, the two countries held the
first ROK-Russia defense strategic dialogue and agreed
to regularize the dialogue. In November 2013, President
Vladimir Putin visited the ROK, and a joint statement
was issued in which the two sides agreed to strengthen
dialogue in the areas of politics and security.


**(3) Overseas Activities**
Since its dispatch of an engineering unit to Somalia in
1993, the ROK has participated in a number of U.N.
peacekeeping operations (PKO). In December 2009,
the ROK unveiled plans to substantially expand the
number of personnel sent overseas on PKO missions
from the current level.[97] In July 2010, the ROK created
the “International Peace Support Force,” a special unit


97 The ROK intends to further improve the legal and institutional foundations for the ROK Forces to expand their participation in PKO activities. In December 2009, an act concerning participation in U.N. PKO


-----

for overseas dispatch. Since March 2013, the ROK has
dispatched troops composed primarily of engineering
units to the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan (UNMISS).
Furthermore, the ROK has dispatched naval vessels
to off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden
where they have been engaged in the protection of ROKregistered ships and maritime security operations (MSO)
of the Combined Maritime Forces (CMF). Since January


2011, the ROK has dispatched a ROK special forces
unit for the purpose of supporting the training of the
United Arab Emirates (UAE) special forces units, joint
exercises, and protecting ROK nationals in emergency
situations. Additionally, in December 2013, the ROK
dispatched a disaster recovery support unit consisting of
approximately 500 personnel, including an engineering
unit and medical personnel, to the Philippines in the wake
of its typhoon disaster.


-----

**Section 3** **China**


**1 General Situation**


China, the world’s most populous country, has a vast
landmass surrounded by a long borderline shared with
14 countries as well as a long coastline. China is also a
nation with various races, religions, and languages. China,
with a long history, has been shaping and maintaining
a distinct culture and civilization. China’s pride in its
unique history and semi-colonial experience in and after
the 19th century is driving its desire for a strong nation
and fueling its nationalism.
In recent years, China has increased its presence in
the international community. For example, China takes a
proactive stance towards efforts in non-traditional security
areas and makes personnel and fi nancial contributions to
U.N. PKOs. In addition, China has been sending its ships
continuously for counter-piracy activities off the coast of
Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden. Furthermore, China has
participated proactively in humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief activities. These activities have been highly
appreciated by the international community. There are
high expectations for China to recognize its responsibility
in the international community, accept and comply with
international norms, and play an active role in a more
cooperative manner on regional and global issues.
Yet, at the same time, there are disputes between
China and other countries over various issues including
human rights issues. While advocating “peaceful
development,”[1] China, particularly over maritime issues
where its interests confl ict with others’, continues to act
in an assertive manner, including attempts at changing
the status quo by coercion based on its own assertions
incompatible with the existing order of international
law.[2] These actions include dangerous acts that could
cause unintended consequences. China is poised to fulfi ll


its unilateral demands without compromise,[3] which has
included making steady efforts to turn these coercive
changes to the status quo into a fait accompli, raising
strong concerns over China’s future direction.
In addition, China faces various problems
domestically. The spread of bribery and corruption
among the central and local leadership of the Chinese
Communist Party (CCP) has become a signifi cant
political problem. Furthermore, China’s rapid economic
growth has brought with it emerging problems such as
regional disparities between urban-rural and coastalinland regions, the issue of the tax system that facilitates
these disparities, wealth gaps among urban residents,
infl ation, environmental pollution, and lack of agricultural
and industrial water. More recently, China has witnessed
a slowdown in its economic growth,[4] spurring turbulence
in the markets including volatility in stock prices. In the
future, China is also expected to face issues associated
with the rapid aging of the population,[5] including pension


The term China’s “peaceful development” began to come into formal use in around 2004. According to a paper presented by then State Councilor Dai Bingguo on March 11, 2011, “peaceful development” is
thought to refer to China’s development whose nature is (1) peaceful, (2) independent, (3) scientifi c, (4) cooperative, and (5) common with other countries.

For example, the justifi cation under international law for the “nine-dash line” asserted by China in the South China Sea is unclear, including under UNCLOS. Japan requests China to clarify to the international
community the justifi cation for China’s assertions under international law.

China strongly urges Japan, the United States, and other countries to respect China’s “core interests.” “Core interests” include “national sovereignty,” “national security,” “territorial integrity,” “national
reunifi cation,” “national political system and social stability,” and “basic safeguards for ensuring sustainable economic and social development.” In particular, with regard to “territory,” some suggest that it refers
to Taiwan, Tibet, and Xinjiang and includes also China’s territorial claims in the East China Sea and South China Sea. According to the Ministry of National Defense of China, in June 2016, during his meeting
with former GSDF Chief of Staff Yoshifumi Hibako who was visiting China, Minister of National Defense Chang Wanquan stated to the effect that Japan was exaggerating “China’s military threat” by criticizing
this and that about issues related to the “core interests” of China, including the East China Sea and South China Sea.

According to the National Bureau of Statistics of China, China’s gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 6.9% year-on-year in 2015. While it was along the lines of the Chinese government’s target of about 7%,
the growth was the slowest since 25 years ago in 1990.

At the fi fth plenary session of the 18th CCP Central Committee held in October 2015, the Chinese government decided to fully abolish the one-child policy which limited couples to one child as a general rule,


-----

and other issues related to the social security system.
The Chinese government has been tightening its control
over society[6] as these potentially destabilizing factors
to the government administration expand and diversify.
However, it is suggested that controlling activities of the
masses becomes increasingly diffi cult with the spread
of the Internet, coupled with other factors. Additionally,
China confronts issues concerning ethnic minorities in
the country, with their staging protests and carrying out
campaigns in pursuit of separation and independence
in the Tibet Autonomous Region, the Xinjiang Uyghur
Autonomous Region, and elsewhere.
In the meantime, the third plenary session of the 18th
CCP Central Committee in November 2013 adopted the
“Decision on Major Issues concerning Comprehensively
Deepening Reforms” regarding reforms in a wide range
of areas, such as economics, politics, culture, society,
environment, and national defense and the military.
Accordingly, the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is
undergoing what can be described as its most signifi cant
reforms since the founding of the country. Also, in China,
under the policy of cracking down on both “tigers” and
“fl ies,”[7] “corruption” has been subject to severe charges,
including that conducted by former prominent leaders
of the party and military such as Zhou Yongkang, then
a Politburo Standing Committee member, as well as
then-Vice Chairmen of the Central Military Commission
(CMC), Guo Boxiong and Xu Caihou. During the fi fth
plenary session of the 18th CCP Central Committee
in October 2015, the idea of “sweeping law-based
governance of the country” was presented as a guiding
concepts of the 13th Five-year Plan (2016-2020). China

**2 Military Affairs**


- 1  Defense Policies


is thus anticipated to continue addressing corruption
within the party and the military.
On the diplomatic fi eld, it is believed that, in order
to maintain national stability, China strives to maintain
stability in the strategic international environment by
sustaining good relations with major powers such as the
United States and Russia, while deepening relations with
neighboring countries, and is strengthening cooperation
with developing countries. In addition, China seeks to
promote multipolarization of the world through building
China-led multilateral mechanisms[8] and to secure
interests necessary for economic development such as
natural resources and energy supply.
On the military front, for over a quarter decade,
China has strengthened its military forces broadly and
rapidly by sustaining large increases in its defense budget.
In particular, China gives priority to the Taiwan issue
as an issue pertaining to the “core” interest of national
sovereignty. It is deemed that China is strengthening
its military forces for the time being with the aim of
improving military capabilities to prevent Taiwan’s
independence. As part of such efforts, China is believed to
be enhancing its asymmetric military capabilities to deter
military forces of other countries from approaching and
advancing to China’s surrounding region, and to inhibit
their military activities in the region (so-called “A2/
AD” capabilities[9]). Additionally, China has made active
efforts to acquire capabilities for missions other than for
dealing with a Taiwan contingency. As China now has
considerable infl uence in the international community
politically, economically, and militarily, other countries
are closely watching its military trends.

changes in the new security environment; to accomplish
the strategic guideline of active defense[10] to realize the
CCP’s goal of building a strong military; to accelerate the
modernization of national defense and the military forces;
to fi rmly protect its national sovereignty, security, and
development interests; and to provide strong assurances
for realizing the “Chinese dream” of the great revival of


China regards that the buildup of strong defense
capabilities and powerful military forces constitutes
a strategic mission to modernize the state, and that
it ensures the security of the state under “peaceful
development.” China considers the main goal and
mission of national defense policies as: to adapt to the


6 In November 2014, China fully revised the National Security Law and enacted the Anti-Spy Law for such purposes as preventing espionage in the country. In December 2015, China passed the Anti-Terrorism
Law that contains provisions on media controls and Internet monitoring. In this way, China promotes the enactment of national security-related legislation.

7 On January 22, 2013, General Secretary Xi Jinping said in a speech during the second plenary session of the 18th Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, “we must uphold the fi ghting of tigers and fl ies
at the same time” to punish corruption.

8 China seeks to implement its own initiatives in the security realm; at the Conference on Interaction and Confi dence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA), China criticized military alliances and proposed “the security
of Asia by the people of Asia.” In the international fi nance domain as well, China plays a leading role in establishment of the New Development Bank (BRICS Development Bank) and the Asian Infrastructure
Investment Bank (AIIB).

9 For a defi nition of the so-called “A2/AD” capabilities, see Part I Overview, Section 2, Footnote 5.

10 The strategic concept of active defense is seen as the essence of the CCP’s military strategic concept. It upholds the principles of defense, self-defense, and “post-emptive strike” (suppress the adversary after


-----

the people of Chinese ethnicity. China contends that these
defense policies are defensive in nature.[11]
China has a policy to actively promote “Revolution
in Military Affairs with Chinese Characteristics,”
which mainly aims to encourage mechanization and
informatization of its military power, based on its military
strategy to win local wars under informatized conditions.
This is in response to global developments in military
affairs observed in the Gulf War, the Kosovo War, the Iraq
War, and other wars. It is believed that China emphasizes
not only physical means but also non-physical means in
military affairs and warfare. It has incorporated the concept
of “Three Warfares” — “Media Warfare,” “Psychological
Warfare,” and “Legal Warfare” — into the tasks of the
political work of the military.[12] In addition, China has
set forth a policy of close coordination between military
struggle and political, diplomatic, economic, cultural,
and legal endeavors.
Dealing with a Taiwan contingency is believed to be
a top priority in China’s strengthening of military forces;
more specifically, improving its capabilities to hinder the
independence of Taiwan and foreign military support
for it. Furthermore, in recent years, China is working
actively to acquire capabilities for missions other than
dealing with a Taiwan contingency, and stresses use of
the military in non-traditional security areas. With regard
to China’s military strengthening, China proclaims that
it would “realize the basic mechanization and achieve
major progress in construction of informatization by
2020” and “by focusing on the capability to win local
wars under informationized conditions, it will improve
the abilities to accomplish diversified military missions
and thoroughly complete the historical military missions
in a new phase of the new century.”[13] These suggest that
China’s military forces will be developed in tandem with
the enhancement of its national strength.
China has sustained large increases in its defense
spending and broadly and rapidly reinforced its military
forces, mainly its nuclear and missile force as well


as its Navy and Air Force. As part of such efforts, it is
understood that China is strengthening its so-called
“A2/AD” capabilities. In addition, China is working
to improve joint operational capabilities, enhance
capabilities for extended-range power projection, conduct
practical exercises, cultivate and acquire personnel for
administering operations of informatized forces, improve
the foundation of its domestic defense industry, and
ensure law-based military governance. Furthermore,
China has rapidly expanded and intensified its activities
at sea and in airspace, including the East and South China
Seas. China, particularly over maritime issues where
its interests conflict with others’, continues to act in an
assertive manner, that is, for example, attempts at changing
the status quo by coercion. China is also poised to fulfill
its unilateral demands without compromise, which has
included making steady efforts to turn these coercive
changes to the status quo into a fait accompli. Japan has
great concerns over such Chinese military activities, etc.,
together with the lack of transparency in its military affairs
and security issues, and needs to keep utmost attention to
them. These activities also raise security concerns for the
region and the international community.

- 2  Military Transparency


China has not disclosed specific information on
possession of weapons, procurement goals and past
procurements, organization and locations of major units,
records of main military operations and exercises, and
a detailed breakdown of the national defense budget.
Moreover, China has neither set out a clear and specific
future vision of its military strengthening, nor ensured
adequate transparency of its decision-making process in
relation to military and security affairs.
China has released defense white papers including
“China’s National Defense” every two years since 1998.
China also conducts numerous dialogues with national
defense authorities of other countries.[14] Furthermore,


11 See the defense white paper “China’s Military Strategy” (May 2015). According to the defense white paper “China’s Peaceful Development” (September 2011), China pursues “peaceful development” but “never
seeks hegemony,” while it is firm in upholding its “core interests” which include: “national sovereignty”; “national security”; “territorial integrity”; “national reunification”; “China’s political system established by
the Constitution and overall social stability”; and “the basic safeguards for ensuring sustainable economic and social development.”

12 China amended the Regulations of the PLA on the Political Work in 2003 to add Media, Psychological, and Legal Warfares to the PLA’s political work. The U.S. DoD’s “Annual Report to Congress: Military and
Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China” (August 2011) explains these warfares as follows:

-  Media Warfare is aimed at influencing domestic and international public opinion to build public and international support for China’s military actions and to dissuade an adversary from pursuing policies
perceived to be adverse to China’s interests.

-  Psychological Warfare seeks to undermine an enemy’s ability to conduct combat operations through psychological operations aimed at deterring, shocking, and demoralizing enemy military personnel and
supporting civilian populations.

-  Legal Warfare uses international and domestic laws to gain international support and manage possible political repercussions of China’s military actions.

13 The defense white paper “China’s National Defense in 2008” also states the following target: “by and large reach the goal of modernization of national defense and armed forces by the mid-21st century.” It is
regarded that this target takes into account the 100th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic of China (2049), one of “the two 100 years,” with the other being the 100th anniversary of the CCP
(2021).

14 For example with Japan, in June 2015, the public affairs delegation of the Ministry of National Defense of China visited the MOD. Exchanges with the public affairs divisions of the MOD and SDF were held for


-----

in August 2007, China expressed its will to return to
the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms
and to participate in the United Nations Instrument for
Reporting Military Expenditures, and has submitted
annual reports based on each framework. The Chinese
Ministry of National Defense has been giving monthly
press conferences by a spokesperson since April 2011. In
November 2013, the position of spokesperson was newly
established at seven departments, including the Navy
and Air Force.[15] Such moves can be perceived on the one
hand as efforts that contribute to the improvement of the
transparency of military forces, and on the other as efforts
to strengthen “Media Warfare.”
However, China has not provided a detailed
breakdown of its national defense spending. In the past,
China disclosed the total amounts and general purposes
for the following three categories: personnel; training
and maintenance; and equipment.[16] Nonetheless, such
explanations have not been offered in recent years.
Moreover, in China’s defense white papers released in
April 2013 and May 2015, the contents were limited to
selective topics. While on some topics they gave more
details than in the past, the papers made no reference to
national defense spending that was described in previous
defense white papers, and the overall volume of the text
decreased. In this respect, transparency is declining in
regard to national defense spending, and China has not
yet achieved the levels of transparency expected of a
responsible nation in the international community.
Incidents have been occurring that incite concerns
over China’s military decision-making and actions,
including Chinese explanations against the facts. For
example, details have yet to be disclosed regarding the
causes of the Chinese nuclear-powered submarine’s
submerged navigation in Japan’s territorial waters in
November 2004 although it constitutes a breach of
international law. Furthermore, with respect to the
incident of a Chinese naval vessel directing its fire-control
radar at an MSDF destroyer (January 2013), among other
incidents, both the Chinese Ministry of National Defense
and Ministry of Foreign Affairs gave explanations which


were inconsistent with the facts; that is, they have denied
the use of the radar itself. With regard to the incident in
which Chinese fighters flew abnormally close to aircraft
of the MSDF and ASDF (May and June 2014), the
Chinese Ministry of National Defense gave explanations
that were contrary to the truth; it claimed that Japanese
aircraft “entered the airspace for the Chinese drills
without reporting to China and conducted dangerous
acts.” In recent years, amid the significant changes in
the environment surrounding the military, including
advances in military specialization and diversification of
missions associated with military strengthening, some
see that relations between the CCP leadership and the
PLA have become increasingly complex. Others opine
that the military’s level of influence on foreign policy
decisions has been changing.[17] Attention will be paid to
such situations also as an issue of crisis management.
Chinese false explanations are also evident in
China’s coercive, rapid, and large-scale development on
features in the South China Sea.[18] In September 2015,
at the U.S.-China summit meeting, President Xi Jinping
stated, “China does not intend to pursue militarization.”
However, in October 2015, the spokesperson of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China commented, “China
has military facilities of a defensive nature.”
As China’s influence in the international community
has risen politically, economically, and militarily, other
countries are closely following China’s moves. In order
to allay their concerns over China, it is becoming more
important for China itself to improve the transparency
of its national defense policy and military capabilities. It
is strongly hoped that China will increase transparency
concerning its military affairs by such efforts as disclosing
specific information pertaining to its defense policies and
military capabilities.

- 3  National Defense Budget


China announced that its national defense budget for
FY2016 was approximately 954.4 billion yuan.[19, 20]
This initial budget amount represented a growth of


15 The seven departments are: then PLA General Political Department; then PLA General Logistics Department; then PLA General Armaments Department; PLA Navy; PLA Air Force; then PLA Second Artillery
Corps; and People’s Armed Police.

16 The defense white papers “China’s National Defense in 2008” and “China’s National Defense in 2010” provided a breakdown of personnel expenses, training and maintenance costs, and equipment costs for
the active force, reserve force, and militia, limited to the FY2007 and FY2009 defense budget expenditures, respectively.

17 For example, some point out that in recent years, the PLA increasingly expresses its position on security issues concerning national sovereignty or maritime interests. Others point out that the extent of the
military’s involvement in the party’s decision-making process is limited because the number of PLA representatives to key decision-making bodies of the CCP is fewer than in the past. Meanwhile, the PLA has
repeatedly stressed “absolute instruction of the forces by the party.”

18 See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 3-2-5(4); Part I, Chapter 2, Section 6-4; Part I, Chapter 3, Section 3-3-7 and 3-3-8.

19 From FY2015, China releases the national defense budget amount as part of the basic expenditures of the central government, which do not include local relocation expenditures, among other expenses.

20 Converting national defense budgets of foreign countries into another currency simply by applying currency exchange rates does not necessarily reflect an accurate value due to differences in price level. If,
hypothetically, China’s national defense budget for FY2016 was converted at a rate of 19 yen per yuan (FY2016 rate that the Japanese government uses for official purposes), this would result in approximately
18,132.7 billion yen. The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) estimates that China’s military expenditures for 2015 were approximately US$215 billion, ranking it second place in the world


-----

Fig. I-2-3-1 Changes in China’s Announced Defense Budget

(100 million yuan) (%)

10,000 40

9,500
9,000 Defense budget (in 100 million yuan)

8,500 Year-on-year growth rate (%) 30

8,000
7,500
7,000 25
6,500
6,000
5,500 20
5,000
4,500

15

4,000
3,500
3,000 10
2,500
2,000
1,500 5
1,000
500
0 0

89 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
(FY)

Note: This basically shows the defense budget within central fiscal expenditures. Note that the FY2002 budget was calculated on the assumption that the disclosed rate

and amount of growth represent increases from the actual defense expenditure in FY2001, because the FY2002 budget was not disclosed and discrepancies
arise when the disclosed rate and amount of growth are applied to the initial budget of the previous year. In FY2015 and FY2016, only the defense budget within
the basic expenditures of the central government (part of the central fiscal expenditures) was announced. The FY2015 defense budget within central fiscal
expenditures was calculated by adding the defense budget within the basic expenditures of the central government and the local relocation expenditure amount,
etc. released separately at a later date.


approximately 7.6% (approximately 67.5 billion yuan)[21]
compared to the initial budget amount for the previous
fiscal year. China’s announced national defense budget has
increased at a rapid pace, recording double-digit annual
growth nearly consistently since FY1989.[22] The nominal
size of China’s announced national defense budget has
grown approximately 44-fold in 28 years since FY1988 and
nearly 3.4-fold in 10 years since FY2006. China positions
the buildup of defense capabilities as important a task as
economic development. It is believed that China continues
to invest resources in the improvement of its defense
capabilities in tandem with its economic development.
Attention will be paid to how the slowdown in China’s
economic growth affects China’s national defense budget.
In addition, it must be noted that the amount of the
defense budget announced by China is considered to
be only a part of its actual military expenditures.[23] For
example, it is believed that the announced defense budget
does not include all the equipment procurement costs and
research and development (R&D) expenses.

See>> Fig. I-2-3-1 (Changes in China’s Announced Defense Budget)



- 4  Military Posture

China’s military forces are composed of the PLA, the
People’s Armed Police Force (PAP),[24] and the militia.[25]
It is provided that these bodies be instructed and
commanded by the CMC.[26] The PLA is defined as a
people’s army created and led by the CCP, comprising
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Rocket Force
(strategic missile force).


**(1) Military Reform**
China is currently carrying out reforms of the PLA which
some see as being the largest in the country’s history.
First, during the third plenary session of the 18th
CCP Central Committee, the following were decided:
adjusting functions and organizations of the CMC and
other bodies; perfecting the system of instruction and
management of forces; developing the CMC’s command
structure for joint operations and command system for
joint operations in theaters; and promoting reforms
of joint operation exercises and logistical support


21 China announced that the rate of growth for its FY2016 national defense budget is “an increase of approximately 7.6% compared to the previous year.” This is the growth rate calculated by comparing the
spending of FY2015 with the initial budget of FY2016.

22 China’s announced national defense budget within central fiscal expenditures achieved double-digit growth on the initial-budget basis every year from FY1989 to FY2015 except in FY2010. For FY2015 in
which the defense budget was announced within the basic expenditures of the central government, this budget amount and the local relocation expenditure amount, etc. released separately at a later date were
added together to calculate the national defense budget within central fiscal expenditures.

23 The U.S. DoD’s “Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China” (May 2016) estimates China’s military-related defense spending as having been at least
US$180 billion in FY2015. The same report indicates that China’s announced defense budget (US$144 billion) does not include major categories of expenditure such as R&D expenses and foreign procurement.

24 Missions of the PAP include security of party and government, border security, social projects, and firefighting activities. According to the defense white paper “China’s National Defense in 2002,” “it is to maintain
state security and social stability, and assist the PLA in wartime in defense operations.”

25 The militia engages in economic development in peacetime and other activities and has a duty to provide logistics support for combat operations in wartime. The defense white paper “China’s National Defense in
2002” explains, “[u]nder the command of military organs, the militia in wartime helps the standing army in its military operations, conducts independent operations and provides combat support and manpower
replenishment for the standing army. In peacetime, it undertakes the tasks of performing combat readiness support, taking part in disaster relief efforts, and maintaining social order.” According to a PLA Daily
article dated October 9, 2012, “China now has six million primary militia members” as of 2010.

26 Formally, there are two CMCs—one for the CCP and another for the state. However, both commissions basically consist of the same membership, and both are essentially regarded as institutions for the CCP


-----

mechanisms. The defense white paper “China’s Military
Strategy” (May 2015) also mentions the development of
the CMC’s command structure for joint operations and
command system for joint operations in theaters.
China’s official position on a specific direction of
the military reforms was unveiled in November 2015. At
the CMC Reform Work Conference, President Xi Jinping
announced that the military reforms would be carried out
by 2020, which would include: implementation of the
CMC’s centralized and unified leadership over the PLA;
establishment of the Army’s headquarters; establishment
of “theaters of operations” and a command structure
for joint operations; reduction of troops by 300,000
personnel;[27] and streamlining of administrative and noncombatant personnel.
Recently, these reforms have taken shape at a rapid
pace. First, in late December 2015, a ceremony was
held in Beijing for the establishment of the PLA Army
Headquarters (PLAA),[28] Rocket Force (PLARF),[29] and
Strategic Support Force (PLASSF).[30] Following this, on
January 11, 2016, the four general departments[31] that were
the headquarters for the entire PLA were replaced by 15
functional sections under the CMC, including the Joint
Staff Department, Political Work Department, Logistic
Support Department, and Equipment Development
Department. On February 1, 2016, the PLA’s seven
Military Regions[32] were abolished, and five theaters of
operations were newly created, namely, the Eastern
Theater, Southern Theater, Western Theater, Northern
Theater, and Central Theater.[33]
It is considered that these series of reforms are
designed to build military forces that can fight and win
wars by improving their joint operational capabilities
and strengthening the military’s readiness, including the
development of military capabilities and organizational
management from peacetime. It is suggested that the
realignment of the four general departments was aimed
to decentralize the leading organs and strengthening the
direct leadership of the CMC and its Chairman. China is


expected to continue these reforms. Attention will be paid
to the outcomes of the reforms, including their effects on
the security of the region including Japan.

**(2) Nuclear and Missile Forces**
China has made independent efforts to develop nuclear
capabilities and ballistic missile forces since the mid1950s, seemingly with a view to ensuring deterrence,
supplementing its conventional forces, and maintaining
its voice in the international community. It is regarded
that China’s nuclear strategy is to deter a nuclear attack
on its land by maintaining a nuclear force structure able
to conduct retaliatory nuclear attacks on a small number
of targets such as cities in the adversary’s country, should
China be subject to nuclear attack.[34] The unveiling of
many strategic missiles[35] at the military parade in Beijing
on the occasion of the “commemorative event for the 70th
anniversary of the victory of the Chinese people’s war
of resistance against Japanese aggression” in September
2015, coupled with the establishment of the PLA Rocket
Force of equal status as the Army, Navy, and Air Force
as part of the ongoing military reforms, suggests that
China will continue to attach importance to its nuclear


27 Earlier, on September 3, 2015, President Xi Jinping stated in his speech at the “commemorative event for the 70th anniversary of the victory of the Chinese people’s war of resistance against Japanese
aggression”: “I announce that China will cut the number of its troops by 300,000.” At a press conference held on the same day, the spokesperson of the Ministry of National Defense of China announced a
policy to complete the 300,000-troop reduction by the end of 2017.

28 The PLA was considered a large organization of the Army, and therefore, a headquarters of the Army did not exist. The ongoing reforms have given the Navy, Air Force, and Rocket Force (the Strategic Missile
Force) the same status as the Army. The headquarters for each service previously consisted of commander and deputy commanders, political commissar and deputy political commissars, headquarters, Political
Department, Logistics Department, and Armament Department. It has not been announced whether the new PLAA has been organized in a similar manner.

29 The establishment of PLARF is seen as a de facto elevation of the Second Artillery Force.

30 PLASSF is identified as a new force for maintaining national security. Reportedly it is in charge of cyber, outer space, and electronic warfare capabilities.

31 General Staff Department, General Political Department, General Logistics Department, and General Armament Department.

32 Shenyang Military Region, Beijing Military Region, Jinan Military Region, Nanjing Military Region, Guangzhou Military Region, Chengdu Military Region, and Lanzhou Military Region.

33 At a ceremony for the establishment of the theaters of operations, President Xi Jinping commented on the role of the theaters and of military services that, “The CMC conducts the overall management, theaters
supervise operations, and military services build up forces.”

34 The defense white paper “China’s Military Strategy” (May 2015) states that “China has always pursued the policy of no first use of nuclear weapons and adhered to a self-defensive nuclear strategy that is
defensive in nature. China...will never enter into a nuclear arms race with any other country.” On the other hand, the U.S. DoD’s “Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the
People’s Republic of China” (May 2016) states that there is some ambiguity over the conditions under which China’s “no first use” policy would or would not apply.

35 The ballistic missiles shown at the military parade in September 2015 were DF-15B (SRBM), DF-16 (SRBM), DF-21D (MRBM [ASBM]), DF-26 (IRBM [including ASBM]), DF-31A (ICBM), DF-5B (ICBM), and cruise


-----

Fig. I-2-3-2 Range of Ballistic Missiles from China (Beijing)

Washington, D.C.

London

San Francisco

North Pole

Moscow

Hawaii

Beijing

**2,500 km**

New Delhi

**2,800 km** Guam
**4,000 km**

Jakarta

**5,400 km**

**7,200 km**

Canberra

**11,500 km**

**12,000 km**

**13,000 km** 1,750–2,500 km Maximum range of DF-21, DF-21A/B/C

2,400–2,800 km Maximum range of DF-3, DF-3A

4,000 km Maximum range of DF-26

5,400 km Maximum range of DF-4

7,200–11,500 km Maximum range of DF-31, DF-31A

12,000–13,000 km Maximum range of DF-5, DF-5A/B

Note: The above image shows a simplified indication of the potential reach of each type of missile taking Beijing as a central point.


and ballistic missile forces.
China possesses various types and ranges of ballistic
missiles: ICBM; SLBM; IRBM/medium-range ballistic
missile (MRBM); and short-range ballistic missile
(SRBM).[36] The update of China’s ballistic missile forces
from a liquid propellant system to a solid propellant
system is improving their survivability and readiness.[37 ]

Moreover, it is believed that China is working to increase
performance by extending ranges, improving accuracy,
mounting warheads, and by other means.
China’s main ICBM strategic nuclear asset had been
the fixed-site liquid-fueled DF-5 missile.[38] However, it has


been suggested that China has deployed the DF-31, which
is a mobile-type ICBM with a solid propellant system
mounted onto a TEL, as well as the DF-31A, a model
of the DF-31 with extended range, and that China will
increase the number of DF-31A in particular.[39] With regard
to SLBM, it is considered that Jin-class nuclear-powered
ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs) to carry the JL-2,
whose range is deemed to be approximately 8,000 km, are
currently operational. If the Jin-class SSBNs begin nuclear
deterrence patrols, it is believed that China’s strategic
nuclear capabilities will improve significantly.[40]
As for the IRBM/MRBM covering the Asia-Pacific


36 In accordance with the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, the United States and Russia eliminated all of their SRBMs and IRBMs/MRBMs by 1991.

37 For differences between the liquid-propellant system and solid-propellant system, see Part I, Chapter 2, Section 2, Footnote 35.

38 The DF-5B is thought to carry multiple independently targetable re-entry vehicles (MIRVs).

39 The U.S. DoD’s “Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China” (May 2016) indicates that China is developing a new road mobile ICBM known as
“DF-41,” which is capable of carrying MIRVs.

40 The U.S. DoD’s “Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China” (May 2016) notes that four Jin-class SSBNs have already been commissioned and one i


-----

Senkaku Islands, which are inherent territories of Japan.
Furthermore, in order to acquire striking force that will
be capable of penetrating layered anti-missile defenses,
China is considered to be developing a hypersonic glide
vehicle which is launched by a ballistic missile. Attention
will be paid to the relevant developments.[46]
China announced that it conducted tests on
midcourse missile interception technology in January
2010 and 2013.[47] Attention will be paid to China’s future
trends in ballistic missile defense.[48]

See>> Fig. I-2-3-2 (Range of Ballistic Missiles from China (Beijing))

**(3) Ground Forces**
The size of the Chinese ground forces is the largest in
the world with approximately 1.6 million personnel.
Since 1985, China has continuously sought to modernize
its armed forces by curtailing the number of personnel[49]
and streamlining organizations and systems in order to
improve efficiency. China aims to develop highly capable
military forces, while reducing units inferior in equipment
and technologies. Specifically, it is improving mobility
by such measures as switching from the past regionaldefense model to a nationwide-mobile model, working to
motorize and mechanize its infantry. China is also believed
to be strengthening its airborne troops (belonging to the
Air Force), amphibious forces, and special operations
forces and helicopter units. China undertakes efforts
to make its military units multifunctional, to build a
command system for improvement of its joint operational
capabilities and efficient operations, and carries out
reforms to improve its logistical support capabilities.
Since 2009, China has annually conducted mobile
exercises that cut across multiple military regions
such as Stride 2009, Mission Action (2010-2013),
and Stride and Firepower (2014-). These are aimed at
verifying and improving such capabilities necessary for
deployment of Army units to distant areas, specifically
as capabilities for the Army’s long-distance maneuver[50]
and for logistical support including mobilization of


region including Japan, China has the solid-propellant
DF-21 and DF-26, which can be transported and operated
on a TEL. These missiles are capable of carrying both
conventional and nuclear warheads.[41] China possesses
ballistic missiles carrying conventional warheads with
high targeting accuracy based on the DF-21, and deploys
the DF-21D anti-ship ballistic missile (ASBM) carrying
conventional warheads, which could be used to attack
ships at sea including aircraft carrier.[42] The DF-26,[43]
which has a range including Guam, is considered the
“second-generation ASBM” developed on the basis of
the DF-21D, and is thought to be capable to attacking
moving targets. In addition to IRBM/MRBM, China
possesses the DH-10 (CJ-10), a cruise missile with a
range of at least 1,500 km, as well as the H-6 (Tu-16), a
bomber that is capable of carrying this cruise missile. It
is deemed that these missiles will complement ballistic
missile forces, covering the Asia-Pacific region including
Japan.[44] China is likely developing these ASBMs and
long-range cruise missile assets to strengthen its “A2/
AD” capabilities. Concerning SRBM, China possesses a
large number of solid-propellant DF-16, DF-15, and DF11, and they are believed to be deployed facing Taiwan.[45]
It is believed that their ranges cover also a part of the
Southwestern Islands including the area surrounding the


41 According to the defense white paper “China’s Military Strategy” (May 2015), China identifies “possessing both nuclear and conventional missiles” as one of the strategies for enhancing the military capabilities
of the then Second Artillery Force.

42 DF-21D is called the “carrier killer” (Annual Report of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission [November 2015]).

43 DF-26 is called the “Guam killer” (Annual Report of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission [November 2015]).

44 The Annual Report of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission (November 2015) states that the H-6K bomber’s ability to carry the DH-10 (CJ-10) land attack cruise missile and the DF-26
(IRBM), which allow for more long-distance attacks, enables China to target as far as the second island chain including Guam.

45 The U.S. DoD’s “Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China” (May 2016) states that as of late 2015, China possessed at least 1,200 SRBMs,
including the DF-16.

46 In January, August, and December 2014, June, August, and November 2015, and April 2016 (total: 7 times), China reportedly conducted flight tests of its hypersonic glide vehicle “WU-14/DF-ZF,” which is said
to travel at ultra-high speed and be difficult to intercept by a missile.

47 China has systems capable of intercepting ballistic missiles, such as the surface-to-air missiles of the HQ series, including HQ-9, and the SA-10/20 (S-300 series) surface-to-air missile imported from Russia.

48 The U.S. DoD’s “Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China” (May 2016) writes that China has twice successfully intercepted a ballistic missile. In
addition to these two tests, China claims that the test conducted in July 2014 was another missile interception technology test. However, it is pointed out that this was actually an anti-satellite weapon (ASAT)
test. (See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 4-2-4, Footnote 27.)

49 It is believed that some of the removed personnel joined the People’s Armed Police.i


-----

|Northe eadquart|rn Theater ers: Shenyang)|
|---|---|
|||

|Col1|Col2|Col3|aiwan (Reference)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Total military forces||Approx. 2.3 million troops A|pprox. 220,000 troops|
|Ground forces|Group troops|Approx. 1.6 million troops A|pprox. 130,000 troops|
||Tanks, etc.|Type-99/A, Type-98/A, M- Type-96/A, Type-88A/B and others Approx. 7,200 vehicles A|60, M-48A/H and others pprox. 1,200 vehicles|
|Maritime forces|Warships|Approx. 880 vessels / 1,502,000 tons Approx|. 390 vessels / 210,000 tons|
||Aircraft carriers, destroyers, and frigates|Approx. 70 vessels|Approx. 30 vessels|
||Submarines|Approx. 60 vessels|4 vessels|
||Marines|Approx. 10,000 troops|Approx. 10,000 troops|
|Air forces|Combat aircraft|Approx. 2,720 aircraft|Approx. 510 aircraft|
||Modern fighters aircraft|J-10 x 347 Su-27/J-11 x 352 Su-30 x 97 J-15 x 14 (Fourth-g (Fourth-generation fighters (total): 810)|Mirage 2000 x 56 F-16 x 145 F-CK-1 (IDF) x 128 eneration fighters (total): 329)|
|Reference|Population|Approx. 1.37 billion|Approx. 23 million|
||Term of service|2 years|1 year|


Fig. I-2-3-3 Deployment and Strength of the People’s Liberation Army

Central Theater
(Headquarters: Beijing)

Northern Theater
(Headquarters: Shenyang)

(Shijiazhuang)

(Jinan)
(Lanzhou)

Western Theater
(Headquarters: Chengdu)

(Fuzhou)

Southern Theater
(Headquarters: Guangzhou) Eastern Theater

(Nanning) (Headquarters: Nanjing)

Notes: 1. G Theater headquarters    Theater Army organization
2. Theater boundaries have not been officially announced. The above map is prepared based on U.S. DoD reports, media reports, etc.

**China** **Taiwan (Reference)**

Total military forces Approx. 2.3 million troops Approx. 220,000 troops

Group troops Approx. 1.6 million troops Approx. 130,000 troops

Ground Type-99/A, Type-98/A, M-60, M-48A/H and others
forces Tanks, etc. Type-96/A, Type-88A/B and others

Approx. 7,200 vehicles Approx. 1,200 vehicles

Warships Approx. 880 vessels / 1,502,000 tons Approx. 390 vessels / 210,000 tons

Aircraft carriers,

Approx. 70 vessels Approx. 30 vessels

Maritime destroyers, and frigates
forces

Submarines Approx. 60 vessels 4 vessels

Marines Approx. 10,000 troops Approx. 10,000 troops

Combat aircraft Approx. 2,720 aircraft Approx. 510 aircraft

Air J-10 x 347

Mirage 2000 x 56

forces Su-27/J-11 x 352

Modern fighters F-16 x 145

Su-30 x 97

aircraft F-CK-1 (IDF) x 128

J-15 x 14

(Fourth-generation fighters (total): 329)

(Fourth-generation fighters (total): 810)

Population Approx. 1.37 billion Approx. 23 million

Reference
Term of service 2 years 1 year

Source: “The Military Balance 2016,” etc. China’s total military forces to be cut by 300,000 troops by the end of 2017.


militia and public transportation. Furthermore, the Navy
and Air Force reportedly took part in Mission Action
2013, and since 2014, have conducted combined military
branch and service exercises under Joint Action. These


suggest that China intends to improve joint operational
capabilities as well.

See>> Fig. I-2-3-3 (Deployment and Strength of the People’s Liberation Army)


-----

**(4) Naval Forces**
The naval forces consist of three fleets: North Sea Fleet;
East Sea Fleet; and South Sea Fleet. The Chinese Navy
has approximately 880 ships (including approximately 60
submarines), with a total displacement of approximately
1.5 million tons. The Navy is in charge of maritime
national defense and protection of the sovereignty of
territorial waters and maritime rights and interests. The
Chinese Navy mass produces the indigenous state-of-theart Yuan-class submarines,[51] as well as surface combatant
ships[52] with improved air defense and anti-ship attack
capabilities. It is also suggested that the Navy is developing
cruisers equipped with vertical launch systems (VLSs)
capable of launching the latest YJ-18 anti-ship cruise
missile. In addition, the Navy is increasing the number of
large landing ships and supply ships. It commissioned a
large hospital ship in October 2008.
With regard to aircraft carriers, China renovated the
Varyag, an incomplete Kuznetsov-class aircraft carrier
purchased from Ukraine. After trial navigations started
in August 2011, the carrier was named “Liaoning” and
was commissioned in September 2012.[53] It is thought that
even after the commission, China continues trainings of
carrier-based aircraft pilots using domestic J-15 carrierbased fighters and takeoff and landing tests on the
“Liaoning.” In November 2013, the carrier sailed in the
South China Sea for the first time and conducted sea trials
in this area.[54] In late December 2015, the spokesperson
of the Ministry of National Defense of China officially
admitted the building of a domestic aircraft carrier for the
first time, announcing that the aircraft carrier “is being
built in Dalian. It has a conventional power plant with a
displacement of 50,000 tons” and “will adopt ski-jump
takeoff mode.”[55]
In view of these developments concerning the
strengthening of the naval forces, China likely aims to
build capabilities for conducting operations in more


A hull reported to be of China’s indigenous aircraft carrier under construction (June 2, 2016)

[IHS Jane’s]

distant waters in addition to near sea defense.[56] It is
necessary to continue to monitor the development of the
Chinese naval forces.[57]


**(5) Air Forces**
The Chinese Air Force and Navy have approximately
2,720 combat aircraft in total. The number of fourth
generation modern fighters is rising steadily. China
imported from Russia and produced under license the
Su-27 fighter, and imported from Russia the Su-30
fighter equipped with anti-surface and anti-ship attack
capabilities. China also mass produces the J-11B fighter,
which is allegedly an imitation of the Su-27 fighter, and
the domestic J-10 fighter.[58] China’s domestic J-15 carrierbased fighter thought to be modeled on Russia’s Su-33
carrier-based fighter is also carried on the aircraft carrier
Liaoning. In November 2015, China reportedly signed
an agreement with a Russian state-run military company
to purchase 24 Su-35 fighters, which is considered the
newest fourth generation fighter. Additionally, China
is developing the J-20 and J-31 fighters, which are
said to become next-generation fighters.[59] The Chinese
Air Force has H-6 bombers that are thought to carry
nuclear weapons as well as cruise missiles, including
the state-of-the-art YJ-12 air-to-ship missile. China is


51 These submarines are believed to be superior in quietness and to be equipped with an air independent propulsion (AIP) system. By carrying the necessary oxygen in advance, this system allows these
submarines to remain submerged underwater for longer periods than previous submarines without accessing atmospheric oxygen by surfacing or other means.

52 For example, in recent years, China is considered to have significantly increased the number of: the Luyang III-class destroyer, a fleet air defense ship called the “Chinese Aegis” with reinforced radars and
carrying a new model of the VLS capable of launching the latest YJ-18 anti-ship cruise missile; the Jiangkai II-class frigate equipped with VLS; and the Jiangdao-class light frigate which is a corvette with
enhanced anti-submarine warfare capabilities.

53 The U.S. DoD’s “Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China” (May 2016) expresses the view that the aircraft carrier Liaoning will possibly be used
for fleet air defense missions, but as it is incapable of long-range power projection compared to U.S. aircraft carriers, it will probably continue to play a role in training. It also notes that in 2015, the Liaoning
certified domestically trained J-15 carrier-based fighter pilots for the first time, and the air wing is expected to deploy for combat in 2016.

54 In May 2013, it was reported that the first carrier air wing was officially established in China.

55 It is suggested that China is conducting research on the electromagnetic aircraft launch system in order to overcome the limitations of the ski-jump configuration, namely, few weapons and little fuel can be
carried on the carrier-based fighter and fixed-wing early warning aircraft cannot be operated.

56 China’s defense white paper “China’s Military Strategy” (May 2015) identifies “offshore waters defense and open seas protection” as a strategy for enhancing the military capabilities of the Navy. The U.S. DoD’s
“Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China” (May 2016) also states that China continues its gradual shift from “near sea” defense to “far seas” protection.

57 According to the defense white paper “China’s Military Strategy” (May 2015), “the traditional mentality that land outweighs sea must be abandoned” and China will aim to “develop a modern maritime military
force structure.” As implied by these references, it is deemed that China attaches importance to its maritime strategy.

58 Additionally, in April 2015, China flew a prototype of the J-11D fighter which was thought to carry a Chinese-made WS-10A turbofan engine, avionics, and weapon system. China is also developing the J-10B
fighter, an upgraded J-10 fighter. “The Military Balance 2016” notes that approximately 50 J-10B fighters were being manufactured by the end of 2015.

59 In January 2011, a prototype of the J-20 fighter successfully conducted its first flight test. A total of nine prototypes are believed to have been made by the end of 2015. A prototype of the J-31 fighter has also
been verified at the Zhuhai Airshow held in November 2014. It is suggested that in the future, the J-31 fighter could be turned into a carrier-based fighter or be exported. “The Military Balance 2016” anticipates ii


-----

The new KJ-500 Airborne Early Warning and Control system [IHS Jane’s] The attack UAV GJ-1 (“Yilong”) is displayed at a military parade [IHS Jane’s]


also making continuous efforts to improve capabilities
which are essential for operations of modern air forces
by introducing the H-6U tanker and KJ-500[60] and KJ2000 Airborne Early Warning and Control system.
Furthermore, it is reported that China is developing a
new Y-20 large cargo aircraft[61] in order to enhance its
transportation capability. In addition to domestically
developing, producing and deploying a variety of aircraft
and introducing them from Russia, China is deemed to
be domestically developing a variety of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAV),[62] including those capable of long-hour
flights at high altitude for reconnaissance and other
purposes (high-altitude long endurance [HALE]) and
those capable of carrying missiles and other weapons for
attack purposes. Some of these are thought to be being
produced and deployed.
Judging from the modernization of the air forces, it is
believed that China is not only improving its air defense
capabilities for its national territory, but also aiming to
build up capabilities for air superiority and anti-surface
and anti-ship attacks in areas which are further distant
from China, and improving long-range transportation
capabilities.[63] Further attention needs to be paid to these
activities conducted by the Chinese air forces.

**(6) Military Use of Space and Cyber Warfare Capabilities**
China is said to have developed its space program in the
shortest time in the world, and may be utilizing space for


military purposes. China is considered to be developing
directed-energy weapons and satellite jammers in order
to restrict and interfere with the use of space-based
assets by adversaries in wartime. In addition, China has
interest in cyber space. Some have speculated that China
is reinforcing its “A2/AD” capabilities by using cyber
attacks to destroy an adversary’s network in the entire
region. This can be attributed to the fact that information
gathering and command and communication in the
military sector, which are vital for swift and efficient
exercise of military strength, increasingly rely on
satellites and computer networks.

See>> Part I, Chapter 3, Section 4 (Outer Space and Security); Part I, Chapter
3, Section 5 (Trends in Cyberspace)

**(7) Establishment of Joint Operational Posture**
In recent years, organizational reform has been under
way to improve integrated and combined operations
capability among the military services. For example,
at the third plenary session of the 18th CCP Central
Committee in November 2013, China proposed a
government policy to “enhance joint operations capability
and reform the command system and organization.” As
part of this, in November 2013, China has established
the “East China Sea Joint Operational Command Center”
allegedly to jointly operate the Navy and Air Force for
such purposes as the effective surveillance of the “East
China Sea Air Defense Identification Zone.”[64] The CCP


60 “The Military Balance 2016” states that at least two KJ-500 Airborne Early Warning and Control systems are operational as of 2015.

61 On January 26, 2013, the Ministry of National Defense of China announced that for the first time it succeeded in a trial flight of the Y-20 large cargo aircraft developed by China. It is believed that since then
China has continued to conduct related tests and trial flights. “The Military Balance 2016” notes that five aircraft at most have been included in the flight test program by the fourth quarter of 2015. It was
reported that a Y-20 large cargo aircraft was formally deployed to a military force in June 2016.

62 HALE UAVs being developed by China include the Xianglong (Soar Dragon) considered the “Chinese Global Hawk.” The BZK-005 is a UAV that can be used for multiple purposes, such as reconnaissance,
communications relay, and signals intelligence. It has been suggested that a UAV of unknown nationality that flew about 200 km north of the Senkaku Islands in September 2013 was the BZK-005. Some media
have reported that this aircraft has been deployed to Woody Island of the Paracel Islands. Attack UAVs include the GJ-1 (“Yilong”) and CH-4 (“Caihong”), which are deemed to have taken part in the Peace
Mission 2014 counter-terrorism combined exercise held in August 2014. “The Military Balance 2016” states that the GJ-1 is currently being operated by the Air Force. UAVs such as the BZK-005 and GJ-1
were unveiled at the military parade in September 2015.

63 In April 2014, Xi Jinping, CMC Chairman, visited an Air Force organization and referred to establishing an air force that “builds air-space capabilities and conducts offensive and defensive operations.” The
defense white paper “China’s Military Strategy” (May 2015) identifies “building air-space capabilities and conducting offensive and defensive operations” as a strategy for enhancing the military capabilities of
the Air Force.

64 During his regular press conference on July 31, 2014, the spokesperson of the Ministry of National Defense of China was asked whether the “East China Sea Joint Operational Command Center” had been i


-----

also established the “Central Military Commission Joint
Operations Command Center” to carry out decisionmaking at the highest strategic level. In November 2015,
President Xi Jinping delivered an address regarding the
specific direction of the military reforms, in which he
elaborated on creating a sound command structure for
joint operations of the CMC and establishing a command
structure for joint operations in theaters of operations.
In January 2016, the “four general departments” were
dismantled, and the CMC introduced a system comprised
of multiple sections. In February 2016, military regions
were realigned into five new theaters of operations. As
such, China may further develop its joint operational
posture as military reforms make further progress.
Furthermore, China has recently conducted drills
aimed at the development of a joint operational posture,
as demonstrated by long-distance mobile exercises which
cut across military regions such as Stride and Firepower,
as well as the joint exercises conducted among the Army,
Navy, Air Force, and other units such as Mission Action
2013 and Joint Action. The above drills are considered to
be intended to further facilitate coordination among the
different military services as well as the mobilization of
assets across theaters. The relevant developments will be
a point to watch out for.

- 5  Maritime Activities


have been observed engaging in monitoring activities
for the protection of its maritime rights and interests.[67]
Extremely regrettable are such activities by China, which
include: intermittent incursions into Japan’s territorial
waters by Chinese government vessels; intrusion into
Japan’s airspace; and dangerous acts that could cause
unintended consequences, including a Chinese vessel’s
direction of a fire-control radar at an MSDF destroyer,
the flight of Chinese military fighter jets abnormally
close to an SDF aircraft, and activities that could infringe
upon the freedom of overflight over the high seas, such
as the establishment of the “East China Sea Air Defense
Identification Zone (ADIZ).” China is urged to act on the
basis of the principle of the “rule of law.”

See>> Part I, Chapter 3, Section3 (Maritime Trends)

**(2) Situation of Activities in Japan’s Surrounding Sea**
**Areas**

Regarding the activities of naval forces, the number
of Chinese naval surface vessels advancing to the
Pacific Ocean has increased in recent years, and such
advancements continue to be conducted with high
frequency.[68] Since 2008, Chinese naval fleets have
transited the sea area between the main island of Okinawa
and Miyako Island several times every year. Furthermore,
every year since 2012, naval fleets have passed through
the Osumi Strait and the sea area between Yonaguni
Island and Nakanokami Island near Iriomote Island. In
March 2015, naval fleets navigated the sea area between
Amamioshima Island and Yokoatejima Island westward.
Naval fleets transited the Tsugaru Strait in October
2008 and February 2016 and the Soya Strait in July
2013, December 2014, and August 2015. In this regard,
naval fleets are beginning to routinely pass through
waters north of Japan. As such, the Chinese naval fleets’
advancements and homing routes to and from the Pacific
Ocean continue to become diverse by incorporating the
areas north of Japan, and it is understood that China seeks
to improve its deployment capabilities to the open ocean.
In October 2013, China conducted Maneuver 5, the first
joint exercise by its three naval fleets in the western


**(1) General Situation**
In recent years, China is believed to be aiming to build
up capabilities to conduct operations in more distant
waters and airspace. Accordingly, China has rapidly
expanded its maritime activities based on its sea and
air powers both in qualitative and quantitative ways. In
the sea areas and airspace surrounding Japan, Chinese
naval vessels[65] and navy and air force aircraft have been
observed conducting training exercises, such as carrierbased helicopter flights and fleet formation and maneuver
exercises, as well as information gathering activities. A
large number of Chinese government ships and aircraft
that belong to maritime law enforcement agencies[66]


65 Examples of the activities of Chinese naval vessels are: a Chinese nuclear-powered submarine conducted “underwater navigation in the territorial waters of another country” in breach of international law in
November 2004; it was confirmed that a total of five Chinese naval vessels, including one Sovremenny-class destroyer, were sailing near the Kashi gas field (Tianwaitian in Chinese) in the East China Sea and
some of them circled around said gas field in September 2005.

66 Surveillance and other activities at sea used to be conducted by “Maritime Police” (Haijing) of the Ministry of Public Security, “China Maritime Surveillance” (Haijian) of the State Oceanic Administration of the
Ministry of Land and Resources, “China Fisheries Law Enforcement Command” (Yuzheng) of the Bureau of Fisheries of the Ministry of Agriculture, “Maritime Safety Administration (Haixun)” of the Ministry of
Transport, and the maritime anti-smuggling force of the General Administration of Customs, all of which were under the State Council. In March 2013, China decided to reorganize the four agencies, excluding
“Maritime Safety Administration” into the new “State Oceanic Administration” and that the new organization would carry out surveillance and other activities under the name of “China Coast Guard” (Zhongguo
Haijing) under the guidance of the Ministry of Public Security. In July of that year, the China Coast Guard was formally launched. It is believed that the State Committee of Border and Coastal Defense, under the
guidance of the State Council and the CMC, is coordinating maritime activities by these maritime law-enforcement agencies and the Navy.

67 Concerning the PLA, there is a view that by turning exception into normality through uniform peacetime and wartime force deployment and exceeding traditional activity spaces, China intends to desensitize the
alertness of others and make the international community tolerate and accept changes in the situation (Taiwan’s 2009 National Defense Report).

68 The number of advancements into the Pacific Ocean by Chinese Navy combatant vessels since 2008 was as follows: 2 times (2008); 1 time (2009); 3 times (2010); 2 times (2011); 7 times (2012); 11 times


-----

Pacific Ocean. In December 2014, a similar joint exercise
involving the three fleets was reportedly conducted.[69]
In addition, Chinese naval vessels appear to conduct
operations in the East China Sea continuously.[70] Stating
its own position regarding the Senkaku Islands,[71] China
alleges that patrols by Chinese naval vessels in the sea
areas under its jurisdiction are completely justifiable
and lawful. In January 2013, a Chinese naval vessel
directed fire-control radar at an MSDF destroyer and
is suspected to have directed fire-control radar at a
helicopter based on an MSDF destroyer.[72] Moreover,
in June 2016, a Jiangkai I-class frigate of the Chinese
Navy entered Japan’s contiguous zone near the Senkaku
Islands. This was the first time a Chinese Navy combatant
vessel entered Japan’s contiguous zone. In recent years,
Chinese Navy intelligence gathering vessels (AGIs)
have also been found conducting multiple activities. A
Chinese Navy Dongdiao-class AGI repeatedly navigated
back and forth outside of the contiguous zone south of
the Senkaku Islands in November 2015 and in waters
outside of the contiguous zone southeast of the Boso
Peninsula in December 2015 and February 2016. In June
2016, the same type of AGI sailed in Japan’s territorial
waters near Kuchinoerabu Island and Yakushima Island
and then sailed within Japan’s contiguous zone north
of Kitadaito Island. Subsequently, the vessel repeatedly
conducted east-west passages outside the contiguous
zone south of the Senkaku Islands. This was the first
navigation in Japanese territorial waters by a Chinese
Navy vessel in approximately 12 years. It is of serious
concern that recently China has unilaterally escalated
activities in waters near Japan, such as activities that are
seen as actions based on their own assertions related to
the Senkaku Islands and further expansion of its naval
vessels’ reach to include the Senkaku Islands.
With regard to activities of Chinese government
vessels, in December 2008, China Maritime Surveillance
vessels hovered and drifted inside Japan’s territorial
waters near the Senkaku Islands – operations which are
not permitted under international law. In September 2010,
Japan Coast Guard patrol vessels and a Chinese fishing


12th offshore platform. Installation of a superstructure was confirmed in May 2016.

trawler collided in Japan’s territorial sea surrounding
the Senkaku Islands. Subsequently, in August 2011
as well as in March and July 2012, “China Maritime
Surveillance” vessels and “China Fisheries Law
Enforcement Command” vessels intruded into Japan’s
aforementioned territorial waters.[73] As these examples
demonstrate, “China Maritime Surveillance” and
“China Fisheries Law Enforcement Command” vessels
have gradually intensified their activities in Japan’s
territorial waters. Such activities increased considerably
and Chinese government vessels began to intrude into
the aforementioned territorial waters intermittently
after September 2012, when the Japanese government
acquired property rights to and ownership of three of
the Senkaku Islands (Uotsuri Island, Kitakojima Island,
and Minamikojima Island). In April and September
2013, eight Chinese government vessels intruded into
the aforementioned territorial waters simultaneously.
The way in which government vessels have carried out
operations intended to intrude into territorial waters
since October 2013[74] suggested such operations had been
routinized. In this light, an operations manual or other
codes may have been developed.
Since December 26, 2015, Chinese government
vessels carrying weapons that appear to be cannons[75]
have begun to repeatedly intrude into Japan’s territorial


69 Some news reports call this exercise “Maneuver 6.” Some of the vessels that participated in this exercise subsequently circled Japan by transiting the Soya and Tsushima Straits.

70 For example, a China Military Online article (October 21, 2015) reported that in recent years, the average number of days in a year that all major combatants in the East Sea Fleet of the Chinese Navy conducted
operations exceeded 150 days.

71 China makes its own assertion about the Senkaku Islands, which are an inherent part of the territory of Japan. In May 2013, a newspaper of the CCP carried an article which wrote, “It may be time to revisit
the unresolved historical issue of the Ryukyu Islands,” and thus could be regarded as one that calls into question that Okinawa is part of Japan. The Chinese government explained that the article was written
by researchers in their personal capacity.

72 See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 3-1 (Trends Related to the “Principle of the Freedom of the High Seas” in the East China Sea and South China Sea).

73 In February 2012, a survey vessel of the Japan Coast Guard conducting a marine survey in Japan’s EEZ was demanded to stop the activity by two China Maritime Surveillance ships. Similar incidents occurred
in May and September 2010.

74 While with some exceptions, two to three Chinese government vessels often intrude into Japan’s territorial waters two to three times a month from around 10 am for about two hours.

75 As of the end of June 2016, government vessels that have been confirmed to carry weapons that appear to be cannons are the “China Coast Guard 31239” and “China Coast Guard 31241.” It has been
suggested that three Jiangwei I-class frigates belonging to the Chinese Navy were repaired to be handed over to the China Coast Guard. Similarly, it has been suggested that two Luda-class destroyers will be


-----

larger-class vessel since August 2014. In February 2015,

Fig. I-2-3-4 Recent Major Chinese Activities in Waters near Japan (The wakes shown are an illustration)

**Chinese naval vessels have sailed several times in the following areas (examples of activities since 2014):**
(1) Vessels sailed through Soya Strait in December 2014 (four vessels, westward) and in August 2015 (five vessels, eastward).
(2) In February 2016, four vessels including Luhu-class destroyer sailed through Tsugaru Strait.
(3) In December 2014, vessels transited Osumi Strait and moved from the East China Sea to the Pacific Ocean, and then sailed through Soya Strait westward. In August 2015, vessels transited
Soya Strait from the Sea of Japan to the Pacific Ocean, and then navigated in the high seas of the Bering Sea.
Subsequently, the vessels sailed the Pacific Ocean, transited between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island, and moved to the East China Sea. In February 2016, vessels sailed
through Tsugaru Strait from the Sea of Japan to the Pacific Ocean, and then transited Osumi Strait from the Pacific Ocean to the East China Sea.
(4) In December 2015 and February 2016, an AGI conducted round-trip passages in waters outside of the contiguous zone southeast of the Boso Peninsula.
(5) Vessels transited Osumi Strait in June (three vessels, westward) and December 2014 (five vessels, eastward), in December 2015 (three vessels, eastward), and in February (four vessels,
westward) and March 2016 (two vessels, eastward).
(6) Vessels passed between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island and advanced to the Pacific Ocean in March (three vessels), May (two vessels), and June 2014 (three vessels), in
February (two vessels), June (two vessels), July (three vessels), and December 2015 (three vessels), and in April (three vessels twice) and June 2016 (five vessels).
(7) In March 2014, three vessels sailed the Pacific Ocean southwest of the main island of Okinawa.
(8) Vessels transited between Yonaguni Island and Nakanokami Island in March 2014 (four vessels, northeastward), in August 2015 (three vessels, northward), and in April 2016 (three vessels, northward).
(9) Government vessels have intruded into territorial waters near the Senkaku Islands since December 2008 and intruded into territorial waters intermittently since September 2012. In
November 2015, an AGI conducted round-trip passages in waters outside of the contiguous zone south of the Senkaku Islands. Since December 2015, government vessels carrying what
appears to be cannons have repeatedly intruded into territorial waters. In June 2016, a frigate entered the contiguous zone north of the Senkaku Islands, and an AGI conducted round-trip
passages in waters outside of the contiguous zone south of the Senkaku Islands.
In addition, in March 2015, two vessels including Sovremenny-class destroyer (10) sailed between Amamioshima Island and Yokoatejima Island in the southwest direction. In June 2016, an AGI
(11) sailed in territorial waters near Kuchinoerabu Island and then (12) in the contiguous zone north of Kitadaito Island. Furthermore, in January 2013, a Jiangkai I-class frigate is suspected to
have directed fire-control radar at a helicopter based on an MSDF destroyer in the East China Sea. In the same month, a Jiangwei II-class frigate directed fire-control radar at an MSDF destroyer
in the East China Sea.
In the South China Sea, incidents have occurred, including standoffs between Chinese and Philippine vessels and Chinese and Vietnamese vessels.

3

Kitadaito Island

4 12

11 Okinawa 7

Tokyo 10 6

Kuchinoerabu 8
Island 5 9 South China Sea

East China Sea Senkaku Taipei

2 Sea of Japan Islands

1 Ningbo

ETOPO1 (NOAA)

waters. Additionally, government vessels deployed to to the China Coast Guard[77] that was formally launched in
seas near the Senkaku Islands are increasingly larger July 2013. In 2014, the Navy and the China Coast Guard
in size, with at least one of the government vessels conducted a coordinated drill. Also, the Navy and the
intruding into Japan’s territorial waters being a 3,000 t or Maritime Safety Administration conducted the joint drill

three 3,000 t or larger-class government vessels entered
Japan’s territorial waters simultaneously for the first
time. China is also building the world’s largest 10,000
t-class patrol vessel, and two vessels[76] have reportedly
already carried out sea trials. In this way, China is seen to
be steadily strengthening an operational posture intended
to use Chinese government vessels to intrude into Japan’s
territorial waters.
In October 2012, vessels of the East Sea Fleet of the
Chinese Navy, along with “China Maritime Surveillance”
and “China Fisheries Law Enforcement Command”
vessels, conducted a joint exercise with a focus on
maintaining and defending China’s territorial sovereignty
and maritime interests. Furthermore, the Navy is believed
to be supporting maritime law enforcement agencies both
in terms of operation and equipment. For example, the
Navy is thought to have handed over retired Navy vessels


to the China Coast Guard[77] that was formally launched in
July 2013. In 2014, the Navy and the China Coast Guard
conducted a coordinated drill. Also, the Navy and the
Maritime Safety Administration conducted the joint drill
Poseidon 2014.

See>> Fig. I-2-3-4 (Recent Major Chinese Activities in Waters near Japan)

**(3) Situation of Activities in Japan’s Surrounding**
**Airspace**

In recent years, activities by Chinese Navy and Air Force
aircraft, which appear to be gathering information about
Japan of some form, have been intensified. The number
of scrambles by the ASDF against Chinese aircraft is also
increasing dramatically.[78]
With regard to activities of air forces in the airspace
above the East China Sea, Chinese aircraft have been
diversifying their flight patterns. Multiple H-6 bombers
in September 2007 and a Y-8 early warning aircraft in
March 2010 flew into Japan’s ADIZ above the East China
Sea and advanced near the Japan-China median line. In
March 2011, a Y-8 patrol aircraft and Y-8 intelligence
gathering aircraft crossed the Japan-China median line


76 “China Coast Guard 2901” and “China Coast Guard 3901.” These government vessels allegedly carry a 76 mm cannon.

77 See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 3, Footnote 67.


-----

An H-6 bomber flies over waters between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island
to the Pacific Ocean (November 27, 2015)

and approached within approximately 50 km of Japan’s
airspace near the Senkaku Islands. In 2012, China
intensified the activities of its aircraft, including fighters.
In January 2013, the Chinese Ministry of National
Defense made public the fact that Chinese military aircraft
regularly conducted warning and surveillance activities
and that Chinese fighters conducted activities believed to
be Combat Air Patrols (CAP) in the East China Sea. In
addition, in the same Chinese defense white paper, the
phrase “air vigilance and patrols at sea” was added for
the first time.
On November 23, 2013, the Chinese government
announced that it established the “East China Sea ADIZ”
including the Senkaku Islands which China described
as if they were a part of China’s “territory,” and that
the Chinese Armed Forces would take “defensive
emergency measures” in the case where aircraft does
not follow the relevant rules set forth by the Chinese
Ministry of National Defense.[79] On the same day, a Tu154 intelligence gathering aircraft and a Y-8 intelligence
gathering aircraft respectively flew over the East China
Sea. On these, the Chinese Air Force announced that it
conducted its first patrol flight since the establishment
of the ADIZ. On December 26, 2013, the Chinese
Armed Forces announced that in the one month that
passed since the establishment of the ADIZ, a total of
87 reconnaissance aircraft, early warning aircraft and
fighters were mobilized to the relevant airspace.
In March and April 2011 and in April 2012, Chinese
helicopters and other aircraft that appeared to belong to


Changes in the Number of Scrambles against
Fig. I-2-3-5
Chinese Aircraft

(Times)

600

550

500

450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15

(FY)


the State Oceanic Administration (SOA) flew close to
MSDF destroyers which were engaged in monitoring
and surveillance in the East China Sea.[80] Further still, in
May and June 2014, two Su-27 fighters of China flew
abnormally close to the aircraft of MSDF and ASDF that
were conducting routine monitoring and surveillance
activities in the East China Sea.[81] The Chinese Ministry of
National Defense announced that SDF aircraft conducted
dangerous acts against Chinese aircraft. However, the
operations of SDF aircraft were legitimate in compliance
with the international law. There is no truth to the Chinese
assertion that SDF aircraft carried out dangerous acts.
With respect to Chinese air forces’ advancement into
the Pacific Ocean, ASDF’s scrambling fighters confirmed
for the first time that a Y-8 early warning aircraft flew over
waters between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako
Island to the Pacific Ocean in July 2013. In 2015, similar
flights were conducted by a Y-9 intelligence gathering
aircraft on two consecutive days in February, by two H-6
bombers in May, by a Y-9 intelligence gathering aircraft,
a Y-8 early warning aircraft, and two H-6 bombers (total:
four aircraft) on two consecutive days in July, and by
four H-6 bombers, a Tu-154 intelligence gathering
aircraft, and a Y-8 intelligence gathering aircraft (total:
six aircraft) in November,[82] respectively.[83] In late January


79 See Part 1, Chapter 3, Section 3-1 (Trends Related to the “Principle of the Freedom of the High Seas” in the East China Sea and South China Sea).

80 For example, on March 7, 2011, a Chinese Z-9 helicopter that was believed to belong to the SOA flew as close as approximately 70 m and as low as approximately 40 m above the water around the Japanese
destroyer Samidare, which was patrolling the waters in the central area of the East China Sea. On April 12, 2012, a Y-12 aircraft, which was believed to belong to the SOA, flew as close as approximately 50 m
and as low as approximately 50 m above the water around the destroyer “Asayuki.”

81 See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 3-1 (Trends Related to the “Principle of the Freedom of the High Seas” in the East China Sea and South China Sea).

82 In addition to the six aircraft, four H-6 bombers and a Y-8 early warning aircraft conducted operations near the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island during the same timeframe, although they did not fly
over waters between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island.iliii


-----

Fig. I-2-3-6 Recent Chinese Activities in Airspace near Japan (The fl ight paths shown are an illustration)

November 2015*, four H-6 bombers and a Y-8 early Flew to the Pacific Ocean through airspace between the main island
warning aircraft conducted operations near the main of Okinawa and Miyako Island
island of Okinawa and Miyako Island Guam -  a Y-8 airborne early warning aircraft (July 2013)

-  two H-6 bombers (September 2013)

Tokyo -  two Y-8 airborne early warning aircraft & two H-6 bombers (three

November 2013, establishment of the consecutive days, October 2013)
“East China Sea Air Defense -  a Y-8 intelligence gathering aircraft & two H-6 bombers (March 2014)
Identification Zone” was announced -  two Y-8 airborne early warning aircraft, a Y-9 intelligence gathering

aircraft & two H-6 bombers (December 6, 7, 10, and 11, 2014)

Okinawa -  a Y-9 intelligence gathering aircraft (two consecutive days,

February 2015)

A Y-9 intelligence gathering aircraft and a Y-8 -  two H-6 bombers (May 2015)
early warning aircraft flew over the East China East China Sea -  a Y-9 intelligence gathering aircraft, a Y-8 airborne early warning
Sea and Sea of Japan (January 2016) aircraft & two H-6 bombers (two consecutive days, July 2015)

-  four H-6 bombers, a Tu-154 intelligence gathering aircraft & Y-8
intelligence gathering aircraft (November 2015*)

-  a Y-8 airborne early warning aircraft (April 2016)

May and June 2014, over the East China Taipei -  December 2012, fixed-wing aircraft of the State Oceanic

Administration intruded into territorial airspace around the

Sea, two Su-27 fighters came near

Senkaku Islands for the first time (through March 2014, fixed-wing

collision with MSDF’s and ASDF’s aircraft Ningbo aircraft of the SOA were frequently observed flying near the airspace)

-  June 2016, Chinese PLA aircraft flew southward towards the

Su-30 fighters, J-11 fighters, KJ-2000 airborne early Senkaku Islands
warning aircraft, etc. flew within the “East China Sea
Air Defense Identification Zone” (November 2013, The following aircraft flew:
announcement by the Chinese side) -  a Tu-154 intelligence gathering aircraft (two consecutive days, November 2013)

-  a Tu-154 intelligence gathering aircraft & a Y-8 intelligence gathering aircraft (November 2013)

The United States National Oceanic and -  a Tu-154 intelligence gathering aircraft (February 2014)
Atmospheric Administration: ETOPO1 Qingdao -  a Tu-154 intelligence gathering aircraft (March 2014)

-  Same day activity


2016, a total of two aircraft, namely, a Y-9 intelligence
gathering aircraft and a Y-8 early warning aircraft, fl ew
over the Tsushima Strait before conducting operations
in the Sea of Japan for the fi rst time. As such, China is
further intensifying activities of its aircraft.[84]
Regarding Japan’s airspace over and around the
Senkaku Islands, territorial airspace intrusion by a fi xedwing aircraft of the SOA in December 2012 marked the
fi rst such instance by a Chinese aircraft. Subsequently,
fi xed-wing aircraft of the SOA were frequently observed
fl ying near the airspace up through March 2014.[85]

See>> Fig. I-2-3-5 (Changes in the Number of Scrambles against Chinese
Aircraft); Fig. I-2-3-6 (Recent Chinese Activities in Airspace near Japan)

Recently, Chinese PLA aircraft have also been
seen fl ying in the southward direction near the Senkaku
Islands. In June 2016, ASDF fi ghters scrambled against
Chinese PLA aircraft that fl ew southward closer to the
Senkaku Islands. The Chinese Ministry of National
Defense released an offi cial announcement stating that
SDF aircraft conducted provocations against Chinese
PLA aircraft.[86] However, SDF aircraft conduct scrambles
in accordance with international law and the Self

Defense Forces Law, and it is not true that SDF aircraft
conducted provocations against Chinese PLA aircraft.
With stronger interests, attention will need to be paid to
activities carried out by Chinese PLA aircraft recently
near the Senkaku Islands.

**(4) Situation of Activities in the South China Sea**
China has also been intensifying its activities in the
South China Sea, including waters around the Spratly
Islands and the Paracel Islands, over which territorial
disputes exist with neighbors, including some ASEAN
member states. In March 2009 and December 2013, a
Chinese naval vessel and other vessels approached and
intercepted a U.S. Navy vessel navigating in the South
China Sea.[87] In August 2014, a PLA fi ghter is alleged to
have fl own abnormally close to and intercepted a U.S.
Forces aircraft.[88] It is also reported that Chinese naval
vessels fi red warning shots at fi shing boats of neighboring
countries. Furthermore, in recent years, there has been
growing friction between China and its neighboring
countries over the South China Sea, as illustrated by
protests by Vietnam and the Philippines against China’s


84 On March 30, 2015, the spokesperson of the PLA Air Force announced that Air Force aircraft fl ew over the Bashi Channel between Taiwan and the Philippines before conducting their fi rst drill in the West
Pacifi c. An announcement was also made that a similar drill would be conducted on August 14 of the same year as well. On May 21, 2015, the same spokesperson announced that for the fi rst time PLA Air
Force aircraft fl ew over a strait between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island before conducting a drill in the West Pacifi c. An announcement was also made that a similar drill would be conducted on
November 27 of the year as well.

85 Some reports point out that China is constructing a heliport and radar installations on the Nanji Islands facing the East China Sea.

86 Regarding the scramble by ASDF fi ghters against Chinese PLA aircraft that fl ew southward towards the Senkaku Islands on June 17, 2016, the Chinese Ministry of National Defense released the following
offi cial announcement: “Chinese fi ghter jets were approached by two Japanese F-15 fi ghter jets in high speed. They conducted provocations and used fi re-control radars against us. The Chinese PLA responded
decisively and took measures such as tactical maneuver. Consequently, the Japanese fi ghter jets fl ew away after fi ring infrared jamming shells.”

87 See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 3-1 (Trends Related to the “Principle of the Freedom of the High Seas” in the East China Sea and South China Sea).


-----

Fiery Cross Reef. Rapid and large-scale land reclamation and the construction of a runway and other facilities are under way.
(Left: as of August 14, 2014; center: as of March 18, 2015; right: as of May 1, 2016)

[CSIS Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative/DigitalGlobe]


Johnson South Reef. Facilities including (probable) radars are being built.
(As of February 9, 2016)

[CSIS Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative/DigitalGlobe]

development activities on the features in these waters,
including land reclamation and various infrastructure
development on the features.
Since 2014, China has pressed ahead with rapid
and large-scale land reclamation works[89] on seven
features in the Spratly Islands.[90] China has built military
facilities such as batteries and has developed various
infrastructures that could be utilized for military
purposes, such as runways, hangars, harbors, and radar
facilities.[91] In Fiery Cross Reef, a large harbor capable of
receiving surface combatants is being built. In January
2016, China declared completion of a 3,000 m-long
runway which fighters and bombers can take off from
and land on. Despite protests from neighboring countries,
China went ahead with aircraft test flights there. In April
2016, a Navy patrol aircraft on patrol over the South


China Sea landed at Fiery Cross Reef to evacuate urgent
patients.[92] Likewise, in Subi and Mischief Reefs, China is
thought to have conducted large-scale reclamations and
be building large runways.[93] Building of facilities, such
as harbors, helipads, and radars, has also proceeded on
the four other features. In the Paracel Islands, China has
similarly carried out land reclamations and promoted
their use for military purposes. In Woody Island, China
has extended the runway since 2013. In October 2015,
China deployed J-11 and other fighters, and in February
2016, the deployment of equipment likely to be surfaceto-air missiles was confirmed. In recent years, Chinese
vessels have allegedly been conducting what are likely
to be survey activities in the Scarborough Shoal, where
a standoff took place between Chinese and Philippine
government ships in April 2012.[94] The possibility of


89 The U.S. DoD’s “The Asia-Pacific Maritime Security Strategy” (August 2015) states, “As of June 2015, [China] had reclaimed more than 2,900 acres of land” and “China has now reclaimed 17 times more land
in 20 months than the other claimants combined over the past 40 years, accounting for approximately 95% of all reclaimed land in the Spratly Islands.” The U.S. DoD’s “Annual Report to Congress: Military and
Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China” (May 2016) notes, “China paused its land reclamation effort in the Spratly Islands in late 2015 after adding more than 3,200 acres of land.”

90 The seven features are: Johnson South Reef; Cuarteron Reef; Gaven Reefs; Hughes Reef; Fiery Cross Reef; Mischief Reef; and Subi Reef.

91 According to the outcome documents that the Chinese and U.S. governments released respectively following the China-U.S. summit meeting in September 2015, President Xi Jinping asserted, “Relevant
construction activities that China is undertaking in the Spratly Islands do not target or impact any particular country, and China does not intend to pursue militarization.” However, in October 2015, the
spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China denied “militarization,” but stated, “China has a number of necessary military facilities of a limited and purely defensive nature.” Furthermore the Ministry
of National Defense announced in April 2016 that Fan Changlong, CMC Vice Chairman, had visited the Spratly Islands.

92 China is believed to have conducted three test flights at Fiery Cross Reef on January 2, 3, and 6 of 2016. In response, the spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Vietnam expressed strong opposition
on January 2, and the Philippines protested in writing on January 8. Additionally, on April 17, 2016, a Chinese Navy patrol aircraft on patrol over the South China Sea evacuated a construction worker at a
construction site on the Spratly Islands whose life was thought to be in danger due to disease as well as two other patients, from the airport in Fiery Cross Reef to an airport in Sanya, Hainan.

93 The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) and the Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative (AMTI) view that the construction of runways is proceeding at a fast pace, describing that the runway
presumably being built at Subi Reef is 3,250 m long and 55 m wide, and the runway presumably being built at Mischief Reef is 2,644 m long and 55 m wide.

94 Chinese government ships have begun to drive away Philippine law enforcement vessels and fishing boats approaching the Scarborough Shoal since a standoff took place between Chinese and Philippine
government ships in April 2012. Subsequently, Philippine ships are said to be unable to approach the Scarborough Shoal.


-----

**y**

**Security Impacts of China’s Land Reclamation Work in the Spratly Islands** **Column**

A number of countries are conducting development work on features of the Spratly Islands which stretch across central to southern South China
Sea. This column focuses on rapid and large-scale land reclamation and infrastructure construction on the features that China has went ahead
with in recent years and examines its impacts on security.
First of all, if harbors on the Spratly Islands China has been building secure its ability to deploy, replenish, and maintain PLA and
government vessels, it will be able to continuously station and deploy them in all areas of the South China Sea. This could signifi cantly improve
its ability to conduct surveillance as well as operations in the sea.
Secondly, building of a runway on Fiery Cross Reef will enable China to forward deploy and replenish a variety of air assets. Furthermore,
installation of radar facilities on the Spratly Islands will considerably improve China’s surveillance capability in the South China Sea. These
circumstances may improve its power projection capability throughout the area, allow China to acquire air superiority effortlessly, and by
extension, increase its “A2/AD” capabilities. In addition, China is building runways on Subi and Mischief Reefs as well. When complete,
they could further enhance China’s presence in the airspace of the area, and then China may declare a “South China Sea Air Defense
Identifi cation Zone” in the future.
Upholding the “principle of the freedom of the high seas” and ensuring security of sea lanes in the South China Sea are of critical concern
to Japan. Should China proceed with land reclamation work on the features and utilize them for military purposes, there may be negative
security consequences including further heightening of tension with neighboring countries as well as increasing risks to stable use of sea lanes.
Issues surrounding the South China Sea are of concern for the entire international community due to their direct implications for peace and
stability of the Asia-Pacifi c region. In this regard, it is necessary to keep monitoring the situation in the sea, including activities of China there.


new land reclamations in the shoal in the future has
been suggested as well.[95] It has been pointed out that
if China conducts land reclamations and installs radar
facilities and other equipment in the Scarborough
Shoal, it could possibly increase its ability to track the
situation in the coastal areas of the Philippines and
adjacent waters. Attention must continue to be paid to
the status of Chinese activities in these waters. Such
activities by China constitute acts that unilaterally
change the status quo and further advance its efforts
to create a fait accompli. Japan is deeply concerned
about these activities, and the concern is shared with the
international community, including the United States.[96]
In response to the growing international concerns
over the development on the features, China asserts


that a number of ASEAN member states including the
Philippines and Vietnam are illegitimately occupying
features of the Spratly Islands and carrying out largescale construction work to build fi xed facilities such
as airstrips[97] However, China’s development work on
the features is of a scale incomparable to the activities
carried out by other countries[98] and is being conducted
at a rapid pace.
In any case, the issues over the South China Sea
are of concern to the entire international community
due to their direct implications for peace and security of
the Asia-Pacifi c region. Countries concerned including
China are urged to refrain from unilateral actions that
heighten tension and act on the basis of the principle of
the “rule of law.”


95 On March 17, 2016, with regard to China’s activities near the Scarborough Shoal, U.S. Chief of Naval Operation John Richardson stated, “I think we see some surface ship activity and those sorts of things,
survey type of activity, going on. That’s an area of concern...a next possible area of reclamation.” According to media reports, it has also been suggested that, “China will start reclamation at the Scarborough
Shoal in the South China Sea later this year and may add an airstrip to extend its air force’s reach over the contested waters.”

96 As regards U.S. concerns, for example, on November 7, 2015, U.S. Secretary of Defense Carter stated at the Reagan Defense Forum that, “The United States, joins virtually everyone else in the region, in
being deeply concerned about the pace and scope of [China’s] land reclamation in the South China Sea, the prospect of further militarization, as well as the potential for these activities to increase the risk of
miscalculation or confl ict among claimant states.” On November 21, 2015, at the Halifax International Security Forum, Commander Harry Harris of the U.S. Pacifi c Command noted that “Tensions in the region
were signifi cantly heightened” because of China’s development work on the features in the South China Sea, and that it “raised concerns” among nations including the United States. In June 2016, Secretary
Carter stated at the Asia Security Summit that, “China’s actions in the South China Sea are isolating it... if these actions continue, China could end up erecting a Great Wall of self-isolation.” As regards the
concerns of the international community, for example, on May 26, 2015, President of the European Council Donald Tusk criticized China over its land reclamation on the features in the South China Sea,
stating that “construction activities on the sea” “will make it much more diffi cult to solve the problem” in the region. At the G7 Summit held in Elmau, Germany on June 7-8, 2015, a Leaders’ Declaration was
released stating that, “[w]e strongly oppose...any unilateral actions that seek to change the status quo, such as large scale land reclamation.” Furthermore, the Chairman’s Statement of the ASEAN Summit
adopted on November 23, 2015 stated, “We shared the concerns expressed by some Leaders” on “the increased presence of military assets” and “further militarisation of outposts” in the South China Sea.
The Chairman’s Statement of the ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Retreat announced on February 27, 2016 expressed that the ministers were “seriously concerned” over the situation in the South China Sea and
affi rmed the “importance of non-militarisation” in the region. Additionally, the G7 Foreign Ministers’ Statement on Maritime Security released on April 11, 2016 included the following text: “We are concerned
about the situation in the...South China Sea” and “We express our strong opposition to any intimidating, coercive or provocative unilateral actions that could alter the status quo and increase tensions.” The G7
Ise-Shima Leaders’ Declaration included the following statements regarding maritime security: “We reaffi rm the importance of states’ making and clarifying their claims based on international law”; “seeking
to settle disputes by peaceful means including through juridical procedures including arbitration”; and “We are concerned about the situation in the East and South China Seas.”

97 Remark by the spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China on April 29, 2015. According to CSIS/AMTI information from May 2016, Vietnam reclaimed over 120 acres of land on a total of ten features
in the last two years.


-----

following which, in January 2016, the spokesperson
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China announced
that China and Djibouti held consultations and reached
agreement regarding the building of “security facilities.”[104 ]

Some indicate that under the “String of Pearls” strategy,
China supports Indian Ocean countries to build port
infrastructure to secure places for making port calls and
strengthen the defense of China’s sea lanes.[105]

**(6) Objectives of Maritime Activities**
Taking into consideration such factors as the situation of
the development of Chinese naval and air forces, activities
in sea areas and airspace, statements in defense white
papers, China’s geographical location and economic
globalization, the maritime activities of the Chinese
Navy, Air Force and other organizations are considered
to have the following objectives.
The first is to intercept operations by adversaries
in waters and airspace as far as possible from China
in order to defend its territory, territorial waters and
territorial airspace. Behind this objective is an increase in
effectiveness of long-range attacks due to recent progress
in science and technology.
The second is to develop military capabilities
to deter and prevent Taiwan’s independence. China
maintains that it will not allow any foreign intervention
in solving the Taiwan issue and realizing the unification
of China. In trying to prevent foreign intervention into
Taiwan surrounded by the sea in all directions through
China’s use of force, China needs to enhance its military
operational capabilities at sea and airspace.
The third is to weaken the control of other countries
over the islands to which China claims territorial
sovereignty and to strengthen the claim through various
surveillance activities and use of force at sea and in
airspace surrounding the islands.
The fourth is to acquire, maintain, and protect its
maritime rights and interests. China is engaged in oil and
gas drilling as well as building facilities and surveying for
the drilling in the East and South China Seas. It has been
confirmed that in addition to the existing 4 platforms,
China is building 12 new offshore platforms on the


See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 6 (Southeast Asia); Part I, Chapter 3, Section
3 (Maritime Trends)

**(5) Situation of Activities in the “Far Seas”**
The Chinese Navy is thought to be shifting its naval
forces towards “offshore waters defense and open seas
protection,”[99] and is steadily increasing its capabilities to
conduct operations in more distant seas such as the Indian
Ocean in recent years. For example, since December
2008, Chinese Navy vessels sail in the Indian Ocean to
the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of Aden to take part
in international anti-piracy efforts. In 2010 and 2013,
a Chinese Navy’s hospital ship carried out “Mission
Harmony,” a medical service mission to assist countries,
including those off the coast of the Indian Ocean.
Furthermore, the Chinese Navy sent its vessels through
Sunda Strait to the eastern Indian Ocean as part of an
exercise from January to February 2014. Outside of the
Indian Ocean, in September 2015, five Chinese vessels[100]
sailed in the high seas in the Bering Sea and entered U.S.
territorial waters near the Aleutian Islands.[101] Activities of
Chinese Navy submarines are also beginning to be spotted
continuously in the Indian Ocean. From the end of 2013
to the beginning of 2014, a Chinese Navy’s Shang-class
nuclear submarine reportedly conducted operations in
the Indian Ocean. From September to October 2014,
a Song-class submarine conducted operations in the
Indian Ocean and called at a port in Colombo, Sri Lanka,
twice in the same year. This marked the first time that
a Chinese submarine entered port overseas.[102] In May
2015, a Yuan-class submarine reportedly called at a port
in Karachi, Pakistan.
Additionally, China has been securing overseas
bases of activities such as harbors, which would help
support its far seas operations. For example, it has been
pointed out from previously that a PLA base would be
built in Djibouti located in a strategic position in East
Africa facing the Gulf of Aden.[103] In December 2015,
Mahamoud Ali Youssouf, Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Djibouti, mentioned at the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation that, “The PLA base will be established in
a section of the new Doraleh port under construction,”


99 See the defense white paper “China’s Military Strategy” (May 2015).

100 The vessels are part of the fleet that participated in the China-Russia naval combined exercise, Joint Sea 2015 (II), conducted off the coast of Vladivostok and the Sea of Japan from August 20 to 28, 2015. The
vessels presumably sailed the Soya Strait and then headed towards the Bering Sea.

101 Under international law, military vessels, like general ships, are granted the right of innocent passage to traverse the territorial waters of a coastal state, so long as it is not prejudicial to the peace, good order,
or security of this state. According to the United States, the coastal state in this case, the Chinese vessels’ navigation did not violate international law.

102 On September 25, 2014, the spokesperson of the Ministry of National Defense of China formally admitted for the first time that a Chinese submarine called at a port in Colombo, Sri Lanka.
103 For example, in May 2015, Ismail Omar Guelleh, President of Djibouti, is said to have revealed that Djibouti and China were negotiating about building of a military base.
104 The Chinese word for “security” has the meaning of “support.”
105 China is collaborating on port development projects and other programs with local governments at such ports as Gwadar Port in Pakistan, Hambantota Port in Sri Lanka, Chittagong Port in Bangladesh, and


-----

Chinese side of the Japan-China median line of the East
China Sea since June 2013. In May 2016, superstructures
were installed on 2 of the 12 platforms at which only
a foundation had been installed. Japan has repeatedly
lodged protests against such unilateral development by
China and demanded the termination of such work.[106]
The fifth is to defend its sea lanes of communications.
In the background is the fact that its sea lanes of
communications, including its crude oil transportation
routes from the Middle East, are extremely important for
the globalizing Chinese economy. The question of which
parts of its sea lanes of communication the Chinese Navy
deems it should defend depends on such factors as the
international situation at the time. However, given the
recent strengthening of the Chinese Navy and Air Force,
it is believed that they will develop a capacity to defend
areas past China’s near seas to the “far seas.”
Given these objectives and recent trends in China’s
activities in sea areas and airspace, it is believed that
China plans to further expand the sphere of its maritime
activities, and further intensify its operations in waters
surrounding Japan, including the East China Sea and the
Pacific Ocean, as well as the South China Sea and the
airspaces over these sea areas. Therefore, more attention
needs to be paid to activities such as operations of
naval vessels and Navy and Air Force aircraft, various
surveillance operations near Japan, developments of
facilities that serve as bases for these activities,[107] and
evolution of China’s interpretation regarding the nature
and scope of rights in China’s exclusive economic zones
(EEZs) and other areas.[108]
Meanwhile, in recent years, China has shown interest
in taking steps to avoid and prevent unexpected situations
at sea. For example, in April 2014, China, together with
other countries such as Japan and the United States,


agreed to the Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea
(CUES), which sets forth the standards of behavior in
the case that the naval vessels or aircraft of the Western
Pacific Naval Symposium (WPNS) member states have
unexpected encounters. In September 2014, Japanese and
Chinese defense authorities agreed in principle to resume
consultations to swiftly begin the implementation of the
Maritime and Air Communication Mechanism, which
China had not agreed to since September 2012. Following
this, the fourth Joint Working Group meeting was held in
January 2015, and the fifth Joint Working Group meeting
was held in June 2015.[109] At the Japan-China Defense
Ministerial Meeting held in Malaysia in November
2015, the two sides confirmed that they would aim to
swiftly begin the implementation of the Mechanism.[110]
Additionally, in November 2014, President Obama and
President Xi Jinping announced that they agreed on two
confidence-building measures[111] in order to lower the
risk of unintended encounters between the United States
and China, and in September 2015, announced that they
agreed on additional annexes.[112]

- 6  International Military Activities


In recent years, the PLA has begun emphasizing
nontraditional security missions such as peacekeeping,
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, and antipiracy. In order to carry out these missions, it has actively
dispatched its units overseas. It is believed that in the
background of the PLA’s stance on international military
activities is the expansion of China’s national interests
beyond its national borders, which in turn increased its
necessity to protect and promote its national interests
overseas, as well as China’s intent to raise its stature by
demonstrating its will to fulfill its responsibilities to the


106 With regard to resource development in the East China Sea, in September 2010, China unilaterally announced postponement of the negotiation to conclude an international agreement with Japan for
implementing the so-called “June 2008 Agreement.” While the negotiation has not been resumed yet, it is pointed out that China is highly likely carrying out gas production in the Kashi gas field (Tianwaitian
in Chinese) and elsewhere. Meanwhile, China’s SOA announced that the “Haiyangshiyou 981” oil rig succeeded in its first drilling in the South China Sea in May 2012.

107 China is reportedly constructing a large-scale naval base that has underground tunnels for nuclear-powered submarines in the city of Sanya located in the southern tip of Hainan island. Experts point out that
the base is in a strategically important location that secures access to the South China Sea as well as the western Pacific, and that China is advancing construction work in order for the base to play a role as
a major hub of the South Sea Fleet, including for the deployment of aircraft carrier.

108 It is pointed out that, in recent years, China aims to limit military activities of other countries in coastal areas of China’s EEZs by employing its own interpretations of the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS). For instance, the Chinese government announced in a statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on November 26, 2010 that it is opposed to unsanctioned military activities by any country in coastal
areas of China’s EEZs.

109 Since 2008, Japanese and Chinese defense authorities have conducted three rounds of consultations. In June 2012, the two sides agreed to hold regular meetings, set up a hotline, and establish a “maritime
communication mechanism” to allow for direct communication between vessels and aircraft. The purpose was to deepen mutual understanding and mutual trust, strengthen defense cooperation, avoid
unexpected incidents, and prevent unexpected situations at sea and in airspace from developing into military confrontations or political issues. At the fourth Joint Working Group meeting, the two sides agreed
to change the name of the mechanism to “Maritime and Air Communication Mechanism” to clarify that aircraft are included. At the fifth Joint Working Group meeting, the two sides agreed to accelerate the
related preparatory work to begin the implementation of the Mechanism.

110 This was the first Japan-China Defense Ministerial Meeting in four years and five months. At the meeting, Minister of Defense Nakatani looked forward to developing a good environment for enhancing the
bilateral relations through collaboration between defense authorities and promotion of defense exchanges. In addition, the Minister stated his views regarding the issues between Japan and China and held a
candid exchange of views. The two ministers affirmed the importance of deepening Japan-China defense exchanges to strengthen their relations, including swiftly beginning the implementation of the Maritime
and Air Communication Mechanism between their defense authorities.

111 The first measure concerns mutual notification of military activities, and the second measure concerns rules of behavior to avoid incidents at sea and in airspace.l


-----

international community.
China vows to consistently support and actively
participate in U.N. PKOs. According to the Ministry
of National Defense of China, it has sent more than
351,000 military personnel to them. According to the
U.N., as of late April 2016, China has contributed a total
of 3,042 troop personnel, police officers, and military
observers to U.N. PKOs,[113] including UNMISS,[114] and
has significantly increased its share of the PKO budget.[115]
In this manner, China has actively made personnel and
financial contributions and has a growing presence in
U.N. PKO. It is deemed that partly underlying China’s
proactive attitude towards U.N. PKOs is China’s wish
to strengthen its relations with the regions where PKOs
are conducted, particular with African nations, by way of
these activities.
Since December 2008, the Chinese Navy has
conducted its first mission in distant waters, dispatching
vessels to the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of Aden in
order to escort Chinese and other ships. The Chinese
Navy is hence improving its capacity to continuously
execute naval operations in more distant waters,
demonstrating that China is placing a greater emphasis
on protecting its sea lanes of transportation. China has
reached an agreement with Djibouti, a country facing
the Gulf of Aden, to build facilities there for providing
logistics support to its military forces. China also
supports the construction of port infrastructure in Indian
Ocean countries. In this regard, the Chinese Navy could
further build up its capabilities to conduct operations in
the Indian Ocean and other distant waters.
In view of the deteriorating situation in Libya, China
carried out an evacuation operation of Chinese nationals
from the country from February through March 2011. In
this operation, China dispatched a Navy vessel and Air
Force transportation aircraft to Libya. This is the military’s
first participation in an evacuation operation of Chinese
nationals living overseas. In addition, from November
to December 2013, China dispatched a hospital ship
to conduct medical relief activities in the Philippines.
From March to September 2014, China dispatched a
Navy vessel, Air Force transport aircraft, among other
assets for the search of the Malaysian airliner that went


missing in March 2014. In December 2014, a Chinese
Navy vessel helped supply water in Malé, the capital city
of the Maldives. In response to the Ebola virus disease
outbreak in West Africa, China provided assistance to
Sierra Leone and Liberia centered on medical assistance,
including the dispatch of units to help fight Ebola. From
March to April 2015, based on the worsening situation in
Yemen, the Chinese Navy’s counter-piracy forces docked
at the ports of Aden, Al Hudaydah, and elsewhere for the
evacuation of Chinese nationals and foreign nationals,
including one Japanese national, living in Yemen. China’s
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief activities have
received international praise. It has been pointed out,
however, that through such activities, China aims to build
a pacifist and humanitarian image of its military forces
and demonstrate, both domestically and internationally,
its intent to place priority on military operations other
than war. It is also suggested that China hopes to test its
ability to project its military power to distant locations.

- 7  Education and Training


In recent years, the PLA has conducted practical
exercises including large-scale exercises such as joint
exercises of the Army, Navy, and Air Force, confrontation
exercises, landing exercises, and exercises that cut across
military regions, as well as night-time exercises and joint
exercises with other countries in order to strengthen
its operational capabilities. The goal of “being able to
fight and winning battles” was repeatedly mentioned in
statements by General Secretary Xi Jinping as well as
in the military training instructions given by the general
staff. This is construed as evidence that the military is
promoting implementation of more practical exercises.[116]
The whole PLA military training conference in 2006
emphasized promotion of a shift from military training
under the conditions of mechanization to military
training under the conditions of informatization. The new
Outline of Military Training and Evaluation, in effect
since 2009, highlights training for military operations
other than war (MOOTW), education in knowledge and
expertise required for informatization, simulated training
of high-tech weapons and equipment, network training,


113 According to media reports, a total of ten Chinese officers and soldiers have been killed in the line of duty while carrying out U.N. PKO missions as of April 2016. In May 2016, a Chinese U.N. PKO unit that was
deployed to Mali was attacked by Islamic extremists, killing one and wounding five officers and soldiers.

114 In September 2014, China’s State Council and CMC decided to deploy 700 infantry personnel to South Sudan. From January to March 2015, China’s first U.N. PKO operational units arrived in South Sudan.
115 China’s share of the U.N. PKO budget was approximately 6.6% in FY2015, ranking it sixth. China’s share then increased significantly to approximately 10.2% in FY2016, exceeding Japan and ranking China
second after the United States.

116 The 2015 military training instructions continued to promote practical trainings. They pursued the realization of military governance based on law, showing that the “rule of law” element presented at the fourth l


-----

and training in complex electromagnetic environments
where electronic interference occurs, in addition to joint
exercises by different services.
In the education spectrum, the PLA aims to develop
military personnel versed in science and technology.
In 2003, it launched a human resource strategy project
to develop human resources capable of directing joint
operations/ informatized operations and of building
informatized armed forces. The project has a goal of
achieving a big leap in the development of military
personnel to 2020. In recent years, the PLA appears to
be increasing its wage standards. It is believed that its
objective is to secure highly capable human resources.
On the other hand, in recent years, a variety of issues
have been raised in relation to benefits, including
remuneration, the personnel development system, and the
treatment of veterans.[117]
China has been developing a mobilization system to
make effective use of civilian resources in the case of war
and other emergencies. In February 2010, China enacted
the National Defense Mobilization Law, which is the
basic law for wartime mobilization, and in July of the
same year, put the law into effect.
China outlined the promotion of “rule of law” at the
fourth plenary session of the 18th CCP Central Committee
in 2014 and is proceeding to develop various related laws.
In November 2014, China revised the existing National
Security Law and enacted the Anti-Spy Law to strengthen
the domestic espionage prevention mechanisms, and the
law entered into force on the same day. Following this,
in July 2015, a new National Security Law was enacted
that covers not only security from external threats, but a
comprehensive range of national security areas including
stability, security, and development. In December
2015, China passed the Anti-Terrorism Law, which will
strengthen state control, and this law entered into force
on January 1, 2016. Attention will be paid to how the
security-related legislation will be implemented.



- 8  National Defense Industry Sector

While China imports highly sophisticated military
equipment and parts that it cannot produce domestically
from other countries such as Russia, China is believed
to place emphasis on their indigenous production. The
country manufactures much of its military equipment
domestically and actively carries out R&D of new
equipment. China’s national defense industry sector
appears to be making advances due to the improvement of
private industry infrastructures accompanying economic
growth, use of dual technologies, the absorption of
foreign technologies, as well as its own efforts. The
sector serves the role of supporting the strengthening of
Chinese military forces.[118]
Growth in the Chinese defense industry was once
hindered by inefficiency caused by excessive secrecy
and other factors. However, in recent years, reform of
the defense industry has progressed. Under the State
Administration of Science, Technology and Industry for
National Defense (SASTIND) of the Ministry of Industry
and Information Technology, a department of the State
Council, China has formed ten corporations to develop
and produce nuclear weapons, missiles, rockets, aircraft,
vessels, and other conventional weapons. In doing so,
China promotes, in particular, two-way technological
exchanges where military technologies are utilized for
developing the national economy, and, in turn, civilian
technologies are absorbed for a buildup of national
defense. As a result, specifically, the technologies of the
defense industry have contributed to the development of
civilian space exploration, the aviation industry, and the
shipbuilding industry.
Furthermore, China encourages and supports
international cooperation and competition in dualuse industries. China is thus thought to have interest
in absorbing foreign technologies through dual-use
industries.


117 The report “China’s Incomplete Military Transformation” (February 2015) by the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission and the RAND Corporation identifies the weaknesses of the PLA as the
following: (1) organizational structure (e.g., party-military relations); (2) organizational culture (e.g., corruption); (3) force structure (size of the PLA, recruitment system, veteran’s benefits); (4) command structure
(e.g. military regions); and (5) human capital (e.g. decline in the quality and mindset of new soldiers stemming from the one-child policy, etc.).

118 The U.S. DoD’s “Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China” (May 2015) states that China’s advanced technology acquisition strategy continues to


-----

**3 Relations with Other Countries**



- 1  General Situation

China, particularly over maritime issues where its interests
confl ict with others’, continues to act in an assertive
manner, including attempting to change the status quo
by coercion. China is poised to fulfi ll its unilateral
demands without compromise, which has included
making steady efforts to turn this status quo into a fait
accompli. In addition, China has acted to create its unique
international order. In May 2014, President Xi Jinping
criticized military alliances and proposed “the security of
Asia by the people of Asia” at the CICA. Furthermore,
China has proposed to build a “New Model of MajorCountry Relations” with the United States,[119] and calls
on the United States to respect China’s “core interests.”
Some have speculated that through this concept, China
attempts to have the United States accept the partitioning
of U.S. and Chinese interests in the Asia-Pacifi c. On the
other hand, China recognizes that a peaceful and stable
international environment is necessary for maintaining
sustainable economic development and enhancing China’s
overall national power. Based on such recognition, in
its relationships with other countries, China proactively
carries out military exchanges including reciprocal visits
by senior military offi cials and joint military exercises. In
recent years, China has been engaged in dynamic military
exchanges not only with major powers such as the United
States and Russia and with its neighboring countries
including Southeast Asian countries, but also with
countries in Africa and Latin America. At the same time,
the objectives of China’s promotion of military exchanges
are thought to include alleviating other countries’ concerns
regarding China by strengthening its relations with these
countries, creating a favorable security environment for
China, enhancing China’s infl uence in the international
community, securing stable supplies of natural resources
and energy, and building foreign bases. China is believed
to consider military exchanges as a strategic means to
safeguard its national interests, and as such, to position
military exchanges as an element in China’s overall
diplomatic strategy. Moreover, China has set forth the
“One Belt, One Road” concept[120] as its foreign policy. In


the international fi nance domain, China plays a leading
role in the establishment of the New Development Bank
(BRICS Development Bank) and AIIB.

- 2  Relations with Taiwan


China upholds the principle that Taiwan is a part of China,
and that the Taiwan issue is therefore a domestic issue.
The country maintains that the “one-China” principle is
the underlying premise and foundation for discussions
between China and Taiwan. China also claims that it
would never abandon its efforts for peaceful unifi cation,
and expresses that it would take up policies and measures
to solve issues of Taiwanese people’s interest and to
protect their due authority. Meanwhile, China is strongly
opposed to any foreign intervention in the unifi cation of
China as well as any move towards the independence of
Taiwan, and on this basis, has repeatedly stated that it
has not renounced the use of force. The Anti-Secession
Law, enacted in March 2005, clearly lays out the nonrenunciation of the use of military force by China.[121]
Former President Ma Ying-jeou (Kuomintang)
of Taiwan advocated a policy of pursuing Taiwanese
economic development by expanding economic
exchanges with China and maintaining the status quo
rather than gaining independence. As a result, the
bilateral relationship deepened primarily along the
economic realm, which included the entry into force
of the Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement
(ECFA). In February 2014, the Minister of the Taiwan
Affairs Offi ce of the State Council of China and the
Minister of the Mainland Affairs Council of Taiwan held
the fi rst ministerial meeting between China and Taiwan
in Nanjing. In November 2015, President Xi Jinping
and President Ma Ying-jeou held the fi rst China-Taiwan
summit meeting since the two have split. Nevertheless,
Tsai Ing-wen (Democratic Progressive Party) won a
landslide victory over Zhu Lilun (Kuomintang) in the
presidential election in January 2016. Furthermore, DPP
won a sweeping victory in the Legislative Yuan elections
held on the same day. The inauguration of the DPP


119 “New Model of Major-Country Relations” dates back to 2012, when then Vice President Xi Jinping visited the United States and utilized the term during his talks with President Obama. China explains that the
concept is based on: (1) no confl ict, no-confrontation; (2) mutual respect; and (3) win-win cooperation.

120 According to an announcement by China’s National Development and Reform Commission, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Ministry of Commerce (March 2015), the “One Belt, One Road” concept is a Chinese
initiative designed to establish a contemporary silk road, and is a collective term for the “Silk Road Economic Belt” (“One Belt”) and the “21st Century Maritime Silk Road” (“One Road”) that President Xi Jinping
announced in succession from September to October 2013. The priority areas are: (1) policy coordination; (2) facilities connectivity; (3) unimpeded trade; (4) fi nancial integration; and (5) people-to-people bond.

121 The law stipulates, “[in] the event that the ‘Taiwan independence’ secessionist forces should act under any name or by any means to cause the fact of Taiwan’s secession from China, or that major incidents
entailing Taiwan’s secession from China should occur, or that possibilities for a peaceful reunifi cation should be completely exhausted, the state shall employ non-peaceful means and other necessary measures


-----

government led by new President Tsai Ing-wen in May
2016 may have implications on China-Taiwan relations.
On the security front, while China urges that the two
make contact and hold exchanges over military issues
at an appropriate time in order to explore the creation
of mechanisms for building mutual trust over military
security, Taiwan has shown a cautious stance, stating that
the conditions are not yet met.[122] Regarding the Senkaku
Islands, China and Taiwan have their own assertions,[123]
and Taiwan has expressed reluctance to work with China.
Attention will be paid to the developments related to
future China-Taiwan relations, including the trends of
political dialogues on military and other affairs.

- 3  Relations with the United States


relationship exactly entails.[126]
Regarding the Senkaku Islands, the United States has
reiterated that the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty applies to
the islands.[127] China protested, stating that it would never
accept any word or deed that includes the islands within
the scope of the treaty (statement by a spokesperson
of China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 2010). With
regard to the issues over the South China Sea, the United
States is concerned about such dimensions as obstruction
to the freedom of navigation in maritime transport
routes, restrictions on the activities of U.S. Forces, and
the worsening security situation in the entire region.
The United States has requested China to comply with
international norms, and has repeatedly criticized China’s
unilateral and assertive actions.[128] The United States
implements the Freedom of Navigation Operation[129] in
the South China Sea to counteract excessive claims to
maritime interests by China and other countries.
China and the United States have deepened military
exchanges and conducted various policy dialogues. China
has dispatched observers to U.S. military exercises, and
joint drills have been conducted between the Chinese
and U.S. navies on mutual port visits. A military hotline
between the defense departments of the two countries
was set up in April 2008. In November 2013, the U.S.
and Chinese armies conducted a humanitarian assistance
and disaster relief exercise. In addition, from June 2014,
Chinese navy vessels participated in the Rim of the Pacific
Exercise (RIMPAC) for the first time. However, while
China wishes to develop relations between the Chinese
and U.S. militaries, it asserts that there are a number of
issues that must be resolved in order to realize the sound
development of the relations. The issues include U.S.
arms sales to Taiwan, activities of U.S. military vessels
and aircraft within China’s EEZs, legal hurdles in mutual
military exchanges, and a lack of strategic trust in China
on the part of the United States.[130] Some unstable facets
have been observed in military exchanges of the two


There are various outstanding issues between the United
States and China, such as human rights in China, the
Taiwan issue, and trade issues. However, since a stable
U.S.-China relationship is essential for China to develop
its economy, it is believed that China will continue to
aspire to maintain stable relations with the United States.
The United States states that it welcomes the rise of
a stable, peaceful, and prosperous China, and that it will
continue to further deepen cooperative relations between
the two countries. At the same time, the United States
calls on China to uphold international rules and norms on
global issues, including maritime security, international
trade, and human rights, and states that it would continue
to closely monitor China’s military modernization and
expanding presence in Asia.[124] Furthermore, the United
States sees China as one of the “revisionist states” that
are challenging international norms, and perceives that
it poses serious security concerns.[125] Conversely, China
seeks to establish what it calls a “New Model of MajorCountry Relations” based on mutual respect and “winwin” cooperation. However, the United States and China
have not necessarily reached a consensus on what this


122 For China’s stance, see the remarks made by then CCP General Secretary Hu Jintao at the discussion on December 31, 2008, commemorating the 30th anniversary of the announcement of the Message to
Compatriots in Taiwan. For Taiwan’s stance, see the QDR released by the Ministry of National Defense of Taiwan on March 13, 2013.

123 Taiwanese authority vessels intruded into Japan’s territorial waters near the Senkaku Islands three times in 2012.
124 U.S. National Security Strategy (February 2015).
125 U.S. National Military Strategy (July 2015).
126 The United States is cautious on the concept of the “(New Model of) Major-Country Relations” that describes the United States and China as having an “equal” and “special” relationship. The United States has
shown intent not to utilize the term “core interests” and align itself with China’s unilateral assertions.

127 In April 2014, President Obama became the first U.S. President in history to clearly state that Article 5 of the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty applied to the Senkaku Islands.
128 See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 3, Footnote 91.
129 As part of the Freedom of Navigation Operation of the U.S. Forces, U.S. Navy vessel USS Lassen sailed within 12 nautical miles of Subi Reef of the Spratly Islands in October 2015. The U.S. Navy vessel USS
Curtis Wilbur sailed within 12 nautical miles of Triton Island of the Paracel Islands in January 2016. The U.S. Navy vessel USS William P. Lawrence sailed within 12 nautical miles of Fiery Cross Reef of the Spratly
Islands in May 2016.

130 According to remarks by then CMC Vice Chairman Xu Caihou in a meeting with then U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates (October 2009). Then Deputy Chief of the PLA General Staff Department Ma
Xiaotian stated at the 11th round of the U.S.-China Defense Consultative Talks held in December 2010 that U.S. arms sales to Taiwan, U.S. laws that impose restrictions on contacts between the military
forces of the two countries, and the frequent military reconnaissance operations conducted by U.S. naval vessels and aircraft in coastal areas of China’s EEZs constituted key obstacles to developing stable


-----

countries.[131] For example, China notified suspensions
of the major military exchanges with the United States
when the U.S. DoD notified Congress of possible arms
sales to Taiwan in October 2008 and January 2010. On
the other hand, the United States asserts that U.S.-China
relations must be undergirded by a process of enhancing
confidence and reducing misunderstanding. With regard
to military exchanges, it is believed that the aim of the
United States is to improve the current situation, wherein
such exchanges are frequently suspended once problems
arise, and to build relations that are capable of maintaining
more stable channels of decision-making for mutual
understanding. In recent years, for instance, Strategic
Security Dialogues have been established in 2011 in the
U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue,[132] and
these dialogues have been held annually. In addition, in
November 2014 and September 2015, it was announced
that an agreement was reached on confidence-building
measures aimed at lowering the risk of unintended
encounters between the United States and China.[133]

- 4  Relations with Russia


years due to the advancement of indigenous weapon
production in China. However, it is suggested that China
has shown strong interest in continuing to import Russia’s
advanced equipment. For example, in November 2015,
China reportedly signed an agreement with a Russian
state-run military company to purchase 24 Su-35 fighters,
which are considered 4.5-generation fighters. It is also
suggested that an agreement was reached between China
and Russia regarding the import of the S-400 surface-toair missile system.[136] At the same time, it is pointed out
that Russia, which shares a land border with China, has a
policy of not supplying sophisticated weapons to China
that would cause a threat to Russia and of differentiating
the performance of the weapons it exports. It is also
suggested that Russia has concerns about competing with
China in arms exports. China and Ukraine have deep ties
in the field of arms procurement, as indicated by China’s
purchase of the Ukrainian unfinished Kuznetsov-class
aircraft carrier Varyag, which became the basis of the
aircraft carrier Liaoning. In this regard, attention will also
be paid to the situation in Ukraine.
Military exchanges between China and Russia take
place in such forms as routine mutual visits by senior
military officers and joint exercises. For example, the


Ever since the China-Soviet confrontation ended in
1989, China and Russia have placed importance on
their bilateral relationship. They have emphasized the
deepening of their “strategic partnership” since its
establishment in the mid-1990s. In 2001, the ChinaRussia Treaty of Good-Neighborliness and Friendly
Cooperation[134] was concluded. In 2004, the long-standing
issue of border demarcation between the two countries
came to a settlement. The two countries have a common
view on promoting the multipolarization of the world and
the establishment of a new international order, and have
further deepened their relations.
On the military front, since the 1990s, China has
purchased modern weapons from Russia, including
fighters, destroyers, and submarines. Russia is currently
the largest supplier of weapons to China.[135] Meanwhile,
their trade amounts are said to be declining in recent


131 When the U.S. DoD notified Congress of possible arms sales to Taiwan in December 2015, while China expressed strong opposition, no major military exchanges between China and the United States
were cancelled.

132 At the eighth U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue held in June 2016, talks took place regarding topics such as the issues of the South China Sea, North Korea’s nuclear development, investment
agreement, and excessive production of steel.

133 See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 3-2-5(6).
134 Regarding the military field, this treaty mentions military confidence building or strengthening of mutual troop reductions in border areas, military cooperation such as military technical cooperation, and holding
discussions in the event that there is awareness of any threat to peace.

135 According to SIPRI, Russia accounts for 59% of China’s arms exports from 2011 to 2015.
136 It is suggested that China is plagiarizing, copying, and reverse-engineering military science technologies, including redesigning its own J-11B fighter based on the Russian-made Su-27 fighter. Feeling strong
discontent and casting doubts over China, it is suggested that Russia is cautious about supplying state-of-the-art equipment to China, such as the Su-35 fighter and the S-400 surface-to-air missile. For
example, Russia has allegedly requested that the agreement regarding the supply of Su-35 fighters requires the payment of a vast amount of compensation if China copies and produces the fighter. It has also


-----

two countries have held the large-scale naval combined
exercise Joint Sea every year since 2012.[137] These
exchanges will likely enable China to not only deepen
mutual understanding and confidence-building between
their militaries, but also learn about the operation methods
of Russian-made weapons and the operational doctrine
of the Russian Armed Forces. Furthermore, China holds
the counter-terrorism combined exercise Peace Mission
among China and Russia or among the member countries
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) that
includes China and Russia.[138] While counter-terrorism
is the purpose of these exercises, they have dimensions
of practical military exercises. For example, fighters
and attack UAVs participated in Peace Mission 2014
conducted in August 2014. With the leaders and military
forces of both countries participating in their respective
commemorative events for the 70th anniversary of war
victories in 2015, the two countries continue to enjoy
good military relations.[139]

- 5  Relations with Other Countries


including Scarborough Shoal and Second Thomas Shoal,
in accordance with UNCLOS.[141] In July 2016, a final
ruling was rendered in which nearly all of the Philippines’
submissions were ruled in favor of the Philippines. China
has said it will not accept the ruling, and attention needs
to be paid to forthcoming developments.
China is actively involved in multilateral frameworks
such as ASEAN Plus One (China), ASEAN Plus Three
(Japan, China and the ROK), and the ASEAN Regional
Forum (ARF). In October 2013, President Xi Jinping
visited Indonesia and Malaysia, and Premier Li Keqiang
visited Brunei, Thailand and Vietnam. While China has
deepened its economic and cultural cooperation with
ASEAN member states through diplomatic forums, more
recently, it has proactively advanced cooperation in the
area of national security by enhancing exchanges of
military personnel such as mutual visits of their senior
military officials and exchanges and cooperation between
military departments.

**(2) Relations with Central Asian Countries**
The Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, located in the
western part of China, is situated next to Central Asia.
It shares borders with the three countries of Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan. It has ethnic minorities
settled in the areas straddling borders, and there are
lively exchanges between the people of those countries.
Therefore, China is deeply concerned about the political
stability and security situations in Central Asian states
such as terrorism by Islamic extremists. Such concerns
of China appear to be reflected in China’s engagement
in SCO, which was established in June 2001. Moreover,
China is strongly interested in the abundant energy
and natural resources of Central Asia, with a view to
diversifying its supply source and procurement methods
of these resources. China promotes cooperation in the
energy field with Central Asian countries, such as the
construction of oil and natural gas pipelines between
China and Central Asian nations.


**(1) Relations with Southeast Asian Countries**
As for its relations with countries in Southeast Asia,
China has continuously developed bilateral relations with
the countries through active mutual top-level visits and
other means. For example, China has had good relations
with Myanmar and has assisted in developing Myanmar’s
infrastructure such as pipelines for petroleum or natural
gas, ports, and railroads. It also has supplied key military
equipment. Some point out that this close relationship
is associated with Myanmar’s location which provides
China the shortest access to the Indian Ocean.[140]
Meanwhile, some ASEAN countries have shown
alarm over China’s advancements in the South China
Sea. For example, China’s drilling in the oil and gas
fields in the Paracel Islands in May 2014 has escalated
tension between China and Vietnam. In addition, the
Philippines has instituted arbitral proceedings against
China regarding their disputes over the South China Sea,


137 The Joint Sea exercise was held in April 2012, July 2013, May 2014, and May and August 2015 in the Yellow Sea, the Sea of Japan off the coast of Vladivostok, northern East China Sea, the Mediterranean
Sea, and the Peter the Great Gulf, respectively. It is suggested that Joint Sea in 2016 will be held in the South China Sea.

138 The Peace Mission exercise was held among China and Russia in August 2005, July 2009, and July to August 2013, and among the SCO member countries including China and Russia in August 2007,
September 2010, June 2012, and August 2014.

139 President Xi Jinping attended the commemorative event for the 70th anniversary of victory day held in Moscow in May 2015, and the PLA participated in the military parade. President Putin attended the
“commemorative event for the 70th anniversary of the victory of the Chinese people’s war of resistance against Japanese aggression” held in Beijing in September 2015, and the Russian Armed Forces
participated in the military parade.

140 Some observers also believe that Myanmar is attempting to end its excessive dependence on China in terms of diplomacy.


-----

**(3) Relations with South Asian Countries**
China has traditionally maintained a particularly close
relationship with Pakistan, and mutual visits by their
leaders take place frequently.[142] Their cooperation in
the military sector, including exporting weapons and
transferring military technology, is also considered to be
deepening. As the importance of sea lanes increases for
the globalizing Chinese economy, it is believed that the
importance of Pakistan is rising for China, partly because
of the geopolitical features of Pakistan which faces the
Indian Ocean.
China and India have undemarcated areas,[143] and
it is deemed that “problems” over this area have arisen
between the two countries even in recent years.[144] On
the other hand, China has recently striven to improve its
relationship with India, while also paying consideration
to maintaining balance with Pakistan. Identifying China’s
relationship with India as a strategic partnership, the
leaders of the two countries actively conduct mutual
visits. It is believed that the deepening of bilateral
relations is attributed to the importance China places on
the economic growth of both countries as well as China’s
response to strengthening U.S.-India relations.
In recent years, China has also been deepening
its relations with Sri Lanka. China constructed a deep
sea port in Hambantota. In addition, the Chinese and
Sri Lankan governments are jointly carrying out a
port city development project in Sri Lanka’s major
city of Colombo. Initially after taking office, President
Maithripala Sirisena, who had campaigned to shift from
a diplomacy oriented towards China to a diplomacy
oriented towards all countries and won the election in
January 2015, suspended infrastructure development
projects financed by China. Subsequently, however, it
has been confirmed that Sri Lanka is moving to resume
these projects. Furthermore, it has been suggested that
Sri Lanka is considering withdrawing its policy to
ban Chinese submarines from making port calls as the
President had initially announced.
Additionally, China is deepening its relations
with Bangladesh, such as by developing the harbor in


Chittagong where a naval base is located and exporting
arms.[145] With regard to military exchanges, China has
conducted a variety of joint exercises with Pakistan and
India since 2003, including joint naval search and rescue
exercises and counter-terrorism exercises.

**(4) Relations with EU Countries**
For China, the European Union (EU) countries are now
as important a partner as Japan and the United States,
especially in the economic field. China, through diplomatic
opportunities, strongly requests EU countries to lift their
arms embargoes against China which have been imposed
since the Tiananmen Square incident in 1989.[146]
Regarding information technology, avionics, and
AIP systems for submarines and other areas, EU member
countries possess more advanced technologies than China
or Russia which exports weapons to China. Therefore, if
the EU arms embargo on China were lifted, the weapons
and military technologies of EU countries would transfer
to China and would be utilized as a bargaining chip to
gain the edge in weapons transactions with Russia. For
this reason, Japan has consistently expressed to the EU
its objection to the lifting of the arms embargo on China,
as well as requested EU member states to carry out more
rigorous management of the exports of arms, dual-use
goods, and their technologies to China. Continuous
attention will need to be paid to future discussions within
the EU.


**(5) Relations with Middle East and African Countries, Pacific**
**Islands, and Central and South American Countries**

China has been enhancing its relations with Middle Eastern
and African nations in the economic realm, including
providing active assistance for their infrastructure
development and investment in their resource and
energy development, and has been further expanding
its influence in the region. In recent years, not only
interactions among state leaders[147] and senior military
officials but also arms exports and exchanges between
military forces are actively conducted.[148] Underlying
these moves could be China’s aim to ensure a stable


142 In April 2015, Xi Jinping made the first official visit to Pakistan by a Chinese President in nearly nine years. During the summit meeting, Xi Jinping underscored China’s intention to build a China-Pakistan
Economic Corridor (CPEC) and strengthen their security cooperation. China identifies CPEC, a ground transport route that starts from the port of Gwadar in Pakistan, as a flagship project of the “One Belt, One
Road” initiative, and announced that China would invest US$46 billion in CPEC.

143 They include the Kashmir region and the state of Arunachal Pradesh.
144 According to a press conference by the spokesperson of the Ministry of National Defense of China in August 2013. In September 2014, when President Xi Jinping visited India, Prime Minister Modi expressed
concern over the PLA’s cross-border activities in the Kashmir region and underscored the need for the resolution of the issue.

145 According to SIPRI, Bangladesh accounts for 20% of China’s arms exports from 2011 to 2015, which is the second largest share. For example, in December 2015, two Jiangdao-class light frigates were sold
from China to Bangladesh.

146 For example, in November 2010, then Chinese President Hu Jintao visited France, and on this occasion, China and France announced a joint statement that included text supporting the lifting of the arms
embargoes against China. It is deemed that some EU countries have positive opinions about the lifting of their arms embargoes against China.

147 In January 2016, President Xi Jinping visited Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Iran, and announced economic assistance of about 6.3 trillion yen for the Middle East.


-----

supply of energy and natural resources and to secure
overseas hubs in the future.[149] China has strengthened its
engagement in the region, actively sending personnel to
U.N. PKO missions in Africa and holding the Forum on
China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) Summit in Africa
for the fi rst time in December 2015.
As regards China-Australia relations, a Chinese
company’s agreement with the Northern Territory
government of Australia to lease Darwin Port has raised
debates over security.[150] China has also been boosting its
relations with the Pacifi c islands. It has been developing
oil, natural gas, and cobalt mines in Papua New Guinea
and has signed an agreement on military cooperation
with the country. Proactive and continuous economic
assistance has also been implemented in other islands.
Furthermore, military exchanges are being promoted
with Fiji and Tonga.[151]
China has striven to further deepen its relations with
Central and South American countries. Chinese senior
military offi cials have continuously visited countries,
such as Argentina and Brazil. In 2011, the Chinese Navy’s
hospital ship conducted a medical service mission in this
region. In January 2015, China and the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) held
their fi rst ministerial meeting.

**4** **[Military Capabilities of Taiwan]**


- 1  Relations with China



- 6  International Transfer of Weapons

China’s arms export total has surpassed its arms import
total since 2010. China has expanded provision of
weapons such as small arms, tanks, and aircraft to
developing countries in Asia, Africa, and other areas.
Specifi cally, it is reported that the main recipients are
Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Myanmar, while weapons are
also being exported to African countries such as Algeria,
Nigeria, Sudan, Tanzania, Ghana, and Kenya, to Central
and South American countries including Venezuela, and
to Middle Eastern countries such as Iraq and Iran. Some
experts claim that China transfers weapons in order to
strengthen its strategic relationships with allies, enhance
its infl uence in the international community, and secure
energy and natural resources. Some observers point out
that China supplies weapons to countries that struggle
with democracy or have human rights problems.[152]

Attention will be paid to whether China will increase
the transparency of international weapons transfer in
response to the concerns of the international community.


crushing defeat to the Democratic Progressive Party in
the nine-in-one local elections in November 2014.
Against this backdrop, in November 2015, President
Ma Ying-jeou and President Xi Jinping held the fi rst
Taiwan-China summit meeting since Taiwan and China
split. Both leaders reaffi rmed the “one-China” principle
and agreed to establish a ministerial-level hotline. The
Taiwanese people had a generally positive response to the
meeting, according to a public opinion poll conducted by
a Taiwanese media company.[153]
Nevertheless, the meeting did not increase support for
the ruling Kuomintang party. In the presidential election


Under President Ma Ying-jeou, based on the basic policy
of “no unifi cation, no independence, and no use of
force,” Taiwan has made clear that it would not advocate
independence and has adopted a collaborative stance
towards China. In particular, Taiwan and China have
deepened their economic relations.
However, from March to April 2014, students against
the approval of the Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement
staged the Sunfl ower Student Movement and occupied
the Legislative Yuan. Amid rising dissatisfaction with
the government, the ruling party Kuomintang suffered a


149 China has reached an agreement with Djibouti, a country facing the Gulf of Aden, to build facilities there for providing logistics support to its military forces.
150 In November 2015, at the U.S.-Australia summit meeting in Manila, U.S. President Obama reportedly told his counterpart that the United States would have liked a “heads up” about Australia’s lease of Darwin
Port to a Chinese company and to “Let us know next time.”

151 From August to September 2014, China’s hospital ship conducted the medical service mission Harmonious Mission 2014, offering services in Tonga, Fiji, Vanuatu, and Papua New Guinea.
152 It has been confi rmed that Chinese-made equipment (FN-6 portable air defense missile system) were among the weapons utilized by ISIL.
153 According to a public opinion poll conducted by one of the major television broadcasters in Taiwan, TVBS, around 41% of the respondents “supported” and around 28% “did not support” the meeting between


-----

held in January 2016, Tsai Ing-wen, Chairperson of the
Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), won a landslide
victory over Zhu Lilun of Kuomintang and was elected
the new President. In the Legislative Yuan elections held
on the same day, whereas Kuomintang took no more than
35 seats, DPP won 68 seats, gaining more than a majority
of the seats, to clinch a victory.
With regard to Taiwan-China relations, new
President Tsai Ing-wen, who took office on May 20,
adopts the position that Taiwan will “work to maintain
peace and stability in cross-Strait relations.” However,
she has not outlined a clear stance regarding the “1992
Consensus,”[154] which positions China as the political
foundation of cross-Strait relations.[155] Attention will paid
to how Taiwan-China relations evolve under the new
administration led by President Tsai Ing-wen.

- 2  Military Capabilities of Taiwan


With regard to Taiwan’s military power, at present,
ground forces, including the Navy Marine Corps, have a
total of approximately 215,000 personnel. It is believed
that approximately 1.66 million reserve personnel of the
air, naval, and ground forces would be available in case
of war. Regarding naval capabilities, in addition to Kiddclass destroyers which were imported from the United
States, Taiwan possesses relatively modern frigates
and other vessels. Regarding air capabilities, Taiwan
possesses F-16 A/B fighters, Mirage 2000 fighters,
Ching-kuo fighters, among other assets.

- 3  Military Balance between China and Taiwan


While China has continued to increase its defense budget
by a significant margin, Taiwan’s defense budget has
remained mostly unchanged for nearly 20 years. As of
2015, China’s announced defense budget was roughly 14
times larger than Taiwan’s defense budget.[156]
While the PLA proceeds to enhance its missile,
naval, and air forces, the Taiwanese military still struggles
to modernize its equipment. The U.S. DoD has notified
Congress of possible arms sales to Taiwan based on the
Taiwan Relations Act.[157] Taiwan wishes to purchase the
F-16C/D fighter,[158] conventional-powered submarine,
and other arms from the United States, and continued
attention needs to be paid to related developments.
Taiwan also promotes the independent development of
military equipment. Tien Kung II surface-to-air missiles,
Hsiung Feng II anti-ship missiles, and Hsiung Feng IIE
surface-to-surface cruise missiles with long-range attack
capabilities are deployed. Additionally, Taiwan is thought
to be developing the Tien Kung III surface-to-air missile
in order to acquire anti-ballistic missile capability.
Furthermore, in order to counter large vessels including
aircraft carriers, Taiwan is moving to induct a new model
of indigenous stealth high-speed missile ships mounted
with Hsiung Feng III supersonic anti-ship missiles.
The military capabilities of China and Taiwan are
generally characterized as follows:


Taiwan, under the policy of building the “hard rock”
defense advocated by President Ma Ying-jeou, has
identified prevention of war, homeland defense, response to
contingencies, deterrence of conflict, and regional stability
as the strategic objectives, and adopted the military strategy
of “resolute defense and credible deterrence.”
Taiwan, for improving the expertise of its military
personnel and other purposes, aimed to transform
its armed forces consisting of drafted personnel and
volunteers into all-volunteer forces, while reducing the
total forces from 275,000 to 215,000 personnel by the
end of 2014. However, in September 2013, the Ministry
of National Defense announced that the transformation
into all-volunteer forces would be postponed until the end
of 2016. At the same time, the Taiwanese armed forces
attribute importance to the introduction of advanced
technologies and improvement of joint operational
capabilities. Additionally, in light of the serious damage
that occurred from the typhoon in August 2009, the
Taiwanese armed forces identify disaster prevention and
relief as one of their major missions.


154 Some say in 1992, the Taiwanese and Chinese liaison institutions for cross-Strait exchanges reached a common recognition affirming the “one-China” principle.
155 On May 20, 2016, new President Tsai Ing-wen stated in her inaugural address: “In 1992, the two institutions representing each side across the Strait (SEF & ARATS), through communication and negotiations,
arrived at various joint acknowledgements and understandings. It was done in a spirit of mutual understanding and a political attitude of seeking common ground while setting aside differences. I respect this
historical fact.”

156 This figure was obtained by comparing China’s announced FY2015 defense budget of approximately 889.6 billion yuan and Taiwan’s announced FY2015 defense budget of approximately 312.8 Taiwan dollars
by converting them into U.S. dollars using the exchange rate for FY2015 released by the Central Bank of Taiwan (US$1 = 6.2264 yuan = 31.898 Taiwan dollars). China’s actual defense budget is reportedly
larger than the amount announced, and therefore, the actual difference in the defense budgets of China and Taiwan could be greater.

157 Recently, the U.S. DoD notified Congress of possible sales to Taiwan of PAC-3 missiles, UH-60 helicopters, Osprey-class mine hunters, and other assets in January 2010, possible arms sales including
equipment necessary to upgrade F-16A/B fighter aircraft in September 2011, and possible sales of two Oliver Hazard Perry-class missile frigates, 36 AAV7 amphibious vehicles, and other assets in December
2015.i


-----

1) Regarding ground forces, while China possesses an
overwhelming number of troops, their capability of
landing on and invading the island of Taiwan is limited
at this point in time. Nevertheless, China is making
efforts to improve its landing and invasion capabilities
in recent years, such as building large landing ships.[159]
2) Regarding naval and air forces, China, which
overwhelms Taiwan in terms of quantity, has also
been steadily strengthening its naval and air forces
in recent years in terms of quality, where Taiwan had
superiority over China.[160]
3) Regarding missile attack capabilities, Taiwan has been
strengthening its ballistic missile defense, including
upgrading PAC-2 to PAC-3 and newly inducting PAC3. China possesses numerous short-range ballistic
missiles and other assets with ranges covering Taiwan
and continues to increase them. Taiwan is deemed to
have few effective countermeasures.


In addition to the size of forces and performance and
quantity of military equipment, a comparison of military
capabilities should take into account various factors
such as the objectives and characteristics of envisioned
military operations, the operational posture, proficiency
in military personnel, and logistics. Nevertheless, as
China is rapidly strengthening its military power, the
overall military balance between China and Taiwan is
shifting in favor of China. Attention must be paid to the
strengthening of both the Chinese and Taiwanese military
capabilities and U.S. weapon sales to Taiwan.

See>> Fig. I-2-3-7 (Changes in Taiwan’s Defense Budget); Fig. I-2-3-8 (Changes
in the Number of Modern Fighter Aircraft of China and Taiwan)

|Fig. I-2-3-7|Changes in Taiwan’s Defense Budget|
|---|---|
|Defense budget (in 100 million Taiwan dollars) (100 million Year-on-year growth rate (%) Taiwan dollars) (%) 4,000 30 3,500 25 3,000 20 2,500 15 2,000 10 1,500 5 1,000 0 500 –5 0 –10 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 (FY) Source: Ministry of National Defense of Taiwan’s “National Defense Reports” and the website of the Directorate-General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics, Executive Yuan||

|Fig. I-2-3-8|Changes in the Number of Modern Fighter Aircraft of China and Taiwan|
|---|---|
|(Number of Aircraft) 850 800 750 China (Su-27/J-11, Su-30, J-10, J-15) 700 650 Taiwan (F-CK-1 (IDF), F-16, Mirage2000) 600 550 500 450 400 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 91 93 95 97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11 12 13 14 15 16 (Year) Source: “The Military Balance” (of respective years)||


159 The Ministry of National Defense of Taiwan states in the 2015 National Defense Report published in October 2015: “The PLA plans to complete the establishment of a formidable military arsenal for conducting
military operations against Taiwan before 2020.”

160 China has 810 fourth-generation fighters, whereas Taiwan has 329. In addition, China has about 70 destroyers and frigates and about 60 submarines, whereas Taiwan has about 30 and 4, respectively.


-----

**Section 4** **Russia**


**1 General Situation**


Under President Vladimir Putin who reassumed offi ce in
May 2012, Russia, having allegedly completed the phase
of reconstruction and strengthening, sets an agenda of
building a rich and prosperous Russia, and at the same
time, attaches importance to becoming an infl uential
power amid a new balance of economic, civilizational,
and military forces.[1]
“The collapse of the Soviet Union was a major
geopolitical disaster of the 20th century.”[2] President
Putin, who made this remark, aims to realize the concept
of the Eurasian Union[3] encompassing the areas of the
former Soviet Union. The President has made clear
Russia’s confrontational stance against the West, noting
that the West is responsible for the crisis in Ukraine, and
that the West exercises infl uence directly or indirectly on
the former Soviet Union countries that Russia considers
are under its sphere of infl uence.[4]
With regard to the situation in Ukraine, marked by an
intensifi cation of tension since February 2014, efforts to
implement the ceasefi re agreement (Minsk Protocol)[5] in
eastern Ukraine have led to a reduction in the intensity of
the fi ghting and to a signifi cant decrease in the number of
confl ict casualties since September 2015. Nevertheless,
no major progress has been made in the political process
such as holding local elections in the areas controlled by
separatists or expanding the local self-government, as
were set out in the Minsk Protocol. The West has alleged
that the Russian Armed Forces (RAF) made a clear direct
intervention in the situation in Ukraine. While Russia is
seen to have attempted to change the status quo by force
or coercion by engaging in “hybrid warfare,” Russia
has continued to assert the legitimacy of its unilateral


actions. The outcomes of these changes have taken on
an aspect of being entrenched, and it is expected that
the international community will make further efforts
to improve the situation.[6] These series of acts by Russia
have led to increased awareness of the threat posed by
Russian “hybrid warfare,” especially in Europe.[7]
In addition, Russia has conducted military
intervention in Syria since September 2015. While
Russia withdrew its major air forces in March 2016, its
swift deployment of military forces to remote areas and
execution of operations for a certain period of time can
be construed as a manifestation of the achievements of
Russia’s series of military reforms. Furthermore, the
display and use of various state-of-the-art equipment
in Syria were likely not unrelated to Russia’s recent
expansion of arms export destinations to not only
the existing countries of India and China, but also to
Southeast Asia, Africa, and Central America and the
Caribbean. Moreover, Russia’s military intervention in
Syria is drawing attention as constituting Russia’s move
to exit its international isolation that resulted from the
Ukrainian crisis and increase its international infl uence.

See>> Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1

At the same time, Russia continues to face a
severe economic situation due to the effects of the
falling prices of crude oil—Russia’s key export—as
well as the depreciation of Russia’s currency the ruble,
and the economic sanctions by the West and other
countries in response to the situation in Ukraine. Since
the collapse of the Soviet Union, Ukraine is believed
to have cooperated on the development of Russia’s
ICBM. It is suggested that the suspension of Ukraine’s


Annual Address to the Federal Assembly by President Putin (December 2012).

Annual Address to the Federal Assembly by President Putin (April 2005).

In an article in the Izvestia dated October 4, 2011, then Prime Minister Putin proposed the creation of a “Eurasian Union” that would strengthen intraregional economic partnerships based on a customs union
and a common economic space.

Annual Address to the Federal Assembly by President Putin (December 2014).

The Minsk Protocol of September 2014 consists of the following items: (1) ensure the immediate bilateral cessation of the use of weapons; (2) ensure monitoring and verifi cation by the Organization for Security
and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) of the regime of non-use of weapons; (3) enact the Law of Ukraine “With respect to the temporary status of local self-government in certain areas of the Donetsk and the
Lugansk regions” (Law on Special Status); (4) ensure monitoring on the Ukrainian-Russian state border and verifi cation by the OSCE, together with the creation of a security area in the border regions of Ukraine
and the Russian Federation; (5) immediately release all hostages and unlawfully detained persons; (6) prohibit the prosecution and punishment of persons in connection with the events that took place in certain
areas of Donetsk and Lugansk regions; (7) conduct an inclusive national dialogue; (8) adopt measures aimed at improving the humanitarian situation in Donbas; (9) ensure the holding of early local elections in
Donetsk and Lugansk regions; (10) remove unlawful military formations, military hardware, as well as militants and mercenaries from the territory of Ukraine; (11) adopt a program for the economic revival of
Donbass and the recovery of economic activity in the region; and (12) provide personal security guarantees for the participants of the consultations.

During a press conference on December 17, 2015, President Putin stated, “We’ve never said there are no people there [in Ukraine] who deal with certain matters, including in the military area, but this does
not mean that regular Russian troops are present there.”
Russia has taken actions which, some suggest, were aimed at maintaining the status quo, such as the announcement of the de facto “completion of the annexation” through the dissolution of the Ministry of Crimean
Affairs in July 2015, a ministry that was established for the economic integration of the Crimean Peninsula, along with the repeated visits to Crimea by President Putin and Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev.

Due to the complex nature of hybrid warfare that combines economic, intelligence operation, and diplomatic aspects, some suggest that the rising threat of hybrid warfare will drive closer cooperation between


-----

technical support following the deterioration of the
bilateral relation could impair the operations of Russian
equipment that rely highly on Ukraine.
Under these circumstances, attention is being paid on
how President Putin, while maintaining his power base,

**2 Security and Defense Policies**


- 1  Basic Posture


will deal with Russia’s diplomatic isolation and economic
hardships, as well as promote economic structural reforms
and measures aimed at the modernization of Russia’s military
forces and its effort to expand international infl uence.[8]

The doctrine continues to regard nuclear weapons
as an essential component for preventing the outbreak
of nuclear wars and wars that use conventional weapons.
It states that Russia will maintain a suffi cient level of
nuclear deterrent capability and reserve the right to use
nuclear weapons in response to an event where nuclear
or other WMDs are used against it or its allies, or under
circumstances wherein conventional weapons are used
against it and where the survival of the country itself is
imperiled.
Furthermore, defending Russian interests in the
Arctic was newly added as one of the military’s tasks
in peacetime.
As for Russia’s defense budget, the FY2016 budget
registered a year-on-year decrease (-1.0%) for the fi rst
time, after the FY2011-FY2015 budgets continued to
record year-on-year double-digit growths. So far, Russia
has given priority to securing its defense budget amid
a severe fi nancial situation. The decreased growth rate
shows Russia’s increasingly severe economic situation,
which is anticipated to have implications including delays
in equipment procurement.

See>> Fig. I-2-4-1 (Changes in Russia’s Defense Budget)[9]


Against the backdrop of foreign policy factors, including the
Ukrainian crisis and the military intervention in Syria, Russia
set out its objectives and strategic priorities of domestic and
foreign policies in the “National Security Strategy of the
Russian Federation” revised in December 2015.
The National Security Strategy construes that Russia
has an increasingly greater role in a multipolarizing
world. The Strategy perceives increased activity of NATO
and expansion of its member states as threats to national
security, and expresses its vigilance against the U.S.
deployment of missile defense (MD) systems to Europe
and the Asia-Pacifi c region for undermining global and
regional stability.
In the defense domain, the Strategy commits to
giving continued priority to the role fulfi lled by Russia’s
military force, and to ensuring strategic deterrence and
preventing military confl ict by maintaining a suffi cient
level of nuclear deterrent capability and the RAF.
The Russian Federation Military Doctrine, revised
in December 2014 as a document substantiating the
principles of the National Security Strategy in the military
sphere, states the existing view that while the probability
of an outbreak of a large-scale war is decreasing, military
risks to Russia are increasing, such as the movement of
NATO’s military infrastructure closer to Russia’s borders
including the expansion of NATO, and the establishment
and deployment of strategic MD systems. In addition,
the doctrine expresses growing alarm, defi ning the
following as new military risks: NATO’s military
buildup; the realization of the U.S. Global Strike concept;
rise of global extremism (terrorism); inauguration of
governments in neighboring countries that carry out
policies Russia’s interests; and the incitement of ethnic,
social, and religious confrontations in Russia.



- 2  Military Reform

Russia has implemented full-scale military reform
since 1997 by presenting the three pillars of reform:
downsizing; modernization; and professionalization.
Moreover, based on the policy statement, “Future
Outlook of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation,”
that was approved by then President Dmitry Medvedev in
September 2008, Russia is advancing measures including
troop reductions, structural reform (from the divisionbased command structure to a brigade-based one[10]),


8 In his campaign platform papers published after January 2012, then Prime Minister Putin listed his policies: to expand the public’s participation in politics; to prevent corruption; to exit the resource-dependent
economy and strengthen domestic industries to modernize the economy; and to develop a middle class that plays a leading role in the society.

9 Russia compiles three-year budgets to plan budgets based on a medium-term outlook. For the FY2016 budget, however, Russia shifted to a single-year budget planning due to the diffi culties of forecasting the
economic situation. President Putin signed the FY2016 draft budget in December 2015. According to the Russian Federal Treasury, the FY2016 defense budget increased 1.0% from the previous fi scal year to
3.1493 trillion rubles.

10 The command structure is reorganized from the four-tiered structure of military district–army–division–regiment, to a three-tiered structure of military district–operational command–brigade. Although this was
said to be completed in December 2009, in May 2013 the Guards Tamanskaya Motorized Rifl e Division and the Guards Kantemirovskaya Tank Division, which had been reorganized into brigades under then
Minister of Defence Anatoliy Serdyukov, were reactivated and participated in a victory parade. Furthermore, in the January 25, 2016 edition of Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star), a newspaper of the military, Gen. Oleg


-----

strengthening of combat readiness, and modernization
of the RAF such as the development and introduction of
new equipment.
Regarding the downsizing of the military forces,
it was decided that RAF would have a strength of one
million personnel as of 2016.[11] Since December 2010,
Russia reorganized its six military districts into four
military districts (Western, Southern, Central and
Eastern Districts). On this basis, Russia established a
joint strategic command in each military district and is
carrying out integrated operations of its entire military
forces, such as the ground force, naval force, and air force
under the control of the Military District Commander. In
December 2014, the Northern Joint Strategic Command
in charge of the Arctic became operational.[12]
Regarding the modernization of the military
forces, based on the State Armaments Program (GPV:
Gosudarstvennaya Programma Vooruzheniya) 2011-2020
that appeared to have been approved by the President by
the end of 2010, Russia intends to further modernize its
equipment and invest approximately 20 trillion rubles
(approximately 42 trillion yen) to increase its percentage
of new equipment up to 70%[13] by 2020.
Regarding the professionalization of the military
forces, in order to make the combat readiness of the
permanent readiness units effective, Russia promotes the
introduction of a contract service system which selects

**3 Military Posture and Trends**


Russia’s military force is comprised of forces such as the
RAF, the Border Guard Service of the Federal Security
Service of the Russian Federation (FSB), and the Federal
National Guard Service of the Russian Federation.[15] The
RAF consists of three services and two independent
forces: Land Force; Navy; Aerospace Force;[16] Strategic
Missile Forces; and Airborne Forces.[17]

See>> Fig. I-2-4-2 (Location and Strength of Russian Military)


Fig. I-2-4-1 Changes in Russia’s Defense Budget

Defense budget (in 100 million rubles)
Year-on-year growth rate (%)

(100 million rubles) (%)

35,000 35

30,000 30

25,000 25

20,000 20

15,000 15

10,000 10

5,000 5

0 0

–5

12 13 14 15 16
(FY)

Note: Official figures announced by the Russian government.


personnel who would serve under contracts from the
conscripted military personnel. In 2015, the number of
contract servicemen exceeded the number of conscripted
personnel for the fi rst time.[14]
In the context of the gradual increase in diffi culties
in securing the defense budget due to the recent severe
economic situation, attention will be paid to the trends
related to Russian efforts to improve the capacity of
conventional forces and maintain the strategic deterrence
capability provided by nuclear weapons.

- 1  Nuclear Forces


Russia emphasizes its nuclear forces to secure its global
position, to strike a balance with the nuclear forces of
the United States and to supplement its inferiority in
conventional forces. It is thus believed that Russia is making
efforts to maintain readiness of its nuclear forces unit.
Russia still possesses ICBMs, SLBMs, and long


11 It was decided that the total military force would be one million personnel as of 2016 by an executive order of December 2008 (the strength was approximately 1.13 million as of 2008). Russia is thought to
have achieved troop reduction to one million personnel already as of 2011. However, since then, the number of personnel has continued to fall below one million due to the reduced military service period to
one year, combined with the stagnant growth in the number of contract servicemen.

12 The Northern Joint Strategic Command is a unifi ed force led by the Northern Fleet and consists of fl eets, ground forces, and air forces. Its area of operation covers the seas and remote islands extending from
the Barents Sea to the East Siberian Sea, and the Arctic coast.

13 In his campaign platform paper on national defense policy published in February 2012, then Prime Minister Putin indicated that he would strengthen military power, including nuclear force, aerospace defense,
and naval power by spending approximately 23 trillion rubles (approximately 48 trillion yen) in ten years. In December 2015, Deputy Minister of Defence Yuri Borisov told TASS that Russia started working on
the GPV 2018-2025 whose preparation had been postponed.

14 Reasons behind the promotion of the contract service system may include a decrease in the population suitable for military service and the shortening of the conscription period (since January 2008, the
conscription period has been shortened to 12 months). At the Expanded Meeting of the Defence Ministry Board in December 2015, Minister of Defence Sergei Shoigu stated that personnel strength adequacy
was around 92.5% and contracted soldiers totaled approximately 352,000. The Regulation on the Military Service was amended in January 2015, enabling those who have no citizenship of any country as well
as foreign citizens to serve as contracted soldiers.

15 In April 2016, President Putin signed an executive order that directed the establishment of the Federal National Guard Service of the Russian Federation to ensure national and public security and to protect
human rights and freedoms, setting forth that the Federal National Guard Service would be formed on the basis of the internal troops of the Interior Ministry.

16 Formed on August 1, 2015 by merging the previous Air Force and Aerospace Defense Forces. Minister of Defence Shoigu explained that the realignment was implemented because of “the increasing importance
of the aerospace theater,” and perceives that “this organizational realignment is the best method for streamlining Russia’s aerospace defense system.”


-----

range bombers (Tu-95 Bears and Tu-160 Blackjacks)
following only the United States in scale.
Russia is obligated to reduce strategic nuclear arms
pursuant to the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty
concluded with the United States.[18] Russia is working
on accelerating the development and introducing new
weapons under the policy to prioritize the modernization
of nuclear forces based on its GPV.
In March 2011, Russia started the deployment of
RS-24, which is considered a multi-warhead version of the
“Topol-M” ICBM.[19] SSBN building and deployment are in
progress. For example, in January 2013, Yuri Dolgoruky,
the first of the Borey-class SSBN, which is believed to
carry the new-type SLBM “Bulava,” was delivered to
the Northern Fleet. Additionally, Alexander Nevsky, the
second of the SSBNs, and Vladimir Monomakh, the third
of the SSBNs, were incorporated to the Pacific Fleet in
December 2013 and December 2014, respectively.[20]
In October 2015, a training of the command of
units was conducted involving the launch of an ICBM,
SLBMs, and cruise missiles from long-range bombers,
surface vessels, and from the ground.[21]
As for non-strategic nuclear forces, Russia scrapped
ground-launched short- and intermediate-range missiles
with a range of between 500 and 5,500 km by 1991 in
accordance with the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
(INF) Treaty with the United States, and removed tactical


nuclear weapons from naval vessels and stored them
in onshore missile silos in the following year. Russia,
however, still possesses a broad array of other nuclear
forces. Under such circumstances, in July 2014, the U.S.
Government concluded that Russia possesses groundlaunched cruise missiles (GLCM) in violation of the INF
Treaty and notified the Russian government. The Russian
side denies this.

- 2  Conventional Forces and Other Issues


Russia is considered to be developing and procuring
conventional forces in accordance with its GPV. Close
attention will need to be paid to Russia’s development,
procurement, and deployment of new equipment, such as
the “fifth generation fighter”[22] and the T-14 Armata tank,[23]
in addition to the introduction of the Su-35 fighter and the
surface-to-surface missile system “Iskander.”
Along with carrying out a range of exercises,[24] since
February 2013, the RAF have been conducting surprise
inspections designed to validate the combat readiness of
the military districts, etc. for the first time since the collapse
of the Soviet Union.[25] These inspections are contributing to
the improvement of long-distance mobilization capability
of the RAF.[26] Outside of Russia, the RAF has continued
to participate in the counter-piracy operations off the
coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden since 2008, and


18 In April 2010, Russia and the United States signed the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty to replace the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty I (START I), and the treaty came into force in February 2011. Each side
is obligated to reduce deployed strategic warheads to 1,550 and their deployed delivery platforms to 700 within seven years after the entry into force of the treaty. In April 2016, the United States announced
that Russia’s deployed strategic warheads was 1,735 and their deployed delivery platforms was 521 as of March 1, 2016.

19 In March 2011, the first regiment of RS-24 missiles was operationally deployed in the division in Teykovo, Ivanovo oblast in northeast Moscow. At the Expanded Meeting of the Defence Ministry Board in
December 2015, Minister of Defence Shoigu stated that six rocket regiments equipped with RS-24 were put on combat duty in 2015. In addition, it is believed that Russia is developing a new heavy ICBM
“Sarmat” that can destroy robust ICBM launch sites and be equipped with many warheads, a light-weight mobile solid-fuel ICBM RS-26 “Rubezh”, as well as new warheads aimed at enhancing the capability
to penetrate MD. “Rubezh” was scheduled to be deployed to Irkutsk in 2015.

20 Eight Borey-class SSBNs are planned to be built by 2020. As of December 2015, three have been commissioned and three are under construction. Construction of the seventh Borey-class SSBN, Imperator
Aleksandr III, was launched in December. The fourth Borey-class SSBN, Knyaz Vladimir, is scheduled to be commissioned in 2017. The test launches of the Bulava started in September 2005. By November
2015, 23 test launches have been conducted, 15 of which have been successful. While the test launch of the Bulava from Alexander Nevsky in September 2013 is deemed to have failed due to problems with
the missile’s nozzle, the same test launch was conducted successfully in September 2014.

21 In an exercise to inspect the command system, under instructions from the National Defense Control Center of the Russian Federation, the ICBM “Topol” was launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome, and SLBMs
were launched from the nuclear-powered submarines Bryansk and Podolsk in the Barents Sea and the Sea of Okhotsk. Additionally, cruise missiles were launched from the small missile vessel Veliky Ustyug,
Tu-160, and “Iskander.”

22 According to media reports, in January 2015, President Yury Slusar of Russia’s United Aircraft Corporation stated that Russia’s PAK FA (Future Air Complex for Tactical Air Forces) “fifth generation fighters” have
begun to be delivered to the Air Force for test flights. In September 2015, Commander-in-Chief of the Aerospace Force Viktor Bondarev stated that PAK FA would be supplied to units in 2017. In July 2015,
Deputy Minister of Defence Borisov stated that Russia would reduce the number of aircraft to be procured and that only one squadron (12 aircraft) would be purchased over the next several years.

23 A new tank fitted with an unmanned turret that was unveiled for the first time during the Victory Day Parade on May 9, 2015. In addition to this tank, Russia is currently developing a family of crawler and wheeled
infantry fighting vehicles, armored personnel carriers, and self-propelled howitzers. The GPV 2011-2020 plans to renovate 2,300 tanks, 3,000 self-propelled artillery, and 30,000 other armored fighting vehicles
by 2020.

24 As it proceeds with its military reform, Russia has conducted large-scale exercises for verification and other purposes in recent years. In the military districts, field training exercises are held every year on a
rotational basis. Caucasus 2012 was carried out in the Southern Military District in September 2012. In addition, Zapado 2013 was carried out in the Western Military District and in the territories of Belarus in
September 2013 and Vostok 2014 in the Eastern Military District in September 2014. In September 2015, Tsentr 2015 was conducted in the Central Military District, which was participated by around 95,000
personnel, over 7,000 equipment and military machinery, around 170 aircraft, and 20 vessels. In December 2015, Minister of Defence Shoigu stated that, as a result of combat training, compared to 2014, the
flight time of pilots increased by 10%, the number of navigation days of surface vessel and submarine crew increased by 7%, and the traveling distance of the operators of combat vehicles increased by 22%.
Meanwhile, there have been crashes involving the Tu-95 long-range bomber, the Mig-29 fighter, and other aircraft since 2015. Some have attributed the reasons to extra burden placed on aging airframes and
surpassing their maintenance capability limit because of large-scale exercises and surprise inspections, along with actual combat and surveillance activities.

25 Surprise inspections were conducted at the Central and Southern Military Districts in February 2013, Southern Military District in March 2013, Western Military District in May 2013, Eastern and Central Military
Districts in July 2013, strategic nuclear units in October 2013, and Western and Central Military Districts from February to March 2014. In September 2014, a surprise inspection of the Eastern Military District
was conducted, which transitioned to the Vostok 2014 large-scale exercise.

26 At the Expanded Meeting of the Defence Ministry Board in December 2015, Minister of Defence Shoigu stated that the surprise inspections held five times a year on average would enable the commanders of


-----

Fig. I-2-4-2 Location and Strength of Russian Military

**Northern Joint Strategic Command**

**Baltic Fleet**
**Kaliningrad**

**Northen Fleet**
**Severomorsk**

**Black Sea Fleet**
**Sevastopol**
**(in Ukraine)**

**Western Military District**
**(Western Joint Strategic Command)**
**(HQ: Saint Petersburg)**

**Eastern Military District**

**Caspian Flotilla** **(Eastern Joint Strategic Command)**

**(HQ: Khabarovsk)**

**Astrankhan** **Central Military District**

**(Central Joint Strategic Command)**
**(HQ: Yekaterinburg)**

**Southern Military District**
**(Southern Joint Strategic Command)**
**(HQ: Rostov-on-Don)**

**Pacific Flotilla**
**Vladivostok**

The United States Geological Survey: GTOPO30; and the United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Geophysical Data Center: ETOPO1

Russia

Total military forces Approx. 800,000 troops

Ground troops Approx. 270,000 troops

Ground T-90, T-80, T-72, etc. Approx. 2,700
forces Tanks (Not including mothballed tanks.

Approx. 20,200 including mothballed tanks)

Warships Approx. 1,010 vessels  Approx. 2,049,000 tons

Aircraft carriers 1 vessel

Cruisers 4 vessels

Maritime

Destroyers 14 vessels

forces

Frigates 32 vessels

Submarines 69 vessels

Marines Approx. 35,000 troops

Combat aircraft Approx. 1,340 aircraft

158 MiG-29 aircraft 32 Su-30 aircraft
112 MiG-31 aircraft 18 Su-33 aircraft

Modern fighter aircraft 200 Su-25 aircraft 57 Su-34 aircraft

199 Su-27 aircraft 36 Su-35 aircraft

Air forces

(4th generation fighter aircraft: Total 812)

16 Tu-160 aircraft

Bombers 60 Tu-95 aircraft

63 Tu-22M aircraft

Population Approx. 142.40 million

Reference
Term of service 1year (In addition to conscription, there is a contract service system)

Source: “The Military Balance 2016,” etc. Ground troops include 240,000 ground force personnel and 34,000 airborne unit personnel.


-----

maintained deployment of vessels in the Mediterranean
Sea.[27] In September 2013, a Kirov-class missile cruiser
was deployed to the eastern Arctic for the first time,
where it conducted military exercises. In September 2014,
the flotilla of the Northern Fleet transported equipment
and supplies to the New Siberian Islands in the eastern
Arctic to build a facility.[28] The RAF has been intensifying
its activities in the Arctic, which include not only such
deployment and exercises of naval vessels and resumption
of military facility operation, but also strategic nuclear
deterrence patrols by strategic nuclear submarines and
patrol flights by long-range bombers.
In April 2015, Russian aircraft including the Tu95 long-range bomber conducted patrol flights over
the Barents Sea, the Norwegian Sea, and the Atlantic


Ocean.[29] Furthermore, in July and November 2015, the
Tu-95 long-range bomber approached the airspaces of
U.S. mainland and Guam.[30] Also, in connection with
the military intervention into Syria, the missile cruiser
Varyag belonging to the Pacific Fleet was deployed to the
Mediterranean Sea off the coast of Syria in January 2016.[31]
The RAF has thus intensified activities not only in
the Asia-Pacific, but also in the Arctic, Europe, and areas
near the U.S. mainland. In particular, Russia’s vessels
and aircraft tend to expand their area of activity.[32]
As for the future of RAF, there are uncertain elements
which may be influenced by Russia’s future economic
and social development and trends in Russia’s diplomatic
relations with European and other countries; therefore, it
is necessary to keep our attention on future developments.


27 Russia’s naval fleet in the Mediterranean which is said to have completed its formation on June 1, 2013, is considered a permanent operational force.

28 The Russian Ministry of Defence plans to rebuild 10 radar sites and 13 airports to improve its military facilities in the Arctic. For example, the Temp Airport on the New Siberian Islands (Novosibirsk) located in
the Eastern Arctic, has been closed since 1993, but in October 2013, its operation was restored with the support of the Northern Fleet.

29 The Russian Ministry of Defence announced that on April 4, 2015, two Tu-95 long-range bombers that departed Engels base conducted patrol flights over the Barents Sea, the Norwegian Sea, and the Atlantic
Ocean, escorted by Mig-31 fighters, and that on this occasion, the bombers were followed by Typhoon fighters of the U.K. Royal Air Force and the F-16 fighters of the Royal Danish Air Force.

30 Tu-95 long-range bombers flew near Alaska and over northern California on Independence Day in the United States on July 4, 2015. Two of these bombers flew within 50 miles of the coast of California. On
November 25, 2015, two Tu-95 long-range bombers flew in international airspace near Guam.

31 The missile cruiser Moskva belonging to the Black Sea Fleet was deployed to the coast of Syria in order to strengthen the aerial defense capabilities of the RAF deployed to Syria. However, the Varyag belonging
to the Pacific Fleet was dispatched to replace the Moskva.

32 It is deemed that the RAF intends to maintain and enhance their combat readiness, as well as use diversionary approach towards the West and other countries in connection with the situation in Ukraine, and l


-----

**4 Russian Forces in the Vicinity of Japan**



- 1  General Situation

Russia newly established the Eastern Military District
and the Eastern Joint Strategic Command in 2010.[33]
Land Forces, the Pacifi c Fleet, and the Air Force and
Air Defense Units have been placed under the Military
District Commander, who conducts unifi ed operation of
these services.
The current presence of the RAF in the Far East region
is signifi cantly smaller than it was at its peak. However,
a considerable scale of military forces, including nuclear
forces, still remains in the region. Russian armed forces in
the vicinity of Japan are generally increasing its activity.
Given that the RAF set their basis of operation
on maintaining the combat readiness of their strategic
nuclear units and dealing with confl icts through the intertheater mobility of its round-the-clock readiness units,
it is necessary to keep our attention on the positioning
and trends of the RAF in the Far East region while also
keeping in mind the trends of units in other regions.


**(2) Ground Forces**
As part of its military reforms, Russia is thought to be
reorganizing the command structure from a divisionbased to a brigade-based one, while also shifting all of
its combat forces into permanent readiness units. The
Eastern Military District now consists of eleven brigades
and one division with approximately 80,000 personnel in
total. In addition, it has a naval infantry brigade equipped
with amphibious operations capability, and therefore, has
amphibious operations capability. The Eastern Military
District has introduced new equipment, such as the
“Iskander” surface-to-surface missile system and the “S400” surface-to-air missile system.

**(3) Naval Forces**
The Pacifi c Fleet is stationed or deployed at its main bases
in Vladivostok and Petropavlovsk. The fl eet is comprised
of approximately 260 ships with a total displacement
in the region of approximately 600,000 tons, including
approximately 20 major surface ships and approximately
20 submarines (approximately 15 of which are nuclear
powered submarines) with a total displacement of
approximately 300,000 tons.


**(1) Nuclear Forces**
As for strategic nuclear forces in the Far East region,
ICBMs, such as SS-25s and approximately 30 Tu-95
long-range bombers are deployed mainly along the
Trans-Siberian Railway. Additionally, the Delta III-class
SSBNs carrying SLBMs are deployed in and around the
Sea of Okhotsk. By and large strategic nuclear units are
believed to be maintaining readiness posture. In a surprise
inspection conducted in October 2013 and a fi eld training
exercise conducted in May 2014 for the strategic nuclear
unit, the Delta III-class SSBNs launched SLBMs in the
Sea of Okhotsk. The second of the Borey-class SSBNs
Alexander Nevsky was incorporated to the Pacifi c Fleet
in December 2013 and the third of the SSBNs Vladimir
Monomakh in December 2014. Subsequently, Alexander
Nevsky was brought to the Pacifi c in September 2015,
and Vladimir Monomakh is also scheduled to be brought
to the Pacifi c in 2016.[34]


**(4) Air Forces**
In the Eastern Military District, Russia deploys
approximately 350 combat aircraft from its Air Force and
Navy combined. Existing models are being refurbished
and new models, such as the Su-35 fi ghters, are being
introduced[35] to improve their capabilities.

- 2  Russian Forces in Japan’s Northern Territories


Since 1978 during the former Soviet Union era, Russia
has redeployed ground troops on Kunashiri, Etorofu, and
Shikotan Islands of the Northern Territories, which are
inherent territories of Japan. While the Russian troop
strength is thought to be far less than that at peak times,


33 The Eastern Military District’s headquarters is in Khabarovsk.

34 At the Expanded Meeting of the Defence Ministry Board in December 2015, Minister of Defence Shoigu stated that the second of the Borey-class SSBNs Alexander Nevsky and the third SSBN Vladimir
Monomakh joined the formation of the permanent readiness units in 2015.i


-----

one division with mainly defensive duties is still stationed
in Kunashiri and Etorofu Islands. Furthermore, tanks,
armored vehicles, various types of artillery, and anti-air
missiles are deployed.[36]
After then President Medvedev visited Kunashiri
Island for the first time as head of state in November 2010,[37]
Russian ministers and others have made repeated visits
to the Northern Territories. Between July and September
2015, Prime Minister Medvedev and six minister-level
dignitaries also visited Etorofu Island, among other areas.
Russia is proceeding with the replacement of equipment
and construction of facilities for its units located in the
Northern Territories.[38] In April 2015, an exercise was
conducted with the participation of over 5,000 troops from
the Eastern Military District on Sakhalin, the Northern
Territories, and the Chishima Islands. In this regard, Russia
continues to increase its activities.
As described above, Russia continues to station RAF
in the Northern Territories, which are inherent territories
of Japan, and has recently been increasing the RAF’s
activities in the territories under de facto occupation.
Some point out that such developments reflect the
Russian people’s heightened awareness of territorial
integrity due to the Ukrainian crisis, as well as the rising
military importance of the Northern Territories adjacent
to the Sea of Okhotsk, an operating area of strategic
nuclear submarines.
It is necessary to keep our attention on Russia’s
activities on the Four Northern Islands, with the hope
that an early solution can be found to the Northern
Territories issue.



- 3  Operations in the Vicinity of Japan

In the vicinity of Japan, the RAF has been generally
increasing its activities, including exercises and drills
which are believed to be conducted for objectives such as
verifying the results of the military reform.
In September 2014, the large-scale exercise Vostok
2014, considered the largest and the most important of
the RAF exercises and drills conducted that year, was
carried out in the Eastern Military District. Over 155,000
personnel, over 4,000 combat vehicles, approximately
80 vessels, and approximately 630 aircraft participated
in the exercise.[39] It is regarded that its purpose was to
verify the combat readiness and mobilization postures
of the units in the Far East strategic front, including the
Arctic. The exercise included units from not only the
Eastern Military District, but also the Western and Central
Military Districts. The various units conducted longdistance maneuvers covering a distance of 12,000 km
at most. Furthermore, the exercise trained coordination
among the Ministry of Defence and other ministries,
agencies, and local governments.
The number of exercises carried out by the Russian Land
Forces in the areas adjacent to Japan has decreased from the
peak. However, its activities are generally increasing.
With regard to naval vessels, their activities are
generally increasing in recent years. For example, joint
exercises and counter-piracy operations have been
carried out by Pacific Fleet vessels involving long
distance voyages, and nuclear-powered submarines
are carrying out patrols.[40] In September 2011, 24 naval
vessels including a Slava-class guided missile cruiser
passed through the Soya Strait in succession. This was


36 The 18th Machine Gun and Artillery Division, which is comprised of two regiments, is one of the few division units making up the RAF since most divisions were transformed into brigades due to military reform,
and is stationed on Etorofu and Kunashiri Islands. The Division aims to prevent landings, and participated in surprise inspections conducted in the Eastern Military District and elsewhere in July 2013. The number
of Russian military personnel stationed in this region in 1991 was approximately 9,500. At the Japan-Russia Defense Ministerial Meeting held in 1997, then Russian Defence Minister Igor Rodionov revealed
that the troops stationed in the Northern Territories had been reduced to 3,500 personnel by 1995. In July 2005, when then Russian Defence Minister Sergei Ivanov visited the Northern Territories, he declared
that Russia would neither increase nor decrease the troops stationed on the four islands, clarifying Russia’s intention to maintain the status quo. In February 2011, a senior official of the General Staff was said
to have stated that troops on the Northern Territories would be maintained at around 3,500 personnel in the process of reorganizing divisions into brigades. In May 2014, Commander Sergey Surovikin of the
Eastern Military District announced the buildup of military facilities on the Northern Territories. In August 2014, Russia opened a new airport in Etorofu Island. Through such measures, Russia has stepped up
its activities in the Northern Territories under de facto occupation.

37 After the visit, Kunashiri Island and Etorofu Island were visited by First Deputy Prime Minister Igor Shuvalov in December 2010, by then Regional Development Minister Viktor Basargin in January to February
2011, followed by then Deputy Prime Minister Sergei Ivanov in May 2011. Security Council Secretary Nikolai Patrushev visited Kunashiri Island and Suisho Island of the Habomai Islands in September 2011. In
addition, in January 2011, Deputy Minister of Defence Dmitry Bulgakov, and in February 2011, then Minister of Defence Anatoliy Serdyukov visited Kunashiri Island and Etorofu Island and inspected the units
stationed there. Furthermore, Prime Minister Medvedev and three ministers visited Kunashiri Island in July 2012. In July 2015, Minister of Healthcare Veronika Skvortsova visited Kunashiri Island and Shikotan
Island, and in August 2015, Prime Minister Medvedev, Deputy Prime Minister and Presidential Plenipotentiary Envoy to the Far Eastern Federal District Yury Trutnev, Minister for the Development of Russian
Far East Galushka, and Minister of Education and Science Dmitry Livanov visited Etorofu Island. In September 2015, Minister of Agriculture Alexander Tkachev visited Etorofu Island, and Minister of Transport
Maksim Sokolov visited Kunashiri Island and Etorofu Island.

38 At a meeting held at the Ministry of Defence of Russia in December 2015, Minister of Defence Shoigu stated that a total of 392 buildings and facilities are planned to be built with regard to the construction in
military areas on the Four Northern Islands and the Chishima Islands. Subsequently, at a meeting held at the Ministry of Defence in January 2016, the Minister noted that completing infrastructure construction
in the areas was one of the priorities for 2016. At a meeting of the Defence Ministry Board in March 2016, the Minister stated that the surface-to-ship missiles “Bal” and “Bastion,” among other assets, would
be deployed to the areas in 2016, and that the Pacific Fleet would conduct a three-month survey mission to study the feasibility of future deployment of Pacific Fleet forces.

39 The large-scale exercise Vostok 2014 was conducted over a vast area extending from the Arctic to the coastal area. In the Kamchatka Peninsula, ALCM launches were carried out from long-range bombers,
as well as launches of SLCMs from Oscar II-class nuclear-powered guided missile submarines (SSGN). In Wrangel Island in the Arctic, night-time parachute landings and survival drills were conducted. In the
Sakhalin, the Naval Infantry conducted landing drills as well as drills to prevent the landings of opposing forces. In the coastal and inland areas, drills including the launches of short-range ballistic missiles
and GLCMs using the “Iskander” surface-to-surface missile system, as well as drills that made use of private infrastructure, such as takeoff and landing drills of the Su-25 attack aircraft using roads for motor
vehicles were conducted.

40 The number of cases of the Russian naval fleet passing through the three international straits (Soya, Tsugaru, and Tsushima) of Japan that have been identified and released in FY2015 is as follows: 22 cases


-----

the fi rst time since the end of the Cold War that such a
major transit of this strait by Russian naval vessels was
confi rmed.[41] In recent years, ten or more Russian naval
vessels have passed through the Soya Strait two or three
times a year. In May 2016, under the command of the
Deputy Commander of the Pacifi c Fleet, an expedition
unit comprised of approximately 200 personnel began
survey activities on Matsuwa Island located roughly
in the middle of the Chishima Islands. The objective is
to study the feasibility of deploying the Pacifi c Fleet’s
forces there in the future. Continued attention needs to be
paid to the relevant developments.[42]
Regarding aircraft, since the resumption of the patrol
activities by its strategic aviation units in 2007, Russia has
been increasing fl ights by long-range bombers and carrying
out fl ights of Tu-95 long-range bombers and Tu-160 longrange bombers which are refueled in mid- fl ight and supported
by A-50 early warning aircraft and Su-27 fi ghters.[43]

Activities such as fl ights close to Japan’s airspace
as well as exercises and drills are generally increasing,
as exemplifi ed by the unusual fl ights of Russian aircraft
detected on seven consecutive days and the fl ights by six
individual Tu-95 long-range bombers on a single day
between March and April 2014.[44, 45]
While Russian aircraft activities in FY2015
decreased compared to that in the previous fi scal year,

**5 Relations with Other Countries**


- 1  General Situation


Changes in the Number of Scrambles against
Fig. I-2-4-3
Russian Aircraft

(Times)

500

450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15

(FY)


a Russian aircraft (presumably) incurred into Japanese
airspace in September 2015 for the fi rst time in almost
two years. Tu-95 long-range bombers conducted long
distance fl ights along the perimeter of Japan in December
2015 and January 2016. In this regard, Russian aircraft
have generally maintained the same level of activities
as that of recent years, excluding the sharp increase that
occurred immediately after the Ukrainian crisis, and has
been generally increasing its activity.

See>> Fig. I-2-4-3 (Changes in the Number of Scrambles against Russian
Aircraft)

directional diplomacy by ruling out futile confrontation and
acquiring as many partners as possible around the world.[47]
For this reason, Russia has been working on deepening
its economic partnerships with the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS).[48] Furthermore, Russia aspires
to deepen its relations with the Asia-Pacifi c countries,
seen as drivers of the global economy,[49] and in recent
years, has attached importance to China and India as


Russia considers the realization of its national interests
as a guiding principle of its foreign policy, recognizing
that Russia’s international position as one of the poles of
infl uence is rising amid the trend towards multi-polarity.[46]
Moreover, based on its National Security Strategy, Russia
engages in open, rational, and pragmatic diplomacy to
protect its national interests. It aims to pursue multi

41 Some of the 24 naval vessels participated in the exercise conducted in the eastern part of the Kamchatka Peninsula and other places.

42 In May 2016, the Russian Ministry of Defence announced that under the command of Vice Admiral Andrei Ryabukhin, Deputy Commander of the Pacifi c Fleet that arrived in Matsuwa Island, an expedition
comprised of approximately 200 personnel including representatives from the Russian Ministry of Defence, the Russian Geographical Society, the Eastern Military District, and the Pacifi c Fleet began conducting
survey activities. Colonel-general Sergei Surovikin, Commander of the Eastern Military District, stated at a military meeting of the district that six Pacifi c Fleet vessels and over 200 personnel participated in an
expedition by the Russian Ministry of Defence and the Russian Geographical Society to Chishima, Etorofu, and Kunashiri Islands, and that its primary objective was to study the feasibility of establishing a Pacifi c
Fleet base in the future.

43 The Russian Ministry of Defence announced in January 2014 that surveillance fl ights of two Tu-95 long-range bombers took place with the assistance of Su-27 fi ghters and A-50 airborne early warning and
control aircraft.

44 In April 2014, Deputy Minister of Defence Anatoly Antonov stated that “Russian Air Force aircraft operated in strict compliance with the international law.” The Deputy Minister also asked the Japanese Ministry
of Defense to “alter its attitude towards cooperation with the Russian Ministry of Defence.”

45 When Tu-95 long-range bombers took a route that circled the area encompassing Japan in September 2011, they were refueled in mid-fl ight by an IL-78 air tanker in the temporary danger zone set by Russia.
In addition, when Tu-95 long-range bombers fl ew in the vicinity of Japan in February 2012 and February 2014, other aircraft such as A-50 Early Warning Aircraft fl ew with them. Two Su-27 fi ghters and two
Tu-95 long-range bombers invaded Japanese airspace in February 2013 and August 2013 respectively.

46 The Foreign Policy Concept of the Russian Federation (February 2013).

47 The National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation (December 2015) states that, “With a view to protecting its national interests Russia is pursuing an open, rational, and pragmatic foreign policy ruling
out futile confrontation (including a new arms race). (Abridged) The Russian Federation’s objective is to acquire as many equal partners as possible in various parts of the world.”

48 In October 2011, eight CIS countries (Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Ukraine, Moldova, and Armenia) signed the CIS Free Trade Zone Agreement.


-----

countries with which to strengthen bilateral relations.
Meanwhile, Russian efforts to strengthen its
cooperative relations with the West are still facing
challenges after the Ukrainian crisis. However, with
regard to the Syrian situation, cooperation between
Russia and other countries is gaining momentum towards
stabilizing Syria and countering international terrorist
organizations, including ISIL.
Attention will be paid to how Russia would balance
its posture and develop its relations with other countries
in terms of economic-centered and benefit-focused
foreign policy, and Russia’s politics and diplomacy which
include the security domain.

- 2  Relations with Asian Countries


India maintain a close relationship under a strategic
partnership, with the leaders of both countries paying
mutual visits. In October 2013, President Putin held
talks with then Prime Minister Singh when he visited
Russia, during which they reached an agreement on
enhanced military cooperation including arms exports.
In December 2014, President Putin, during his visit to
India, held talks with Prime Minister Modi, and the two
sides agreed to build a new Russian-made nuclear power
plant, among other matters. In January 2015, Minister of
Defence Shoigu, during his visit to India, held talks with
Minister of Defence Parrikar, and the two sides discussed
military and military technology cooperation between
the two countries. Both countries are strengthening their
military technology cooperation, including the joint
development of the fifth generation PAK FA fighter and
the “BrahMos” supersonic cruise missile.[55] Additionally,
since 2003 Russia and India have been conducting
INDRA antiterrorism exercises involving the Armies
and Navies of both countries. Regarding the relationship
with Japan, Russia states that it will develop mutually
beneficial cooperation and is intensifying its approach in
many fields including politics, economy and security.

- 3  Situation in Ukraine


Russia recognizes that the significance of the Asia-Pacific
region is increasing within its multi-pronged foreign
policy, and the relationship with Asian countries is also
important from the viewpoint of economic development
in Siberia and the Far East,[50] counter-terrorism, and
security.[51] In the executive order concerning foreign policy
issued in May 2012, President Putin upheld his policy to
participate in the integration process of the Asia-Pacific
region in order to accelerate socioeconomic development
in the East Siberia and Far East regions, and stated that
Russia would make efforts to develop relationships with
Japan, the ROK, and other countries, along with China,[52]
India, and Vietnam. To achieve strategic stability and equal
strategic partnerships, Russia places particular emphasis
on developing a comprehensive partnership relationship
and strategic cooperative relationship with China as a key
factor in maintaining global and regional stability, and in
assigning an important role for the privileged strategic
partnership with India.[53]
Under this policy, Russia has participated in various
frameworks in the Asia-Pacific region.[54] The APEC
Summit was held in Vladivostok in September 2012.
Among these different countries, Russia and


In Ukraine, armed conflicts between Ukrainian troops and
separatist armed forces continued even after the ceasefire
agreement of February 2015 (package of measures for
the implementation of the Minsk agreements).[56] Since
September 2015, however, the implementation of the
ceasefire agreement led to a reduction in the intensity of
the conflict and to a significant decrease in the number
of war casualties. In October 2015, a summit meeting
was held among Germany, France, Russia, and Ukraine,
and agreement was reached on the commencement of the
withdrawal of light weapons and expanding the authority
of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission. Nonetheless,


50 Russia is currently developing resources in Siberia and Sakhalin.

51 The Foreign Policy Concept of the Russian Federation (released in February 2013). In his campaign platform paper on foreign policy published in February 2012, then Prime Minister Putin expressed his
recognition that the importance of the entire Asia-Pacific region was rising.

52 See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 3-3 for the relationship with China.

In November 2013, President Putin made official visits to Vietnam and the ROK.

53 The National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation (December 2015) states that, “The Russian Federation will develop its comprehensive partnership relationship and strategic cooperative relationship with the
People’s Republic of China as a key factor for maintaining global and regional stability. The Russian Federation will assign an important role to the privileged strategic partnership with the Republic of India.”

54 Russia has participated in regional frameworks, such as the APEC, the ARF, the SCO, and the East Asia Summit (EAS; since 2011).

55 Aside from this cooperation, it has been reported that in March 2015, India requested Russia to lease another Akula-class nuclear-powered attack submarine in addition to the one already on lease.

56 The package of measures for the implementation of the Minsk agreements consists of the following items: (1) implementation of ceasefire starting from February 15, 2015 00.00 AM (local time); (2) withdrawal
of heavy weapons to create a security zone with widths ranging from 50 to 140 km; (3) monitoring of the ceasefire by the OSCE; (4) launch a dialogue on local self-government of areas controlled by separatists;
(5) ensure pardon and amnesty; (6) ensure release of all hostages; (7) ensure humanitarian assistance; (8) resumption of socio-economic systems in the East, including social transfers such as pension; (9)
reinstatement of full control of the state border by the government of Ukraine throughout the conflict area; (10) withdrawal of foreign armed formations, military equipment, and mercenaries from Ukraine; (11)
carrying out constitutional reform, providing for decentralization as a key element, and adopting legislation on the special status of certain areas of Donetsk and Lugansk regions (local self-government) by the
end of 2015; (12) discuss local elections with representatives of certain areas of Donetsk and Lugansk regions; and (13) intensify the work of the Trilateral Contact Group including through the establishment


-----

Putin denied intrusion into Turkish airspace by a RAF
aircraft; he strongly condemned Turkey’s response,
requested an apology, and decided on economic sanctions
against Turkey. This incident has deteriorated TurkeyRussia relations.

Since the beginning of its airstrikes, Russia increased
the level of its military intervention, which included
long-range attacks using cruise missiles launched from
submarines and destroyers and the mobilization of
strategic bombers and Su-35 fighters. Then, in March
2016, Russia withdrew its major units, stating that the
expected purpose had been achieved. Nonetheless,
Russia still stations its forces at military bases in Syria
and continues to utilize them, suggesting that the Russian
military operation is ongoing.

See>> Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1

The objectives of Russian military intervention may
include: (1) to sustain the Assad administration which
is friendly to Russia; (2) to defend Russian interests
including its military bases in Syria; (3) to address the
threat of international terrorist organizations including
ISIL; and (4) to secure influence in the Middle East.
Thus far, Russia seems to have contributed to the
recovery of the Assad administration’s areas of control
and protecting Russian interests. Additionally, the use of
cruise missiles and strategic bombers in the attacks has,
in turn, demonstrated Russia’s long-range precision strike
capabilities. Considering the significant influence of
Russia’s military intervention on the course of the Assad
administration, coupled with the expanding partnerships
between Russia and surrounding countries such as Iran
and Iraq, Russia’s influence on future stability in Syria
and on anti-ISIL military operations cannot be neglected.


the separation provided for in the Minsk agreements has
not resulted in major advances in the political process,
including the holding of elections in areas controlled by
separatists. As can be seen from the above, the outcomes
of the changes to the status quo in the Crimean Peninsula
and eastern Ukraine via Russia’s “hybrid warfare” have
taken on an aspect of being entrenched. Under these
circumstances, it will take some time to find a solution to
the Ukrainian crisis. Continued attention needs to be paid
to the situation in Ukraine, also due to the risk of military
confrontation recurring between Ukrainian troops and
separatist armed forces.

- 4  Situation in Syria


In September 2015, Russia began airstrikes in Syria,
explaining that President Assad of Syria requested
assistance. The West condemned Russia for attacking
not only terrorist organizations including ISIL, but also
Syrian dissidents that are opposed to the Assad regime.[57]
ISIL declared it would retaliate against Russia.
In October 2015, a Russian passenger aircraft crashed
after departing from Egypt, killing 224 passengers and
crew. Russia concluded that this incident was a terrorist
attack conducted by ISIL, declared retaliation against
ISIL, and strengthened its airstrikes by mobilizing
strategic bombers and other assets.

See>> Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1

Alongside these developments, in November 2015, a
Turkish military aircraft shot down a RAF aircraft flying
near the Syrian-Turkish border, reason being that the
Russian aircraft intruded into Turkish airspace. President


57 In October 2015, the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey issued a joint declaration calling on Russia to cease its attacks on the Syrian opposition and civilians i


-----

- 5  Relations with Commonwealth of Independent States

Russia positions the development of bilateral and
multilateral cooperation with the CIS as the top foreign
policy priority. Russia considers that its vital interests
are concentrated in the territories of the CIS,[58] and has
dispatched troops to be stationed in Ukraine (Crimea),
Moldova (Transnistria[59]), Armenia, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan,
and Georgia (South Ossetia, Abkhazia), which withdrew
from the CIS in August 2009.[60] In November 2014,
Russia and Abkhazia concluded an alliance and strategic
partnership treaty.[61] In such ways, Russia has been working
on ensuring its military influence.[62]
Due to increasing activities by Islamic armed
insurgents in Central Asia and the Caucasus, Russia has
been pursuing military cooperation primarily on counterterrorism measures in the region, and organized the
Collective Rapid Deployment Force in May 2001 within
the framework of the CIS Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO).[63] Furthermore, in June 2009, a
permanent joint rapid reaction force was established to
strengthen the functions of the CIS Collective Rapid
Deployment Force.[64]
In addition, out of concern that the worsening
security in Afghanistan could lead to the destabilization of
Central Asia, Russia and Central Asian countries support
Afghanistan while considering measures to strengthen
the security of the Afghan border.[65]



- 6  Relations with the United States

President Putin has striven to deepen cooperative
relations with the United States in the economic domain,
while opposing the United States on any action Russia
considers as “a U.S. attempt to encroach on Russia’s
strategic interests.” Meanwhile, in response to the
Ukrainian crisis, the Obama administration has strongly
condemned Russia’s violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine and has imposed severe
economic sanctions on Russia.[66] In this regard, U.S.Russia relations have deteriorated compared to when the
Obama administration was inaugurated.[67]
Russia strongly opposed the deployment plan of
the MD system in Europe by the United States, stating
that it would have a negative impact on Russia’s nuclear
deterrent capabilities. In September 2009, the United
States announced that it was reviewing the proposed
deployment of the MD system in Europe,[68] which was
cautiously welcomed by Russia.
However, Russia’s understanding is that the New
Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New START) effective
from February 2011 would be invalidated if the United
States developed, both quantitatively and qualitatively,
its MD capabilities and threatened Russia’s potential
strategic nuclear strength.[69] Russia has striven to keep the
United States in check in response to the recent progress
of the U.S. MD plan in Europe, indicating that Russia


58 In August 2008, following the conflict with Georgia, then President Medvedev indicated that one of the five principles of Russia’s foreign policy was that there are regions in which Russia has privileged interests.

59 In Transnistria, located on the eastern side of the Dniester River, ethnic Russian residents declared separation and independence from Moldova in 1990, but it was never recognized as such by the international
community. Following the “annexation” of Crimea into Russia, in March 2014 the “Parliament” of Transnistria urged Russia to also incorporate the region. Moreover, during a telephone conference between President
Putin and President Barack Obama in March 2014, President Putin pointed out that Transnistria was experiencing a blockade. A Russian unit of approximately 1,500 troops is currently stationed in Transnistria.

60 After the conflict with Russia in August 2008, Georgia withdrew from the CIS in August 2009, but Russia unilaterally recognized the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia in the Georgian territory and
continues to have troops stationed in the regions. In the parliamentary election in October 2012 “Georgian Dream,” an opposition alliance with a campaign promise of improving Georgia-Russia relations,
defeated the ruling “United National Movement” that adopts an anti-Russian policy. In the presidential election of October 2013, Giorgi Margvelashvili, backed by “Georgian Dream,” was elected and became
president in November of the same year. In his inauguration speech, President Margvelashvili stated that he was ready to deepen the dialogue with Russia, expressing his intention to continue with pro-Euro,
pro-U.S. lines while pursuing improvement of the relationship with Russia.

61 Russia’s “Military Doctrine” revised in December 2014 states that Russia would promote cooperation with the Republic of Abkhazia and the Republic of South Ossetia aimed at shared defense and security.

62 While some CIS countries continue to prioritize their relations with Russia, such as Belarus and Kazakhstan, others attempt to maintain a distance from Russia. Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, and Moldova have
taken mostly pro-Western policies to reduce their security and economic dependence on Russia. In September 2012, Kyrgyzstan and Russia agreed on a 15-year extension of the period of the use of Russian
military bases in Kyrgyzstan, which otherwise would end in 2017. In October 2012, Tajikistan and Russia agreed to extend the lease of the base of Russia’s 201st Motor Rifle Division in Tajikistan until 2042.
In December 2013, Su-27 fighters of the Russian naval force were deployed in Belarus for the first time.

63 In May 1992, leaders of six countries (Armenia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan) signed the Collective Security Treaty (CST) in Toshkent, Uzbekistan. In 1993, Azerbaijan, Georgia and
Belarus joined the treaty, which came into effect in April 1994. However, Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Uzbekistan withdrew from the treaty in 1999 without renewing it. In May 2002, CST was reorganized into the
CSTO. Uzbekistan returned to CST in August 2006 but gave notice to suspend its participation in CSTO in June 2012, effectively withdrawing from the organization.

64 Learning from the fact that CSTO could not sufficiently respond to the request by Kyrgyzstan for the peace-keeping activities at the time of the ethnic conflict in the southern part of Kyrgyzstan in June 2010,
CSTO has been discussing improvement in the efficiency of its crisis response system. The CSTO Summit Meeting in December 2011 warned against the foreign forces’ stationing in a member state by requiring
the consent of all member states when any member state builds a base of a third country. CSTO joint exercises, Vzaimodeistvie (cooperative operation), were implemented in Kazakhstan in October 2009 and
October 2010, in Armenia in September 2012, and in Belarus in September 2013.

65 At the Expanded Meeting of the Russian Defence Ministry Board in December 2013, President Putin said that the withdrawal of the ISAF from Afghanistan in 2014 would be a destabilizing element not only to
Afghanistan but also to Central Asia and could pose a threat to the national interests and security of Russia.

66 The United States has gradually expanded the list of Russian individuals and companies subject to asset freezes and entry bans. The United States has also expanded the targets of its loan suspensions and
asset freezes to include key industry sectors, including finance, energy companies, state-owned banks, and state-owned defense technology companies.

67 In April 2016, during a telephone conference with Minister of Foreign Affairs Sergey Lavrov, Secretary of State Kerry registered strong objections to unsafe maneuvers executed by RAF Su-24 fighter bombers
and Ka-27 helicopters flying close to the U.S. Aegis vessel USS Donald Cook in the high seas of the Baltic Sea. In the same month, a RAF Su-27 fighter allegedly approached and intercepted a RC-135
reconnaissance aircraft of the U.S. Forces over the high seas in the Baltic Sea. Russia has reportedly argued that these flights were legitimate actions.

68 See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 1-2 for the U.S. deployment plan of the MD system in Europe.


-----

may withdraw from the New START.[70]
With regard to the military exchanges with the United
States, Russia was considered as seeking establishment
of a cooperative relationship with the United States
to some extent, as exemplified from Russian vessels’
participation in RIMPAC in waters around Hawaii for
the first time in July 2012. However, following Russia’s
actions in connection with the situation in Ukraine, the
United States announced suspension of the military
exchanges with Russia in March 2014.[71] In addition, the
United States dispatched a missile destroyer to the Black
Sea and provided non-lethal weapons to the Ukrainian
government.[72] In February 2015, as the tense situation in
eastern Ukraine continued, the United States stepped up
its activities to keep Russia in check, including suggesting
to provide lethal weapons to the Ukrainian government.
As regards the situation in Syria, relevant countries
including both the United States and Russia as well as
Saudi Arabia and Iran agreed to aim for the cessation of
hostilities in all areas of Syria from February 2016.[73] On
February 22, 2016, a joint statement and an annex on the
cessation of hostilities in Syria were issued at the initiative
of the United States and Russia. As these developments
suggest, there has been some signs of cooperation.

See>> Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1



- 7  Relations with Europe and NATO

Through the framework of the NATO-Russia Council
(NRC), Russia has worked with NATO as an equal
partner in the areas of mutual interest, such as by
participating in certain decision-making processes.
However, following the Ukrainian crisis, NATO and
European countries suspended their practical cooperation
with Russia, including that in the military domain, except
for the NRC’s ambassador-level meetings.[74] Additionally,
NATO and European countries have maintained a severe
diplomatic stance towards Russia while working with the
Ukrainian government.
At the NRC summit held in Lisbon in November
2010, Russia and NATO stated that both sides would
work towards building a true and modernized strategic
partnership. They are now searching for possibilities
of dialogue and cooperation in fields such as MD,
Afghanistan, cooperation on counter-terrorism, and
anti-piracy measures. With regard to MD cooperation,
no progress was made on Russia-NATO relations.
For example, the talks at the meeting of NRC defense
ministers held in June 2011 highlighted the difference
in position between NATO advocating MD cooperation
in which only information and data would be exchanged
under the two independent systems of NATO and Russia,
and the position of Russia aiming at “sector MD” in
which both sides operate integrally by setting zones for


70 Russia has demanded a legal guarantee that the MD plan of the United States is not targeted at Russia, and claimed that the United States is not considering Russia’s concerns. Russia issued an executive
statement in November 2011, mentioning countermeasures such as deployment of operational early-warning radars and the possibility of its withdrawal from the New START. In November 2013, Minister of
Foreign Affairs Sergey Lavrov stated that if the Geneva agreement on Iran’s nuclear issues was implemented, the U.S. MD system in Europe would not be needed.

71 Following the occupation of the Crimean Peninsula by Russia, then U.S. Department of Defense Spokesperson Kirby announced in March 2014 that the United States would cease all military exchange with
Russia, including joint exercises with the RAF, consultations, and port calls.

72 The United States provided non-lethal weapons such as body armor, helmets, vehicles, night and thermal vision devices, heavy engineering equipment, advanced radios, patrol boats, rations, tents, countermortar radars, uniforms, first aid equipment, and other related items to Ukraine.

73 The main points of the agreement are as follows: (1) full implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 2254 that provides for the political transition process in Syria; (2) cease attacks on the Syrian Armed
Forces by the Syrian opposition; (3) cease attacks on the Syrian opposition by the Syrian Armed Forces and the RAF; and (4) refrain from acquiring territory from other parties to the ceasefire. It was decided
that the agreement would be implemented from 00:00 on February 27. The agreement does not apply to ISIL, Al-Nusra Front, and other terrorist organizations designated by the U.N. Security Council.

74 NATO issued a statement condemning Russia over the situation in Ukraine, and has deployed additional military forces to countries in Eastern Europe and the Baltic. However, there are discrepancies among


-----

each country’s responsibility under a unified MD system
of NATO and Russia.
Meanwhile, there remains an unsolved issue between
Russia and NATO regarding the Conventional Armed
Forces in Europe (CFE) agreement.[75]
Furthermore, the Ukrainian crisis has presented a
threat to NATO’s eastern border for the first time since
the Cold War. Consequently, some of NATO’s member
states in Eastern Europe and the Baltic harbor national
security concerns. For this and other reasons, NATO
continues to take steps to ensure the effectiveness of its
collective defense.[76]
Meanwhile, Russia has actively conducted air
activity that can be deemed provocative in Europe,
especially near the Baltic countries.[77] With France, on the
other hand, the agreement on France’s export of Mistralclass amphibious assault ships to Russia was annulled
smoothly based on a two-way agreement. Additionally,
Russia is engaging in a cooperative behavior to some
extent in Syria following the terror attacks in Paris. In
this regard, Russia takes varying responses depending on
the country.



- 8  Exportation of Arms

Russia seems to actively promote the export of arms
not only to maintain the infrastructure of its military
industry and to make economic profit, but also to help
promote better foreign policy. The country’s export value
has been increasing in recent years.[78] In January 2007,
the Russian government granted the exclusive right to
export arms to the Rosoboron Export State Corporation
as part of its ongoing initiatives to improve its export
system. In addition, Russia regards its military industry
as an integral part of the nation’s military organization
and is committed to improving and further developing
the military industry by such measures as promoting the
integration of aircraft companies such as Sukhoi, MiG,
and Tupolev.
Russia exports equipment such as fighters and vessels
to countries including India, China, Algeria, ASEAN
member states, and Venezuela.[79] Among Russia’s arms
export deals in 2015, of note was the signing of a contract
for the Su-35 fighter[80] and the “S-400” surface-to-air
missile system for China. It has been pointed out that this
deal was made possible because the interests of China
and Russia coincided: while China promotes indigenous
weapons production, it still needs Russian technology for
state-of-the-art equipment, whereas Russia aims to avoid
diplomatic isolation caused by the Ukrainian crisis and to
gain economic profit through arms exports.[81]


75 At the 1999 Istanbul summit of the OSCE, an agreement was reached on changing the troop ceilings set formerly by blocks to those set by country and territory and on complying with the current CFE Treaty
until the adapted CFE Treaty comes into effect. Russia was dissatisfied with the fact that despite its ratification of the adapted CFE Treaty, NATO member states refused to ratify the Treaty on the grounds that
the RAF were not withdrawing from Georgia and Moldova. Therefore, in December 2007, Russia suspended the implementation of the CFE Treaty and halted inspections based on this treaty. Presently, only four
countries have ratified the adapted CFE Treaty—Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine—and it has not yet come into effect. In addition, Russia has proposed dissolving the existing security framework that
has NATO at its center and creating a new European security treaty that would provide new fundamental principles for security in Europe and the Atlantic region.

76 At NATO’s Wales Summit in September 2014, the Readiness Action Plan (RAP) was adopted as a measure to strengthen NATO’s collective defense. The RAP includes the creation of the Very High Readiness Joint
Task Force (VJTF) as an initial response force of the NATO Response Force (NRF), a command and control presence on the territories of eastern Allies to facilitate the rapid increase of troops, the development
of host facilities, the advance deployment of equipment and supplies, and the enhancement of exercise plans focused on collective defense. Bulgaria, the Baltic countries, Poland, and Romania have expressed
their intention to provide facilities.

Subsequently, at the NATO defense ministers’ meeting in June 2015, the ministers approved that NRF would consist of up to 40,000 personnel, and that the NATO Force Integration Units (NFIUs) supporting
the deployment of the VJTF would be established in Bulgaria, the Baltic countries, Poland, and Romania. At the NATO defense ministers’ meeting in October 2015, the ministers approved the establishment of
NFIUs in Hungary and Slovakia.

77 In October 2014, NATO announced that the Russian Air Force conducted significant military maneuvers over the Baltic Sea, North Sea, Atlantic Ocean, and Black Sea on October 28 and 29. NATO criticized that
this air activity represents an unusual level of activity over European airspace.

Following the NATO defense ministers’ meeting in October 2015, the NATO Secretary General stated in his remarks as follows: “The ministers agreed that Russia’s military escalation in Syria raises serious
concerns. I call on Russia to play a constructive role in the fight against ISIL. But Russian actions and the support to the (Assad) regime are not helpful. The recent violations of Turkish airspace are unacceptable.
NATO will continue to follow the developments closely. And we stand in strong solidarity with Turkey.”

78 According to SIPRI, Russian arms exports between 2011 and 2015 increased by 28% compared to that of the period between 2006 and 2010. Russia has the second largest share of arms exports in the world
(25%) after the United States.

79 Russia concluded sales contracts with Indonesia for Su-27 and Su-30 fighters in 2003 and 2007 and has delivered the fighters. Furthermore, it was reported in 2016 that Russia plans to sell ten Su-35 fighters
to Indonesia. Russia concluded sales contracts with Malaysia and Vietnam for Su-30 fighters in 2003, and has delivered the fighters to these countries. There are also reports of a sales contract with Vietnam
in 2009 for Su-30 fighters and Kilo-class submarines. In January 2014, the first of the Kilo-class submarines, Hanoi, arrived in Vietnam. With regard to India, aircraft carrier Admiral Gorshkov, which had been
refurbished in Severodvinsk, was delivered to India, renamed as INS Vikramaditya, which arrived in India in January 2014. Moreover, in 2006, Russia concluded sales contracts with Algeria and Venezuela for
arms, including Su-30 fighters, and has delivered some of these arms. Russia’s exports to China have included Su-27 and Su-30 fighters, Sovremenny-class destroyers, and Kilo-class submarines. Against the
backdrop of the advancement of indigenous weapon production in China, some point out that the value of Russian exports to China has been declining in recent years. Nevertheless, Russia has continued to
export equipment such as aircraft engines for repair purposes. With regard to Iran, Russia started exporting the “S-300” surface-to-air missile system in April 2016.

80 According to news reports, a contract was signed to export 24 Su-35 fighters for approximately US$2 billion and 32 S-400 launchers for approximately US$3 billion. The first four Su-35 fighters are scheduled
for delivery by the end of 2016.


-----

**Section 5** **Australia**


**1 General Situation**


Australia shares universal values with Japan, such as
respect for freedom and human rights, and democracy. It
is allied with the United States, as are Japan and the ROK.
In Australia, a federal election was held in September
2013. Tony Abbott, the head of the Liberal Party of the
conservative coalition which won control of the lower
house, took offi ce as Prime Minister, resulting in a change
of government from the Labor Party to the conservative
coalition.[1] The Abbott administration criticized the defense
spending cuts of the previous administration, and signaled
its intention to actively make investments which are
deemed necessary for building a stronger defense force.
This policy has continued under the Turnbull
administration inaugurated in September 2015. The
Defence White Paper released in February 2016 during
the Turnbull administration states that over the next two
decades, the Australian government will make important

**2 Security and Defense Policies**


The Australian government launched its fi rst National
Security Strategy (the Strategy) in January 2013.[2] The
Strategy provides a blueprint for national security over the
next decade, presenting the recognition that responding
to the economic and strategic changes in the Asia-Pacifi c
region is vital to the national security of Australia. The
Strategy defi nes four objectives for the country’s national
security: (1) to ensure a safe and resilient population; (2)
to protect and strengthen Australia’s sovereignty; (3) to
secure Australia’s assets, infrastructure and institutions;
and (4) to promote a favorable international environment.
On this basis, the Strategy outlines the following priorities


investments to maintain a high level of capability of the
ADF, setting out a plan to continue to increase the troop
strength and acquire high performance equipment. The
white paper states explicitly that defense funding would
be increased over the next decade, setting a specifi c target
to reach 2% of Australia’s GDP by 2020. With regard to
Australia’s international relationships, the white paper
sets forth that Australia would aim to mature and deepen
practical engagement with partners across the IndoPacifi c, including Japan, while continuing to give highest
priority to its alliance with the United States. To achieve
its strategic defense objective of contributing military
capabilities to coalition operations that support Australia’s
interests in a rules-based global order, Australia makes
proactive contributions to the peace and stability of the
international community through the deployment of ADF
to overseas operations, among other efforts.

for the next fi ve years: (1) enhanced engagement in the
Asia-Pacifi c region;[3] (2) integrated cyber policy and
operations;[4] and (3) effective partnerships.[5]
In February 2016, the Australian government
released its seventh new Defence White Paper.[6] This
white paper presents an outlook of Australia’s security
environment over the next two decades. It then outlines
the direction of Australia’s defense strategy for dealing
with this environment, and the development of the
defense force pursuant to this strategy.
Specifi cally, the white paper maintains that
while there is little prospect of a military attack on


In this election, the conservative coalition comprised of the Liberal, National, and other parties won 90 out of the 150 lower house seats. As a result, Tony Abbott, the head of the Liberal Party, which had the
most seats among the member parties of the conservative coalition that secured a majority in the lower house, was inaugurated as the 28th Prime Minister of Australia.

This strategy is based on the National Security Statement, announced in December 2008, which articulated Australia’s national security agenda and set in motion reforms to strengthen the National Security
Community. The national security strategy is scheduled to be revised every fi ve years.

This includes: deepening the Australia-U.S. alliance; enhancing bilateral cooperation with infl uential regional countries such as China, Indonesia, Japan, the ROK, and India; and promoting the superiority and
effectiveness of multilateral forums.

The Australian Cyber Security Centre (ACSC) integrates the capabilities of Australia’s Department of Defence, Attorney-General’s Department, and Federal Police and the cyber-related personnel of the Australian
Crime Commission.

This includes sharing information securely and quickly with domestic and international partners and strengthening information sharing between government and business.

The Defence White Paper of Australia presents the government’s future plan and measures for national defense. It was previously published in 1976 (Fraser Liberal Party administration), 1987 (Hawke Labor
Party administration), 1994 (Keating Labor Party administration), 2000 (Howard Liberal Party administration), 2009 (Rudd Labor Party administration), 2013 (Gillard Labor Party administration), and 2016


-----

Australian territory in the period to 2035, Australia
will face new complexities and challenges.[7] Based on
this understanding, three strategic defense interests are
identifi ed, namely: a secure, resilient Australia (including
the security of sea lanes); a secure nearer region; and a
stable Indo-Pacifi c region and rules-based global order.
Additionally, three strategic defense objectives are given,
which are: (1) Deter, deny, and defeat attacks on or
threats to Australia and its national interests; (2) Make
military contributions to support the security of maritime
Southeast Asia and support the governments of South
Pacifi c countries to build and strengthen their security; and
(3) Contribute military capabilities to coalition operations
that support Australia’s interests in a rules-based global

**3 Relations with Other Countries**


In the new Defence White Paper, Australia subscribes
to the view that Australia’s security and prosperity are
directly linked to the development of the nearer region, the
Indo-Pacifi c region, and the global strategic environment.
Based on this view, Australia will build and maintain
international security relationships to achieve its strategic
defense objectives. In particular, Australia will aim to
mature and deepen practical engagement with partners
across the Indo-Pacifi c region, including Indonesia,
Japan, the ROK, New Zealand, India, and China, while
continuing to give the highest priority to its alliance with
the United States.

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-4-1 (Japan-Australia Defense
Cooperation and Exchanges)


order. To maintain the ADF’s high level of capability
needed to achieve these objectives, the government will
make important investments. In addition to increasing
the troop strength by approximately 4,400 personnel,[8]
Australia will acquire high performance equipment,
including 12 new submarines,[9] 3 air warfare destroyers
(Aegis vessels), 72 F-35 Joint Strike Fighters, and 7 MQ4C unmanned patrol aircraft. Simultaneously, Australia
will seek to strengthen ISR capabilities, electronic warfare
capabilities, and cyber security capabilities, as well as
strengthen the functions of its bases in northern Australia
and elsewhere. To support these programs by funding, the
white paper also presents the concrete target of increasing
defense funding to reach 2% of GDP by 2020.

States of America (ANZUS)[10] is based on shared values
and will continue to be the centerpiece of Australia’s
defense policy. Australia notes that the United States,
which remains the pre-eminent global military power
over the next two decades, will continue to be its most
important strategic partner, and the active presence of the
United States will continue to underpin the stability of
the region. It is stated that Australia thus welcomes and
supports the critical role of the United States in ensuring
stability in the Indo-Pacifi c region.
Since 1985, the two countries have been regularly
convening the Australia-United States Ministerial
Consultations (AUSMIN) to discuss major diplomatic
and security issues. On the operational front, the two
countries have made efforts to increase interoperability
through joint exercises, including Exercise Talisman
Saber.[11] Since April 2012, the U.S. Marine Corps have
conducted rotational deployments to northern Australia.[12]
On the equipment front, the two countries have been
simplifying the export procedures associated with



- 1  Relations with the United States

In the Defence White Paper, Australia states that its
alliance with the United States pursuant to the Security
Treaty between Australia, New Zealand and the United


7 The white paper identifi es six factors that will shape the security environment of Australia over the next two decades: (1) the roles of the United States and China in the Indo-Pacifi c region and the relationship
between them; (2) challenges to the stability of the rules-based global order; (3) the threat of terrorism to Australians at home and abroad; (4) state fragility caused by uneven economic growth, crime, social,
environmental and governance challenges, and climate change; (5) the pace of military modernization and the development of more capable regional military forces; and (6) the emergence of new complex,
non-geographic threats (e.g., cyber threats). With regard to (5), the white paper notes that in the Indo-Pacifi c region, half of the world’s submarines and at least half of the world’s advanced combat aircraft will
be operating and more countries may acquire ballistic missile technology.

8 According to the white paper, over the next decade, the number of active duty ADF personnel would be increased to approximately 62,400 personnel from the current approximately 58,000 personnel. If this
is realized, the ADF would return to its largest size since 1993.

9 The Defence White Paper refers to the submarines to be acquired as “regionally superior submarines.” It explains that Australia would select the submarine classifi cation by the end of 2016, and that the fi rst
submarine would begin entering service in the early 2030s. Japan, Germany, and France participated in the submarine Competitive Evaluation Process. In April 2016, the Australian government announced that
the French company DCNS was chosen as the partner for building the submarines.

10 A trilateral security treaty among Australia, New Zealand, and the United States, which went into effect in 1952. Since 1986, the United States has suspended its obligation to defend New Zealand due to its
adoption of a non-nuclear policy. The treaty is thus effective only between Australia and the United States and between Australia and New Zealand.

11 Exercise Talisman Saber, started in 2005, is a biennial combined Australia-U.S. training activity designed to improve combat readiness and interoperability. About 33,000 U.S. Forces and ADF personnel
participated in the exercise held in July 2015.

12 By way of the Force Posture Initiatives of November 2011, the United States and Australia announced that the U.S. Marine Corps would conduct rotational deployments approximately every six months to Darwin
and northern Australia. Accordingly, approximately 200 U.S. Marines were deployed in 2012 and 2013, 1,150 Marines in 2014 and 2015, and approximately 1,250 Marines in 2016. The Defence White Paper


-----

equipment deals pursuant to the Australia-U.S. Defence
Trade Cooperation Treaty that entered into force in May
2013. In addition, the two countries are examining the
joint development of the F-35 JSF and missile defense
cooperation.[13] Furthermore, bilateral cooperation is being
advanced in areas such as ISR, space,[14] and cyber.[15]
Since the Abbott administration that was inaugurated in
September 2013, Australia has continued to pursue the
further deepening of bilateral relations. In August 2014,
the two sides signed the Force Posture Agreement which
provides a legal framework for the rotational deployment
of the U.S. Marine Corps. From October 2014, the ADF
has been participating in the combat mission of the
U.S.-led operation against ISIL. In July 2015, the two
countries conducted a training in which B-52 strategic
bombers of the U.S. Forces were flown from the U.S.
mainland to drop bombs on an air weapons range in
Australia and then returned to the United States. At the
30th AUSMIN in October 2015, the two sides signed a
joint statement on defense cooperation[16] to serve as a
guideline for future defense cooperation, and reaffirmed
their strong bilateral cooperation.

- 2  Relations with China


enhance mutual understanding, facilitate transparency,
and build trust.
Based on such a policy, Australia and China
continuously hold dialogues among their defense
authorities,[17] along with exchanges to develop the
cooperative relations between their defense forces,
including joint exercises and mutual visits by vessels.[18]

Meanwhile, like the previous Abbott administration,
the Turnbull administration has been making Australia’s
position on China very clear. The Joint Statement of the
AUSMIN in October 2015, referring to China by name,
expresses strong concerns over recent land reclamation
and construction activity in the South China Sea, and
calls on all claimant states to halt militarization. When
the United States conducted the Freedom of Navigation
Operation in the South China Sea in the same month,
Minister for Defence Marise Payne of Australia issued a
statement expressing strong support for rights to freedom
of navigation and overflight under international law.[19] In
the Defence White Paper, Australia asserts that it will
be important for regional stability that China provides
reassurance to its neighbors by being more transparent
about its defense policies, and expresses particular
concern with the unprecedented pace and scale of China’s
land reclamation activities in the South China Sea. That
said, in October 2015, the government of the Northern
Territory leased to a Chinese company the rights to
operate the commercial wharfs of the Darwin Port, also
utilized by ADF and U.S. Force vessels. The fact that the
Australian federal government did not lodge objections,
saying there were no security concerns, led to people
expressing uneasiness within and outside of Australia.[20]


In the Defence White Paper, Australia states that its
relationship with China is crucial in different ways
from its relationship with the United States, and that
it welcomes China’s continued economic growth and
the opportunities this is bringing for Australia and
other countries in the Indo-Pacific. It goes on to say
Australia is committed to continuing the development of
Australia’s defense relations with China, and working to


13 While Australia considers that the threat of an ICBM attack on Australia is low, it deems there is a possible threat of an attack on Australian territory by a long-range or submarine-launched ballistic missile or
cruise missile, as well as attack on the deployed ADF by a short-range ballistic missile or cruise missile. To counter such threats, Australia and the United States have launched a working group to study options
that could contribute to missile defense in the region.

14 Since signing the Space Situational Awareness Partnership in November 2010, Australia and the United States have promoted space cooperation, including the relocation of the U.S. C-band ground-based radar
system and the Space Surveillance Telescope to Australia.

15 At the AUSMIN in September 2011, the two nations signed a joint statement on cyberspace and confirmed that, mindful of their longstanding defense relationship and the ANZUS Treaty, the two would consult
together and determine appropriate options to address threats in the event of a cyber attack that threatens the territorial integrity, political independence, or security of either Australia or the United States.

16 The statement envisions that greater competition for resources and territorial disputes will increase the possibility of miscalculation and the potential for conflict in the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean regions,
and states that the two countries would further deepen their defense relationship to deal with this. Specifically, the statement sets forth: deeper interoperability; strengthened policy and intelligence cooperation;
increased collaboration in science and technology, capability development, and defense industry engagement; and coordinated multilateral engagement.

17 In July 2014, Fan Changlong, Vice Chairman of the Central Military Commission of the Communist Party of China, visited Australia, and held talks with Prime Minister Abbott, Minister for Defence David Johnston,
and others. The two sides agreed to hold a U.S.-China-Australia trilateral joint exercise. In addition, Australia and China have regularly convened the Defence Strategic Dialogue since 1997. At the 18th Dialogue
held in December 2015, Gen. Fang Fenghui, then Chief of the General Staff of the People’s Liberation Army of China, visited Australia and held talks with Australian officials, including Air Chief Marshal Mark
Binskin, Chief of the Defence Force, and Dennis Richardson, Secretary of the Department of Defence.

18 In August 2015, following on from the previous year, KOWARI 2015, the second survival training among the United States, China, and Australia, was conducted in northern Australia, with ten personnel
participating from each country. In September 2015, Exercise Pandaroo designed to build teamwork, friendship, and trust between the Australian and Chinese forces was carried out in southeastern Australia,
with ten personnel participating from each country. In November, two vessels of the Royal Australian Navy (RAN) visited Zhanjiang, Guangdong Province in China, and conducted a joint exercise with Chinese
Navy vessels including a live firing exercise. In January 2016, three Chinese Navy vessels visited Brisbane, Australia and conducted navigation training with ADF vessels.

19 In response to China’s announcement of the “East China Sea ADIZ” in November 2013, Minister for Foreign Affairs Julie Bishop issued a statement saying Australia has made clear its opposition to any coercive
or unilateral actions to change the status quo in the East China Sea.

20 In addition, opposition parties and think tanks raised concerns over the fact that this Chinese company is thought to have close ties with the Communist Party of China and the People’s Liberation Army, and


-----

- 4  Relations with Southeast Asia and South
**Pacific Countries**

In the Defence White Paper, Australia regards a secure
nearer region encompassing maritime Southeast Asia
and South Pacific as its strategic interest. In particular,
Australia considers that instability and conflicts in
Southeast Asia have the potential to threaten Australia’s
security and economic relations with countries.
Furthermore, Australia depends on maritime trade with
Southeast Asian countries and maritime trade that transits
Southeast Asia. In this regard, Australia perceives that
the security of these sea lanes must be ensured alongside
freedom of navigation. Based on this understanding,
Australia seeks to make military contributions to support
the maritime security of Southeast Asia and support the
governments of South Pacific and other countries to build
and strengthen their security.
Australia has been deepening its relations with
Indonesia in the security and defense fields following
the signing of the Lombok Treaty in November 2006, the
elevation of their relationship to strategic partnership
in March 2010, and the conclusion of the Defence
Cooperation Arrangement in September 2012.[22] In
recent years, however, issues have emerged, including
differences in their responses to stowaways from
Indonesia, the case of wiretapping of the Indonesian
President and others by Australia’s intelligence agency,
and the issue of the execution of Australian nationals
in Indonesia.[23] Consequently, cooperative relations in
the security and defense fields stalled intermittently
between the two countries. Subsequently, in the
second half of 2015, mutual visits by ministers and
higher-level officials resumed, including the visit
to Indonesia by Prime Minister Turnbull. The third
Foreign and Defense Ministerial Meeting (2+2) was
held in December 2015, and the bilateral relationship
is seeing further improvements.
With Singapore and Malaysia, Australia carries
out regular joint combined exercises in the South China


Australia and India’s first combined naval exercise AUSINDEX 2015

[Australian Department of Defence]



- 3  Relations with India

In the Defence White Paper, Australia states that it
welcomes India’s increasingly active role in the IndoPacific region, and that it sees India as a key security
partner. Australia notes that it aims to further mature its
defense relationship with India in support of their shared
strategic interests.
The Australia-India relationship was elevated to
strategic partnership in November 2009, and the two
countries have regularly conducted strategic dialogues,
mutual visits by senior military officers, interactions
among military services, and mutual dispatches of
students to military educational organizations. More
recently, in November 2014, Prime Minister of India
Narendra Modi visited Australia, marking the first visit
to Australia by an Indian Prime Minister in 28 years. The
two leaders agreed to extend defense cooperation to cover
research, development, and industry engagement, to hold
regular meetings at the level of Defense Minister and
conduct regular maritime exercises, and to convene talks
between each of their military services. Accordingly, in
June 2015, two Indian Navy vessels made a goodwill visit
to Australia, and in September 2015, the first bilateral
combined naval exercise AUSINDEX 15 was conducted
off the east coast of India.[21]

See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 7-1-2 (Military Affairs)


21 From Australia, three RAN vessels including a submarine and one patrol aircraft participated. From India, three Indian Navy vessels and one patrol aircraft participated.

22 The Lombok Treaty is a security cooperation framework that espouses wide-ranging cooperation in the defense field. It entered into force in February 2008. The Defense Cooperation Arrangement covers
strengthened cooperation in counter-terrorism and maritime security.

23 To deal with the increasing number of stowaways from Indonesia, the Abbott administration has taken responses, such as turning them away at sea prior to their landing in Australia. This has prompted backlash
from the Indonesian government. In November 2013, it was reported that an Australian intelligence agency wiretapped the telephone calls of Indonesia’s previous President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, Mrs.
Yudhoyono, ministers, and others. The Indonesian government lodged strong protests, including summoning the Australian Ambassador to Indonesia and demanding an apology to the Australian government.
The government also announced the suspension of military exchanges and intelligence cooperation with Australia. In April 2015, two Australians were executed in Indonesia for helping to smuggle drugs, and


-----

Sea and other areas[24] under the framework of the Five
Power Defence Arrangements.[25] Australia considers that
Singapore is its most advanced defense partner, and that
they share Australia’s interest in a secure maritime trading
environment. As regards Malaysia, Australia stations
the ADF in Royal Malaysian Air Force (RMAF) Base
Butterworth, and contributes to maintaining regional
security and stability through patrol activities in the
South China Sea and the northern Indian Ocean.[26]
Australia plays a leading role in assisting Papua New
Guinea, Timor-Leste, and the South Pacific countries in
fields such as security maintenance, coping with natural
disasters, and maritime patrol.[27] In particular, in the field
of maritime patrol, Australia still regularly deploys ADF
assets to the South Pacific to assist with patrol activities.
In addition, in June 2014, Australia unveiled a plan to
replace the 22 patrol vessels it provided to these countries
in the past.
With New Zealand, Australia has an alliance
pursuant to the ANZUS Treaty. The two countries hold
regular meetings by their leaders and defense ministers,
and have maintained close cooperative relations in the
security and defense fields through joint exercises and
joint activities in the region.

See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 6 (Security and Defense Policies of Each Country)



- 5  Overseas Activities

In the Defence White Paper, Australia identifies the
following strategic defense objective: Contribute military
capabilities to coalition operations that support Australia’s
interests in a rules-based global order. In line with this
objective, as of late June 2016, about 2,350 of Australia’s
approximately 56,750 force strength[28] are deployed and
are conducting operations overseas.
In Iraq, to support the airstrikes conducted by the
U.S. Forces against ISIL in northern Iraq, Australia began
air-dropping humanitarian supplies in August 2014 and
participating in combat missions such as airstrikes from
October 2014. In addition, Australia has been advising
and assisting the Iraqi Security Forces on the military
front since May 2014. As of late June 2016, about 780
personnel (of which approximately 400 personnel are
engaged in assistance in the United Arab Emirates), six
F/A-18 fighter/attack aircraft, one E-7A early warning
and control aircraft, one KC-30A refueling aircraft,
among other assets are executing this mission.
In Afghanistan, since October 2001, approximately
1,550 ADF personnel on average have engaged annually
in reconstruction assistance activities and the trainings of
the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF), under the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). With the
completion of ISAF’s activities in the end of 2014, about
270 ADF personnel now train, advise, and assist NATOled Afghan forces.


24 In October 2014, Exercise Bersama Lima was held in the Malay Peninsula and the neighboring waters and airspace, in which approximately 500 personnel, vessels, and patrol aircraft of the ADF participated.
In Exercise Bersama Shield held in May 2015, approximately 380 personnel, vessels including a submarine, and patrol aircraft of the ADF participated.

25 See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 6-2, Footnote 10.

26 See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 3-6.

27 Australia has extended proactive assistance for the political and social stability of Timor-Leste since 1999, when the momentum for independence heightened in Timor-Leste. The ADF led the International
Stabilization Force (ISF) since 2006, and with the stabilization of the security situation in Timor-Leste, the withdrawal of the ADF was completed in March 2013. In the Solomon Islands, the ADF extended
assistance for their stabilization since July 2003 through the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI). The ADF withdrew from the country in August 2013, when the military activities of RAMSI
were completed.


-----

**Section 6** **Southeast Asia**


**1 General Situation**


Southeast Asia occupies a strategic position for traffi c,
linking the Pacifi c and the Indian Oceans, such as the
Straits of Malacca and the South China Sea. It is an
important region for Japan which relies on maritime
transport for many of the supplies needed for economic
activities and the lives of the Japanese people. The


countries in Southeast Asia are making efforts to achieve
political stability and steady economic growth, and lately
have realized overall economic development to varying
degrees. Such economic development has deepened
interdependence within the region and with countries
outside the region. In late 2015, the establishment of

|Fig. I-2-6-1 Comparison of Forc|es Strength and Defense Budget between Southeast Asia and Japan/China/ROK 2016|
|---|---|


**ROK**

Ground forces
**1.6 million troops**
Combat aircraft Ground forces
approx. 2,720 aircraft **495,000 troops**

Combat aircraft
approx.
**620 aircraft**

Vessels National Defense Budget
**211,000 tons** approx. U.S.$ 35.6 bn

Vessels National Defense Budget (38.7995 trillion won)
**1.502tons million** approx. U.S.$ (954.4 billion yuan)151.1 bn **China**

Ground Combat
forces aircraft
**140,000** approx.
troops **410 aircraft**

Vessels

National Defense Budget

**All of Southeast Asia** **469,000** approx. U.S.$ 40.5 bn

tons

(4.8607 trillion yen)

(137 vessels)

**1.655Ground forces million troops** **Japan**

Combat aircraft
approx.
**840 aircraft**

National Defense Budget

Vessels approx. U.S.$ 37.7 bn
**628,000 tons**

Notes: 1. Source: “The Military Balance 2016,” etc. The size of each block indicates relative size using Japan as the base size.
There are limits to the comparisons of national defense budgets which have simply been converted into U.S. dollars when the different elements are taken into consideration,
such as each country’s exchange rate fluctuations and price levels. However, as the purchasing power parities of Southeast Asian countries are not published by the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (except Indonesia), this figure intentionally represents the national defense budgets of Japan and other
countries that have been converted into U.S. dollars using the exchange rate published by the Ministry of Finance of Japan.
2. For Japan, the force strength shows the actual strength of each SDF as of the end of FY2015; the number of combat aircraft is the sum of the number of combat aircraft of the
ASDF (excluding transport aircraft) and that of the MSDF (fixed-wing aircraft only).
The Japanese national defense budget is the initial budget excluding the cost of the SACO, the share of the U.S. Forces realignment costs.
The Japanese national defense expenditures are the initial budget excluding SACO-related expenses (4.6 billion yen), excluding the portion meant to reduce the burden on the
local community (142.6 billion yen) out of the U.S. Forces realignment expenses and expenses associated with the acquisition of new government aircraft.
3. The national defense budget of China is from the Finance Minister’s Budget Report to the National People’s congress in 2016.
4. The national defense budget of the ROK is from ROK Ministry of National Defense sources from 2016, etc.
5. The national defense budget for all of Southeast Asia represents the sum of the 2015 figures for each country according to “The Military Balance 2016.” However, the sum uses
2014 figures from “The Military Balance 2015” for Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos.
6. The national defense budget of China and the ROK is expressed in U.S. dollars and is calculated using the FY2016 Ministry of Finance exchange rates of 120 yen to 1 dollar,
19 yen to 1 yuan, and 110 yen to 1,000 won.
7. The Japanese national defense budget is expressed in U.S. dollars converting 2016 figures using the FY2016 Ministry of Finance exchange rate of 120 yen to 1 dollar.


-----

the ASEAN Community was declared as an outcome
of the strides made in ASEAN cooperation towards its
integration. Meanwhile, this region still has destabilizing
factors, including the territorial disputes over the
South China Sea, ethnic minority issues, separatist
and independence movements, and Islamic extremist
groups. Moreover, there are incidents such as piracy
by which the safe passage of ships is obstructed.
Furthermore, in recent years, there is a concern about
nationals embarking to Iraq and Syria for the purpose of
joining ISIL and engaging in terrorism after returning to

**2 Security and Defense Policies of Each Country**


- 1  Indonesia


their countries.[1] In order to cope with these issues, the
countries in Southeast Asia are working to build military
forces for national defense and maintenance of domestic
public security, as well as for addressing new security
issues such as terrorism and piracy. Recently, against
the backdrop of economic development, the countries
have been modernizing their military forces, particularly
their naval and air forces, as well as strengthening their
maritime law enforcement capacities.

See>> Fig. I-2-6-1 (Comparison of Forces Strength and Defense Budget
between Southeast Asia and Japan/China/ROK 2016)

through efforts including conducting related exercises.
While no major terror attacks had occurred in Indonesia
in recent years, terrorist bombing attacks took place in
January 2016 in central Jakarta, which killed and injured
several people.[6]
Indonesia emphasizes cooperation with other
Southeast Asian countries, and adopts an independent
and active foreign policy. With the United States, it is
strengthening its cooperative relationship in such fi elds
as military education and training and military equipment
procurement, and carries out joint training with the United
States. These include the “Cooperation Afl oat Readiness


Indonesia is a country of importance in Southeast Asia
with the world’s largest Muslim population, vast land
and territorial waters, and strategic importance for
maritime traffi c. Although Indonesia does not confront
any immediate external military threats, it faces internal
concerns, including the activities of Islamic extremists,[2]
such as Jemaah Islamiyah (JI), and secession and
independence movements in Papua Province.
Under the banner of the maritime nation concept,
President Joko Widodo who took offi ce in October 2014
strives to revive maritime culture, address territorial
disputes through maritime diplomacy, and strengthen
maritime defense capabilities.
As part of its military force reform, Indonesia
aims to meet the requirements for minimum defense
capabilities—what it calls Minimum Essential Force
(MEF)—and build the MEF over a period of four years.
However, Indonesia has indicated that its maritime
defense capabilities, in particular, are still very much
inadequate.[3] Accordingly, Indonesia has announced a
defense budget increase as well as a policy to bolster its
deployment of assets to the Natuna Islands in the South
China Sea and other locations.[4] Furthermore, Indonesia
established the Joint Special Operations Command in the
Indonesian National Armed Forces[5] to counter terrorism.
Indonesia also aims to increase its response capabilities


As of November 2015, approximately 700 Indonesian nationals reportedly embarked for Iraq and Syria to join ISIL. It has also been suggested that nationals embarked from Malaysia, Singapore, and the Philippines.

For details, see Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1-3 “Trends in the Spread of International Terrorism.”

In October 2014, Commander of the Indonesian National Armed Forces Moeldoko commented that the country had only yet reached 38% of the target to achieve MEF in the next four years. Chief of Staff of
the Indonesian Navy Marsetio has stated that the country’s maritime defense capabilities are very much inadequate, and that 12 submarines and 16 frigates are necessary.

It is believed that on December 15, 2015, Minister of Defense Ryamizard Ryacudu unveiled a plan to deploy a fi ghter squadron and small vessels to the Natuna Islands as well as increase the number of troops
stationed there from the current 800 to around 2,000, including the special operations force of the Air Force, for the purpose of “being prepared for a range of threats such as illegal operations and illicit intrusion.”

On June 9, 2015, Commander of the Indonesian National Armed Forces Moeldoko formed the Joint Special Operations Command. Comprised of personnel from the Army, Navy, and Air Force who have received
counter-terrorism training, it is believed to be based in Sentul, West Java and is ready to be mobilized 24 hours a day.

On January 14, 2016, multiple explosions and gunfi re took place in central Jakarta, killing 8 people including 4 bombers and injuring more than 20 people. ISIL’s Indonesia branch issued a statement


-----

and Training (CARAT)”[7] and the “Southeast Asia
Cooperation Against Terrorism (SEACAT)”[8] exercises.
In October 2015, President Joko visited the United
States. The two leaders discussed the strengthening of the
comprehensive partnership between the two countries,
and welcomed the signing of the Joint Statement for
Comprehensive Defense Cooperation between the
Secretary of Defense and the Minister of Defense that
took place at the same timing.[9]
With China, the counter-terrorism training Sharp
Knife has been held among the special operation forces
of the two countries since 2011, and Sharp Knife
Airborne among the airborne units of the air forces of
the two countries since 2013. In March 2015, President
Joko visited China as a state guest, and affirmed with
President Xi Jinping that they would deepen bilateral
relations under the framework of comprehensive strategic
partnership.

See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 5-3 (Relations with Other Countries); Part III,
Chapter 2, Section 1-4-6 ((1) Indonesia)

- 2  Malaysia


and mutual visits by dignitaries take place frequently. In
September 2015, Malaysia and China conducted their
first bilateral field training exercise Peace and Friendship
2015 in the Strait of Malacca. Furthermore, in November
2015, when the Commander of the Chinese Navy visited
Malaysia, the two countries are said to have agreed on
making use of the Port of Kota Kinabalu for port calls by
Chinese Navy vessels.[12] On the other hand, in connection
with the recent continued anchoring of Chinese
government vessels around the South Luconia Shoal
over which Malaysia claims sovereignty, Malaysia has
announced that its Navy and maritime law enforcement
agencies would conduct around-the-clock monitoring,
and that Malaysia would firmly defend its sovereignty.
Along with strengthening its maritime defense force, in
recent years Malaysia has striven to bolster its defense
posture in eastern Malaysia, announcing in October 2013
that it would construct a new naval base in Bintulu close
to the James Shoal and the South Luconia Shoal.[13]

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-4-6 ((9) Malaysia)

- 3  Myanmar


Malaysia, which is located at the center of Southeast
Asia, considers itself to have common strategic interests
with its neighboring countries. Although Malaysia
does not acknowledge any imminent external threats at
present, it believes that its forces should maintain a level
of readiness for dealing with all military threats, and
therefore, places importance on “Independence,” “Total
Defence,” “Commitment to the Rule of the Five Power
Defence Arrangements (FPDA),”[10] “Cooperation to the
U.N. for World Peace,” “Measures against Terrorism,”
and “Defence Diplomacy” in its defense policy. Malaysia
and the United States hold joint exercises such as CARAT
and SEACAT, and promote military cooperation including
capacity-building in the maritime security field.[11]
Despite competing claims over the sovereignty of the
South China Sea and other matters, Malaysia and China
have strong ties, especially their economic relationship,


Myanmar shares borders with China and India, which are
steering the changing balance of power in the international
community, and is located on the border of South Asia
and Southeast Asia. In light of these factors, Myanmar is
noted for its strategic significance. In Myanmar, the armed
forces had control over the government following the
collapse of the socialist regime in 1988. However, with an
economic slowdown caused by the economic sanctions
imposed by the West against the military government,
coupled with isolation from the international community,
a road map to democracy was unveiled in 2003.[14] The
road map to democracy was completed following the
inauguration of the Thein Sein administration in March
2011. In the first general elections held in November
2015 following the transition to civilian rule, the National
League for Democracy (NLD) led by President Aung San


7 A general term that refers to a series of bilateral exercises that the United States conducts with Bangladesh, Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Timor-Leste.

8 A general term that refers to counter-terrorism joint exercises that the United States conducts with Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand.

9 On October 26, 2015, the Joint Statement for Comprehensive Defense Cooperation was signed between U.S. Secretary of Defense Carter and Minister of Defense Ryamizard during his visit to the United
States. The joint statement consists of five pillars: maritime; peacekeeping; HA/DR; defense modernization; and countering transnational threats. In November 2015, when President Obama unveiled his policy
of strengthening assistance for Southeast Asian countries, the President stated that the United States would expand cooperation on Indonesia’s coastal patrol and ISR capacity-building, among other areas, and
provide US$21 million of assistance to Indonesia over two years until 2016.

10 Entered into force in 1971. This agreement states that Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom will discuss what response should be adopted in the event of aggression towards or the threat of an
attack on Malaysia or Singapore. The five countries carry out various exercises based on these arrangements.

11 In November 2015, Minister of Defence Hishammuddin Hussein, joined by U.S. Secretary of Defense Carter who was visiting Malaysia, boarded and toured a U.S. aircraft carrier in the South China Sea. In the
same month, when President Obama unveiled his policy of strengthening assistance for Southeast Asian countries, the President stated that the United States would provide assistance of US$2.5 million to
Malaysia over two years until 2016. The President then announced that the United States would expand bilateral cooperation in such areas as port security and joint exercises.

12 Admiral Wu Shengli, Commander of the Chinese Navy, visited Malaysia from November 9 to 11, 2015. When the Commander held talks with officials including Malaysia’s Deputy Minister of Defence and Chief
of Navy, the two sides agreed that they would deepen the relations between their military forces and promote practical cooperation in all directions. In addition, the two sides are said to have agreed on making
use of the Port of Kota Kinabalu in the state of Sabah, Malaysia for port calls by Chinese vessels as part of their defense cooperation.

13 In October 2014, Prime Minister Najib Razak announced that Malaysia would relocate Squadron Hawk (light attack aircraft) from the Malay Peninsula to the Labuan Air Base facing the South China Sea, and
that Malaysia would upgrade the runway at the airport in Lahad Datu in the state of Sabah in the northeastern area of Borneo.

14 Consists of seven steps: reconvening of the National Assembly; stepwise implementation of processes necessary for democratization; drafting a new constitution; a national referendum on the constitution;


-----

widespread concerns among the international community
about their impacts on the democratization of Myanmar.
With regard to the Rohingya issue, since 2015 the drifting
of approximately 7,000 people near the Strait of Malacca
has developed into a crisis. Following talks to discuss
responses by the relevant countries, it was decided that
countries such as Malaysia and Indonesia would permit
the temporary acceptance of these people, on the condition
that they return to their country in the future. However,
Myanmar does not recognize the Rohingya people as its
citizens, and thus, their legal status as stateless people is
further complicating this issue.
With regard to foreign policy, Myanmar upholds
the principle of independence and non-alignment. On
the other hand, China is thought to be an especially
important partner to Myanmar since its period of military
rule. With economic support from China, a gas pipeline
and a port, among other infrastructure, are being built. On
the military front, China is regarded as a major supplier
of equipment. In June 2014, previous President Thein
Sein visited China, and the two sides agreed to deepen
cooperation in such areas as defense practices, law
enforcement, and security. In June 2015, NLD President
Aung San Suu Kyi visited China, and in a meeting with
President Xi Jinping, the two countries agreed that they
would enhance their friendly relations. Furthermore,
Myanmar is strengthening its cooperative relationship
with India both in the economic and military areas.

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-4-6 ((7) Myanmar)

- 4  The Philippines


Suu Kyi secured a victory.[15] In March 2016, Htin Kyaw
was elected President at the Assembly of the Union. In
the same month, he was appointed President, and a new
administration was inaugurated.
Since the previous Thein Sein administration,
the government of Myanmar has actively taken steps
towards democratization, including the release of
political prisoners and ceasefire agreements with ethnic
minorities.[16] The international community has shown
some level of appreciation for these steps, with the West
including the United States successively easing economic
sanctions on Myanmar. Following the inauguration of the
new administration, the United States and other countries
have issued statements welcoming the advances made
towards democratization and expressing high expectations
for the administration of the government.
With regard to the efforts for a ceasefire agreement
with ethnic minorities, in October 2015 the government
signed a national ceasefire agreement with eight of the
16 armed ethnic minority groups with which negotiations
were undertaken. Nevertheless, challenges still remain for
the new administration, with eight other groups refusing
to sign the ceasefire agreement, as well as fighting
breaking out with groups that are not participating in the
negotiations and are excluded from the agreement.
Additionally, including in the years preceding the
previous administration, nuclear issues and military
ties with North Korea have been raised as matters of
concern.[17] The conflicts between Rohingya Muslim
ethnic minorities and Buddhists since 2012 have led to


The Philippines perceives that it confronts new security
challenges, including non-traditional threats, such as
transnational crime. At the same time, it identifies that
long-standing issues, such as the territorial disputes
over the South China Sea and terrorism perpetrated by
domestic anti-government armed groups, constitute major
security concerns. In the first presidential election in six
years held in May 2016, Rodrigo Duterte was elected.
As regards domestic security issues, over the last
approximately 40 years, armed conflicts have repeatedly
broken out between the government of the Philippines and
the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) in particular.
With the support of the activities of the International


15 On November 20, 2015, the Union Election Commission of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar announced the results of the November 8 general elections. The results confirmed that NLD won 390 of the
491 contested seats, while the ruling party Union Solidarity and Development Party (USDP) gained no more than 41 seats.

16 About 30% of Myanmar’s population is ethnic minorities, some of which demand secession or greater autonomy for their regions. In the 1960s, the government of Myanmar implemented oppressive policies
involving human rights violations such as forced labor and forced migration, which led to armed conflicts with armed groups of ethnic minorities.

17 It is reported that at talks with then President Lee Myung-bak of the ROK in May 2012, President Thein Sein admitted that some weapons trading took place with North Korea in the past 20 years and indicated
that the country would not engage in such trade in the future. He denied cooperation with North Korea on nuclear development. Moreover, it has been reported that, at the 11th IISS Shangri-La Dialogue (Asia
Security Summit) held in June the same year, then Defence Minister Hla Min disclosed that while the previous government attempted to start academic research on nuclear technology, this research was


-----

Monitoring Team (IMT),[18] the peace process is seeing
progress, including the signing of the Comprehensive
Agreement on the Bangsamoro and the partial
decommissioning of MILF forces and weapons.[19] On the
other hand, military clashes have occurred between the
government army and National Police, and armed forces
opposing the peace talks.[20] It is deemed that time will be
required to achieve practical peace.
The Philippines and the United States, with a
historically close relationship, consider that the U.S.Philippines alliance is a lynchpin for the peace, stability,
and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region. The two
countries have maintained a cooperative relationship
under their mutual defense treaty and military assistance
agreement, even after the withdrawal of the U.S. Forces
in 1992.[21] The two countries have conducted the largescale military exercise Balikatan every year since 2000
as well as the CARAT and SEACAT joint exercises. In
November 2015, when President Obama visited the Port
of Manila during his visit to the Philippines, the President
announced support for areas including equipment
cooperation, capacity-building in coastal security, and
joint exercises, stating that as an ally the United States
was committed to further strengthening and expanding
their existing security cooperation.
In January 2016, the Supreme Court of the
Philippines ruled that the Enhanced Defense Cooperation
Agreement (EDCA)[22] signed between the two countries
in April 2014 for strengthening their cooperation on such
areas as the capacity enhancement of the Armed Forces
of the Philippines and disaster relief was constitutional.
In the same month, the two countries held a Foreign
and Defense Ministerial Meeting (2+2) in Washington,
D.C. and discussed South China Sea issues, approach
to strengthening their defense cooperation, among other
matters. In March 2016, the two countries agreed on five
locations for carrying out defense cooperation based on
the EDCA. In April 2016, the two countries announced


The U.S. and Philippine Defense Secretaries shake hands aboard an Osprey over the waters
of the South China Sea (background: USS John C. Stennis) (April 15, 2016)

[Photo courtesy of the U.S. Marine Corps]

the continuation of joint patrols in the South China Sea
and routine deployments of U.S. aircraft and other assets
to Clark Air Base.[23] It is expected that concrete steps
would be taken, including the development of facilities
in the Philippines for the rotational deployment of the
U.S. Forces in accordance with the EDCA. In this regard,
attention will be paid to related developments from the
perspective of the strengthened presence of the U.S.
Forces in the Philippines.
The Philippines and China have competing claims
over the sovereignty of the Spratly Islands and the
Scarborough Shoal in the South China Sea. In recent
years, the two countries have stepped up their activities
to assert their sovereignty, with both countries lodging
protests against the other’s actions and assertions. Against
this backdrop, seeking a settlement under international
law, in January 2013, the Philippines launched arbitral
tribunal proceedings pursuant to UNCLOS against
China. The Philippine effort aimed at peaceful settlement
has received support from many countries including the
United States. The arbitral tribunal rendered its final
ruling in July 2016.

See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 6-4 (Trends concerning Sovereignty and
Other Issues over the South China Sea)

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-4-6 ((4) The Philippines)


18 Malaysia, Brunei, Indonesia, Japan, Norway, and the EU are the member states of the IMT. (As of March 2015)

19 In October 2012, the Framework Agreement for the realization of a final agreement on the Mindanao peace process was signed. In January 2014, the government of the Philippines and MILF signed the Annex
on Normalization. The goal of the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro signed in March 2014 is to launch an autonomous government in 2016 after formulating the Bangsamoro Basic Law, holding
a referendum in order to demarcate a jurisdictional domain, abolishing the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM), and establishing the Bangsamoro Transition Authority (BTA).

20 In January 2015, in Mindanao, an exchange of fire occurred between the Philippine National Police that were mobilized to arrest JI suspects, and the MILF and Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters (BIFF).
This incident reportedly left casualties on both sides.

21 In 1947, a military base agreement was concluded that allows the U.S. Forces to use Clark Air Base and Subic Bay Naval Station for 99 years. A military assistance agreement was also concluded in 1947,
followed by the mutual defense treaty in 1951. With the revision of the 1966 military base agreement, the time limit for the stationing of U.S. military bases in the Philippines was set for 1991. Clark Air Base and
Subic Bay Naval Station were returned in 1991 and 1992, respectively. Subsequently, the two countries concluded the Visiting Forces Agreement in 1998, establishing the legal status of U.S. Forces personnel
visiting for joint military exercises in the Philippines.

22 The EDCA is designed to enable the U.S. Forces to utilize and develop facilities in the Philippines, preposition equipment, among other activities. It was agreed that the bases in the Philippines to be utilized by
the U.S. Forces would be decided through consultations after the EDCA was concluded and would be stated in an annex to the agreement. After the signing in 2014, the consultations regarding the annex had
been suspended as litigation procedures were instituted in the Philippines on the grounds that the EDCA was unconstitutional.

23 At the 2+2 talks held on January 12, 2016 (EST), the ministers welcomed the decision that the EDCA was constitutional, and reaffirmed their commitment to continue strengthening their alliance in terms of
ensuring both countries’ mutual defense and security as well as jointly contributing to regional peace, stability, and economic prosperity. On March 17-18, 2016 (EST), a strategic dialogue among foreign and
defense authorities was held in Washington, D.C. The two sides agreed on the following five EDCA Agreed Locations: Antonio Bautista Air Base; Basa Air Base; Fort Magsaysay; Lumbia Air Base; and MactanBenito Ebuen Air Base. On April 14, 2016, Secretary of Defense Carter who was visiting the Philippines during the Balikatan exercise announced that the United States would continue the joint patrols in the
South China Sea since March, and following the termination of Balikatan, would continue to station five A-10 Thunderbolt aircraft, three H60G Pave Hawk helicopters, and one MC-130H Combat Talon aircraft


-----

of the Royal Thai Armed Forces (RTAF) and developing
the defense industry. Attacks and bombing incidents by
Islamic extremists seeking secession and independence
have become a frequent occurrence in southern Thailand.
The government identifies the swift restoration of peace
and security of the lives and property of the people in
southern Thailand as an urgent task.
In August 2013, the submission of an amnesty bill[27]
by opposition parties to the House of Representatives
sparked large-scale anti-government demonstrations,
mainly in the capital city of Bangkok. The House was
dissolved in December 2013, and a declaration of a state
of emergency was issued in January 2014.
In May 2014, following the declaration of martial
law nationwide, forces led by the RTAF launched a coup
d’état and seized power over the nation. Subsequently,
then Commander-in-Chief Prayuth Chan-o-Cha of the
Royal Thai Army established the National Council
for Peace and Order that he chairs. In August 2014,
he was elected interim Prime Minister. Based on the
roadmap for transitioning to civilian rule, the Prayuth
administration established the National Reform Council
and the Constitution Drafting Committee in succession
in October 2014, and aims to hold general elections
and transition to a new administration under a new
constitution. Meanwhile, in September 2015, the draft of
the new constitution was rejected by the National Reform
Council. As a result, a national referendum on the draft
new constitution was scheduled for August 2016, which
is expected to delay the general elections to 2017 or
thereafter.
In August 2015, bombings took place in Thailand’s
capital city of Bangkok that resulted in many casualties
and wounded. Twenty people died, including foreign
nationals.[28] In addition, undemarcated border issues exist
between Thailand and neighboring countries including
Myanmar and Cambodia.
Under its flexible omni-directional diplomatic
policy, Thailand pursues cooperation with other Southeast
Asian countries and coordination with major countries,
including Japan, the United States, and China. Since the
conclusion of the Military Assistance Agreement in 1950,



- 5  Singapore


Given its limited land area, population, and resources,
Singapore’s existence and development depend on the
peace and stability of the region in a globalized economy.
Singapore gives high priority to national defense, with
defense spending accounting for about one-fifth of its
national budget.
Singapore identifies deterrence and diplomacy as
twin pillars of its national defense policy.
Singapore emphasizes the importance of cooperative
relations with ASEAN and the FPDA,[24] and has concluded
defense cooperation agreements with countries within
and outside the region. With the aim of contributing to
peace and stability in the region, Singapore supports U.S.
presence in the Asia-Pacific and permits it to use military
facilities in Singapore. In 2013, U.S. littoral combat
ships (LCSs) began their rotational deployments.[25]
In December 2015, the P-8 patrol aircraft of the U.S.
Forces were deployed to Singapore for around one week
for the first time. The two countries have committed to
continuing to carry out similar deployments routinely.[26]
In addition, Singapore conducted joint exercises with the
United States, such as CARAT and SEACAT.
With China, active mutual visits by their dignitaries
have taken place, and in November 2014, Minister of
Defence Ng Eng Hen visited China. During his talks with
Minister of National Defense Chang Wanquan, the two
sides agreed to develop their defense cooperation and
promote joint training. In November 2015, President Xi
Jinping of China visited Singapore. In May 2015, the
two countries conducted their first bilateral naval joint
exercise China-Singapore Cooperation 2015.

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-4-6 ((3) Singapore)

- 6  Thailand


Thailand’s defense policy includes: strengthening defense
cooperation through ASEAN, international organizations,
and other entities; defense that makes comprehensive
use of political, economic, and other national strengths;
and effective defense aimed at increasing the readiness


24 See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 6-2, Footnote 10.

25 Based on an agreement reached in April 2013. In December 2013, LCS USS Fort Worth arrived in Singapore for the second rotational deployment.

26 In December 2015, Minister of Defence Ng Eng Hen of Singapore visited the United States. The two sides signed the Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement, and concurred that in accordance with this
Agreement, they would strengthen their defense cooperation in the five areas of military, policy, strategy, technology, and the non-traditional security area of piracy and terrorism.

27 The bill gives amnesty to those who were arrested in the political upheaval since the military coup d’état in 2006. It is deemed that the bill would allow former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, who has been
convicted but is living overseas, to return to Thailand.

28 On August 17, 2015, two bombings took place in a commercial area in central Bangkok (sightseeing location Erawan Shrine at the Ratchaprasong Intersection), killing 20 people and injuring many including
Japanese nationals. On the following day, August 18, a bombing took place at a dock along the Chao Phraya River in Bangkok (no casualties and wounded). On the same day, Prime Minister Prayut Chan-ocha issued a statement saying, “The incident has made it clear that there are elements who have intent to make political gains to undermine the Thai economy and tourism industry. The government is fully
committed to the investigation of the perpetrators.” That same day, the Commander-in-Chief of the Royal Thai Army denied the possibility that Islamic extremists aiming to secede and gain independence in


-----

Thailand and its ally,[29] the United States, have maintained
a cooperative relationship. They have conducted the
multinational joint exercise Cobra Gold since 1982,
as well as the CARAT and SEACAT joint exercises.[30]
Thailand and China have also promoted military
exchanges, conducting joint exercises such as Blue Strike
among their marines and Falcon Strike[31] among their air
forces. In April 2012, the two countries agreed on the
joint development of multiple rocket launchers.

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-4-6 ((5) Thailand)

- 7  Vietnam


Party of Vietnam (CPV) was held after five years since the
previous Congress. The Congress decided that Nguyen
Phu Trong would remain CPV General Secretary, among
other decisions, and a new leadership was established.[32]
General Secretary Trong in his second term identified
that his focal missions for the next five years would
include the following: enhance party building; carry out
political reform; accelerate national modernization; and
maintain the country’s independence, sovereignty, unity,
and territorial integrity.
Vietnam and the United States have strengthened
their military relations in recent years.[33] This has taken
such forms as joint exercises with the U.S. Navy and port
calls by U.S. Navy vessels in Vietnam. In June 2015,
Minister of National Defence Thanh and U.S. Secretary
of Defense Carter, who was visiting Vietnam, signed a
joint statement spelling out promotion of consultations
and dialogues and engagement in maritime security.[34] In
July 2015, General Secretary Trong, making his first visit
to the United States as CPV General Secretary, held talks
with President Obama. In the area of defense, the two
sides confirmed that they would continue to cooperate
on maritime security, carry out defense equipment
trade, and cooperate on the transfer of defense science
technologies.[35] In June 2016, during his visit to Vietnam,
President Obama announced that the United States would
fully lift its arms embargo on Vietnam.
Vietnam and Russia continue to strengthen
cooperation in the area of national defense. In March 2013,
Minister of Defence Sergey Shoygu visited Vietnam,
and the two sides agreed to jointly construct vessel
replenishment facilities along Cam Ranh Bay. In 2014,
Russian IL-78 aerial refueling tankers landed at Cam Ranh
International Airport for the first time for the refueling
flights for Russia’s Tu-95MS strategic bombers.[36] As


Vietnam perceives that it confronts diverse and complex
security challenges. It considers that the issues in the
South China Sea have serious impacts on the maritime
activities of Vietnam, and non-traditional threats, such as
piracy and terrorism, are matters of concern.
During the Cold War era, the former Soviet Union
provided the most significant assistance to Vietnam.
Until 2002, Russia had a naval base in Cam Ranh Bay.
After the collapse of the former Soviet Union, Vietnam
rapidly expanded its diplomatic relations with other
countries, including establishing diplomatic ties with
the United States. At present, Vietnam pursues an omnidirectional diplomatic policy and seeks to actively
participate in international and regional cooperation
in order to build friendly relations with all countries.
Vietnam established a PKO Center in May 2014 and
began deploying personnel for U.N. PKO in June
2014. Following this, Vietnam announced that it would
gradually scale up its personnel contributions. As such
efforts exemplify, Vietnam is committed to making
contributions to the international community.
In January 2016, the Congress of the Communist


29 Thailand and the United States have an alliance based on the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, or Manila Pact, of 1954 and the Rusk-Thanat communiqué of 1962.

30 In May 2014, following the coup d’état in Thailand, the United States announced it would suspend joint exercises and freeze military assistance. However, multinational joint exercise Cobra Gold was held in
February 2015, and bilateral joint exercise CARAT was held in August 2015.

31 From November 12 to 30, 2015, the first joint exercise between Chinese and Thai air forces, Falcon Strike-2015, was held at the Korat Royal Thai Air Force Base in Thailand. From China, six J-11B fighters
participated, and from Thailand, five JAS-39 Gripen fighters participated. In addition, in the air show of the closing ceremony of the exercise, from China, seven J-10 fighters of the August 1st Aerobatics Team
participated, and from Thailand, two F-16 fighters participated.

32 President Truong Tan Sang, Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung, Minister of National Defence Phung Quang Thanh, among others were not reelected and retired from office. In April 2016, President Tran Dai Quang,
Prime Minister Nguyen Xuan Phuc, Minister of National Defense Ngo Xuan Lich, and others were appointed at the Vietnamese National Assembly.

33 In 1984, the United States invoked an arms embargo on Vietnam on the grounds of its human rights issue. In 2007, the arms embargo was lifted excluding lethal weapons. In October 2014, the United States
announced the lifting of its embargo on the sale of maritime security-related lethal weapons to Vietnam. In November 2015, when President Obama unveiled his policy of strengthening assistance for Southeast
Asian countries, the President stated that the United States would provide approximately US$40 million of assistance to Vietnam over two years until 2016. The President then announced the bolstering of
maritime ISR capabilities and the expansion of cooperation on bilateral exercises focusing on HA/DR.

34 On June 1, 2015, U.S. Secretary of Defense Carter and Vietnamese Minister of National Defence Thanh signed a joint statement in Hanoi. They confirmed that the two countries would, among other things: (1)
promote senior-level consultations and defense policy dialogues and mutually carry out U.N. PKO; (2) mutually carry out search and rescue, humanitarian assistance, and disaster relief; and (3) promote maritime
security. The United States affirmed that it stood ready to share its experience and information, conduct personnel training, and provide equipment that contribute to maritime security and law enforcement.

35 In July 2015, CPV General Secretary Trong of Vietnam visited the United States for the first time as General Secretary and held talks with President Obama. At the joint press conference following the meeting,
the two sides announced that they would: strengthen their defense and security relations; promote economic, trade, and investment cooperation; and increase mutual visits by senior officials and bilateral
consultations. The two sides also announced the signing of the “United States-Vietnam Joint Vision Statement,” “Memorandum on U.N. PKO Cooperation,” and agreements pertaining to trade promotion,
infectious disease measures, and grant assistance related to civil aircraft.

36 In March 2015, it was reported that U.S. DoD authorities, while stating the relevant facts, requested Vietnam to prevent the recurrence of this activity. In addition, a senior official of the U.S. Pacific Command
allegedly stated that the Russian military aircraft that received refueling from the aerial refueling tankers arriving from the Cam Ranh base conducted provocative flights. In January 2015, the Russian Ministry i


-----

these examples demonstrate, the two countries have been
carrying out new military cooperation. In recent years,
the two countries have also promoted cooperation in the
energy sector, such as nuclear power generation. Vietnam
is nearly dependent on Russia for its defense equipment.

See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 4-5-2 (Relations with Asian Countries)

Vietnam and China, under their comprehensive
strategic cooperation partnership relations, proactively
conduct exchanges among their senior government
offi cials. However, the two countries have competing
claims concerning issues such as sovereignty over the
South China Sea. In April 2015, CPV General Secretary
Nguyen Phu Trong visited China for the fi rst time in
three and a half years. Following his talks with President
Xi Jinping, the two sides issued a joint statemen[37] on
strengthening exchanges and cooperation between their
military forces and managing the differences in opinion
to prevent their development into disputes, among other
matters. In November 2015, President Xi Jinping visited
Vietnam, and the two sides agreed that differences in

**3 Military Modernization in the Region**


In recent years, Southeast Asian countries have increased
their defense spending against the backdrop of economic
development and other reasons, and are modernizing their
military forces focusing on inducting equipment such
as submarines and fi ghters including fourth-generation
modern fi ghters. The underlying factors noted are
increases in defense spending, the relationship between
Southeast Asian countries in the sense that they react to
neighboring states’ development of military capabilities,
response to the expansion of China’s infl uence, and the
inadequate role of regional security organizations to
nurture relationships of trust.[39] Many Southeast Asian
countries procure much of their defense equipment from
a wide range of countries. As such, there are perceived
diffi culties in achieving consistent operations and
maintenance in the respective countries.
Indonesia has introduced a total of 16 Russian Su27 fi ghters and Su-30 fi ghters by 2013. Moreover, in
September 2015, Indonesia allegedly decided to purchase


opinion regarding maritime issues would be dealt with
appropriately. They also signed a joint statement that
included commitments to peacefully resolving the South
China Sea issues among the parties to the issues.
Vietnam and India have been deepening their
cooperative relationship in a broad range of areas,
including security and economy. In the area of defense
cooperation, it is noted that the Indian Armed Forces
support the training of Vietnam’s Navy submarine
personnel and Air Force pilots, and Indian Navy vessels
make friendly visits to Vietnam. Furthermore, when
Minister of National Defense Phung Quang Thanh visited
India in May 2015, the two sides signed the Joint Vision
Statement on Defence Cooperation for the period 20152020.[38] Cooperation in the area of energy between India
and Vietnam is also deepening, with a joint development
program for oil and natural gas in the South China Sea.

See>> Part I, Chapter 2 Section 6-4 (Trends concerning Sovereignty and
Other Issues over the South China Sea)

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-4-6 ((2) Vietnam)

Su-35 fi ghters from Russia under its plan to upgrade its
F-5 fi ghters. It is also believed that Indonesia agreed to
purchase two Kilo-class submarines from Russia. In 2011,
an agreement was reached regarding the U.S. provision
of 24 F-16 fi ghters, three of which were delivered in July
2014. In 2013, Indonesia agreed to purchase 8 AH-64
attack helicopters. With the ROK, Indonesia concluded
an agreement in December 2011 to purchase three ROKmade 209-class submarines. The two countries started
joint development of the KF-X fi ghter, and in October
2014, concluded a basic agreement which sets forth the
details of their cost sharing and bilateral cooperation. In
addition, Indonesia is domestically building two frigates
based on the Dutch Sigma-class vessel.
In 2009, Malaysia introduced two Scorpène-class
submarines (jointly developed by France and Spain) as its
fi rst submarines. In November 2014, Malaysia reportedly
concluded an agreement to purchase six corvettes from
the ROK. Furthermore, Malaysia announced a plan to


37 The joint statement’s references to the military fi eld include maintaining high-level contacts and military and security dialogue between the two countries, strengthening friendly exchanges between their border
patrol forces, properly dealing with differences in opinion, exchanging military experiences with party and political tasks, deepening cooperation on personnel training, and continuing joint patrols in the Gulf of
Tonkin and vessel exchanges. In the joint statement, with regard to the South China Sea dispute, the two sides also affi rmed the importance of executing the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South
China Sea (DOC) and swiftly establishing the Code of the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (COC).

38 The statement was agreed upon in May 2015, when Minister of National Defense Phung Quang Thanh of Vietnam visited India and held talks with Defence Minister Manohar Parrikar. While the content of the
Joint Vision Statement has not been disclosed, it is said to cover the period 2015-2020, with maritime security cooperation constituting the main pillar. On the same day, the two sides also signed an MOU on
strengthening the cooperation between their coast guards.


-----

build six indigenous LCSs and started building one of
them. It also introduced 18 Russian-made Su-30 fi ghters
by 2009 and is selecting a successor to its Mig-29 fi ghters
that are scheduled to be decommissioned in 2015.
The Philippines has taken steps in recent years to
modernize its defense equipment against the backdrop of
confl icts over territorial rights in the South China Sea.
After the F-5 fi ghters were decommissioned in 2005,
the Philippines did not have any fi ghters for some length
of time. However, in November 2015, the Philippines
introduced the fi rst 2 of the 12 FA-50 light fi ghters for
which a purchase agreement had been concluded with
the ROK. As for naval forces, the Philippines received
two Hamilton-class frigates from the United States in
2011 and 2012, and is expected to receive three more
of the same-class frigate. In June 2014, it was reported
that the ROK would provide decommissioned Pohangclass corvettes. By January 2015, seven Italian AW109
multi-purpose helicopters tailored to wide-ranging
naval missions, such as maritime patrol, have been
delivered. Additionally, the Philippines has announced
plans to procure equipment, such as attack helicopter,
long-range maritime patrol aircraft, transport vessel,
and amphibious vehicle.
Singapore is actively striving to modernize its
forces. By 2012, Singapore introduced two Archerclass (Västergötland-class) submarines from Sweden.
In December 2013, Singapore concluded an agreement
to purchase two German 218SG-class submarines, and
announced a plan to build eight indigenous patrol vessels.
With regard to fi ghters, Singapore inducted U.S.-made

**4 Trends concerning Sovereignty and Other Issues over the South China Sea**


In the South China Sea, ASEAN countries and China have
competing claims to such areas as the Spratly Islands[40] and
the Paracel Islands.[41] Under these circumstances, China’s
unilateral, large-scale, and rapid land reclamation and
building of facilities have heightened tension in the region,
increasing international concern over freedom of navigation
in the seas and other dimensions. Against this backdrop, the
international community’s deep concern over the unilateral
changes in the status quo and their creation of a fait accompli
is quickly becoming ever more widespread.
In recent years, the relevant countries and others
are increasing their activities in the South China Sea in


F-15 fi ghters and participates in the F-35 Joint Strike
Fighter (JSF) Program.
Thailand has an aircraft carrier but does not own
submarines. In July 2014, Thailand established the
Submarine Squadron Headquarters, and has started the
evaluation work to procure new submarines. In July 2015,
it was reported that the Royal Thai Navy decided on a
plan to purchase Chinese-made submarines. While it was
deemed that subsequently, Minister of Defence Prawit
Wongsuwon instructed the reconsideration of the plan,
it is thought that in July 2016, he decided to purchase
three Yuan-class submarines from China. With regard to
frigates, in September 2012, the Cabinet approved a plan
to introduce two frigates, and concluded an agreement
to purchase an ROK-made frigate for the fi rst frigate. In
addition, by 2013, Thailand has introduced 12 Swedishmade JAS-39 Gripen fi ghters.
In December 2009, Vietnam concluded a contract to
purchase six Russian-made Kilo-class submarines and
introduced four of them by June 2015. In 2013, it was
reported that Vietnam concluded a contract to purchase
two Dutch-made Sigma-class corvettes. Furthermore,
Vietnam reportedly concluded a contract to purchase
24 Russian-made Su-30 fi ghters from 2009 to 2011,
and concluded a contract to additionally purchase 12 of
the same fi ghter by 2013. Following the United States’
lifting of its embargo, attention will be paid to the trends
in the equipment that Vietnam introduces from the
United States, primarily in terms of the strengthening of
Vietnam’s maritime defense capabilities.

support of their territorial claims. China enacted the Act
on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone of the
People’s Republic of China in 1992, which stated that the
Spratly Islands and the Paracel Islands are the territories
of China. In addition, China attached a map of the “ninedash line” to a verbal note addressed to the United
Nations in 2009, in which it made claims to the parts of
the South China Sea that purportedly came under China’s
sovereignty, sovereign rights, and jurisdiction. There
were objections to the ambiguity of the justifi cations
to this “nine-dash line” under international law, and
this has given rise to competing claims with Southeast


40 The area surrounding the Spratly Islands is expected to have offshore resources such as oil and natural gas. The area is also a maritime transport hub and is blessed with rich fi shery resources.


-----

Asian countries over the sovereignty and other aspects
of the South China Sea. To date, China has not offered
any concrete explanations regarding the relationship
between the “nine-dash line” and relevant international
norms. In June 2012, China announced the establishment
of Sansha City in Hainan Province, which claims to
have jurisdiction over the islands of the Spratly Islands,
the Paracel Islands, the Macclesfield Bank, and their
surrounding waters. In November 2013, Hainan Province
amended its regulation on the implementation of China’s
fishing law, stipulating that foreign fishing vessels that
wish to carry out fishing activities in waters under the
jurisdiction of Hainan Province must obtain permission
from the relevant departments under China’s State
Council. In January 2016, China set out a maritime policy
for the next five years beginning from 2016, which stated
that China would build a “Spratly Islands ecosystem
protection zone.”
In March 2009, the Philippines passed the so-called
Archipelagic Baselines Law, stating that the Philippines
has sovereignty over part of the Spratly Islands and the
Scarborough Shoal pursuant to UNCLOS.[42] In May
2009, Vietnam and Malaysia jointly requested to the
U.N. an extension of the continental shelf of the sea area


that includes part of the Spratly Islands. In June 2012,
Vietnam adopted the Maritime Law (effective January
2013) that asserts its sovereignty over the Spratly and
Paracel Islands.
Some of the countries concerned in the South China
Sea have reportedly resorted to the use of force on the
opposing country’s vessels, including seizing vessels and
firing warning shots, and the concerned countries have
mutually lodged protests against these actions. In May
2014, China’s unilateral commencement of oil drilling in
waters near the Paracel Islands triggered confrontations
between Chinese and Vietnamese vessels, and many
vessels reportedly sustained damages due to collisions. In
July 2015, a Vietnamese fishing vessel was rammed by a
Chinese vessel and sunk near the Paracel Islands. Similar
incidents are believed to have taken place in September
2015 and January and March 2016. In November 2015, a
Chinese vessel allegedly appeared several kilometers off
the coast of Thitu Island of the Spratly Islands occupied
by the Philippines and anchored there for approximately
ten days.[43] In January 2016, a Vietnamese fishing vessel
operating near the Spratly Islands reportedly collided
with a Taiwanese coast guard vessel. In the same month,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Vietnam, alleging that


Subi Reef. Rapid and large-scale land reclamation is under way. (Top left: as of January 26, 2015; top center: as of March 5, 2015; bottom left: September 3, 2015; bottom center: as of May 1, 2016)
A 3,000m runway and other facilities are being built on the reef. (Right: as of May 1, 2016) (CSIS Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative/DigitalGlobe)

42 According to the Republic Act No. 9522. This law gives the location of the baselines of the archipelago in terms of latitude and longitude, including of Luzon Island, Palawan Island, and Mindanao Island. However,
for the Spratly Islands (Filipino name: Calayan Islands) and the Scarborough Shoal (Filipino name: Bajo de Masinloc), the law states that the baseline is based on the “Regime of Islands” under Article 121 of
UNCLOS and does not give the geographical location of the baseline.

43 Thitu Island (Filipino name: Pag-asa Island) is a feature located near Subi Reef where China is building a runway. The mayor with jurisdiction over the island spotted the China Coast Guard vessel. This was i


-----

China’s oil drilling rig “Haiyang Shiyou 981” conducted
activities in an area north of the Paracel Islands where
Vietnam and China have overlapping claims to the
continental shelf, requested China to suspend its
operations and withdraw the rig.[44]

See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 3-2-5 (Maritime Activities)

Furthermore, some of the countries concerned
in the South China Sea conduct land reclamations and
build facilities on the features they respectively occupy,
including the Spratly Islands. Since 2014, China has went
ahead with its large-scale and rapid land reclamations and
the building of facilities, such as harbors and runways,
on seven features of the Spratly Islands. China has
officially admitted to the installation of military facilities.
In January 2016, China went ahead with test flights of
requisitioned private aircraft at an airstrip built on Fiery
Cross Reef. In response, Vietnam expressed strong protest
and requested the prevention of its recurrence. Similarly,
the Philippines expressed its intention to protest.
In October 2015, Taiwan completed a 12.7 m-high
lighthouse on Itu Aba Island of the Spratly Islands.[45] In
December 2015, Taiwan completed a deep-water wharf
on the same island cable of anchoring 3,000 t-class
vessels. In January 2016, then President Ma Ying-jeou of
Taiwan visited Itu Aba Island. In this connection, Vietnam
lodged representations to Taiwan, saying it was a “serious
violation of sovereignty.” U.S. government officials have
also expressed despair. Meanwhile, by 2015 Vietnam has
reclaimed approximately 86,000 square meters on the
West London Reef and Sand Cay of the Spratly Islands
combined. It is suggested that Vietnamese construction
work includes the building of military facilities.[46] At the
same time, in 2011, the Philippines unveiled a plan to
repair the harbor and runaway on Thitu Island of the
Spratly Islands. It has also announced a plan to install
monitoring equipment on the same island to track private
aircraft by the end of 2016.[47] In December 2015, 47 young
people and others of the Philippines, in protest against
Chinese claims, landed on Thitu Island and stayed there
for approximately one week, to which China expressed
strong dissatisfaction.
Under these circumstances, in 2002, ASEAN and


China signed the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties
in the South China Sea (DOC)[48] aimed at peacefully
resolving the issues over the South China Sea. Official
talks are now ongoing for establishing the Code of the
Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (COC), which
goes into further detail than the DOC and is deemed to
have legal binding force.
The issues surrounding the South China Sea have
been discussed repeatedly at ASEAN-related meetings
and other fora, with a view to achieving their peaceful
resolution. However, as exemplified by the unprecedented
situation in the past that led to the failure to adopt an
ASEAN joint statement, there have been instances in
which consensus was not reached among the member
states. Nevertheless, there were also instances in which
ASEAN adopted a unified response. For example, at
the ASEAN Summit in April 2015 and the ASEAN
Foreign Ministers’ Meeting in August 2015, members
expressed that they “share the serious concerns” on
the land reclamations being undertaken in the Spratly
Islands. At the ASEAN Summit in November 2015,
members shared concerns regarding the possibility of
further militarization in the South China Sea. At the
East Asia Summit held in the same month that was also
attended by non-ASEAN countries, members took note
of the serious concerns regarding developments related
to the situation in the South China Sea. The Chairman’s
Statement included reference to the fact that the members
welcomed assurances given by President Xi Jinping of
China during his visit to the United States in September
2015 that China “does not intend to pursue militarization
in the South China Sea.”[49]
Some countries involved are also making efforts
to settle the issues in accordance with international
law. In January 2013, the Philippines instituted arbitral
proceedings pursuant to UNCLOS for the dispute over
China’s assertions and actions in the South China Sea.
In July 2015, the Philippines presented oral arguments
in The Hague in the Netherlands to determine whether
or not the arbitral tribunal had jurisdiction over the
submissions made by the Philippines. In October 2015,
the arbitral tribunal ruled that it had jurisdiction with


44 According to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Vietnam, on January 16, 2016, China’s oil rig “Haiyang Shiyou 981” was found 21.4 nautical miles east of the assumed median line where the Vietnamese and
Chinese continental shelves overlap. It is believed that representations were lodged to China on January 18.

45 Itu Aba Island (Taiwanese name: Taiping Dao) is the only feature occupied by Taiwan on the Spratly Islands and has a 1,200 m-long runway.

46 According to an article of the CSIS and AMTI. It is reportedly known that approximately 65,000 square meters were reclaimed on West London Reef (Vietnamese name: Da Tay) from January 2010 to April 2015
and approximately 21,000 square meters on Sand Cay (Vietnamese name: Dao Son Ca) from August 2011 to February 2015.

47 According to an article mentioning comments made by Civil Aviation Authority officials of the Philippines. The monitoring equipment is believed to be the Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast system
(ADS-B) that can receive data such as location information transmitted from private aircraft.

48 The DOC includes commitments to resolve territorial and other disputes by peaceful means, and to reaffirm that the adoption of a code of conduct would further promote peace and stability in the region and
work towards the attainment of this objective, based on the principles of international law.


-----

respect to some of the matters.[50] In response, China
issued a statement saying that this decision was “invalid
and has no binding force,” and reiterated its position that
it would not participate in the proceedings. The arbitral
tribunal, however, expressed the opinion that China’s
non-participation would not affect the implementation of
the proceedings. The decision of the arbitral tribunal has
legal binding force between the parties to the dispute.[51] In
November 2015, the Philippines presented oral arguments
for this case, and in July 2016, the tribunal rendered
a fi nal ruling in which nearly all of the Philippines’
submissions were ruled in favor of the Philippines.[52] In
response, China once again issued a statement noting
that the ruling was invalid and had no binding force and
that China opposed and refused to accept it. Pursuant to

**5 Regional Cooperation**


The ASEAN Community established on December 31,
2015 is comprised of three pillars, namely, cooperation
by the ASEAN Political-Security Community, ASEAN
Economic Community, and ASEAN Socio-Cultural
Community. The fi rst of these, the ASEAN PoliticalSecurity Community (APSC), adopts the principle of
building on what has been constructed over the years in
the fi eld of political and security cooperation through
ASEAN’s initiatives, and of aiming to ensure a peaceful
life in a democratic and harmonious environment. To live
up to this principle, the APSC Blueprint 2025, which was
adopted at the 27th ASEAN Summit in November 2015,
describes the following two major concepts.
The fi rst is to become a community in which people
live in a safe and harmonious security environment and
share the values of tolerance and moderation by 2025.
The second is to respond to challenges against regional
peace and security and play a central role in the regional
architecture, while at the same time, working with
countries outside of the region to contribute to world
peace, security, and stability.


UNCLOS provisions, the award of the arbitral tribunal is
fi nal and is legally binding on the parties to the dispute,
and therefore, it is necessary that the parties adhere to
the award.
The issues surrounding the South China Sea
are a matter of concern for the whole international
community, and are directly related to the peace and
stability of the Asia-Pacific region. As such, attention
will continue to be paid to trends in the countries
concerned, as well as the direction of dialogues aimed
at the resolution of the issues.

See>> Part I, Chapter 3, Section 3-1 (Trends Related to the “Principle of
the Freedom of the High Seas” in the East and South China Seas);
Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-4 (Promotion of Defense Cooperation
and Exchanges)

The Blueprint identifi es four characteristics of
measures that are designed for realizing these concepts:
(1) aiming to become a rules-based, people-oriented,
people-centered community, adhere to and promote
ASEAN fundamental principles by implementing the
ASEAN Charter and ASEAN agreements to date,
among other actions; (2) aiming to become a peaceful,
secure, and stable region, strengthen mechanisms such
as the ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting, the ASEAN
Defense Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM), and the ARF;
(3) aiming for dynamic and outward-looking ASEAN
centrality, strengthen the initiatives under ASEAN-led
mechanisms and strengthen dialogue and cooperation
with countries outside of the region; and (4) aiming for
strengthened ASEAN institutional capacity and presence,
streamline ASEAN work processes and raise institutional
presence regionally and internationally.
ASEAN member states also utilize ASEAN as the
multilateral security framework of the region that it has
been over the years. ASEAN holds mechanisms such as
the ARF and ADMM, which provide opportunities for


50 According to information made public by the arbitral tribunal, of the 15 submissions made by the Philippines, the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal has been recognized thus far for submissions such as
those concerning decisions regarding whether or not the features, etc. occupied by China meet the requirements of territorial waters or of EEZ/continental shelf (e.g., Mischief Reef and Subi Reef are low-tide
elevations and do not meet the requirements of territorial sea), those contending that China interfered with or posed danger to the activities of Philippine fi shing vessels, and those contending that China violated
obligations to protect and preserve the environment.

51 With regard to the binding force of the decisions of the arbitral tribunal, UNCLOS contains provisions, such as “Any decision rendered by a court or tribunal...shall be complied with by all the parties to the
dispute” and “Any such decision shall have no binding force except between the parties and in respect of that particular dispute” (Article 296 and Annex VII, Article 11).

52 With regard to the “nine-dash line” and China’s claim to historic rights, the arbitral tribunal found that China’s claims to historic rights with respect to the maritime areas encompassed by the “nine-dash line”
are contrary to UNCLOS and without lawful effect to the extent that they exceed the limits of China’s maritime entitlements under UNCLOS. With regard to the legal status of features, the arbitral tribunal found
that all of the features in Scarborough Shoal and the Spratly Islands (including Itu Aba Island [Taiwanese name: Taiping Dao]) have no EEZ or continental shelf. With regard to the legality of Chinese activities,
the tribunal found that China has unlawfully prevented Filipino fi shermen from engaging in traditional fi shing at Scarborough Shoal, violated its obligations to protect the marine environment through its largescale land reclamations, artifi cial island-building, and other activities, violated its obligations pertaining to navigation safety by virtue of the dangerous navigation by its law enforcement vessels, breached the
Philippines’ sovereign rights through its land reclamations at Mischief Reef, and violated its obligations by aggravating and extending the disputes through its dredging, airstrip construction, and other activities


-----

dialogue on security issues. Furthermore, ASEAN has
made efforts to improve the security environment in the
region and promote mutual trust, for example, by holding
the ASEAN Militaries’ Humanitarian Assistance and
Disaster Relief Table-Top Exercise (AHR). In addition,
ASEAN attaches importance to expanding its relations
with countries outside of the region. It holds the ASEAN
Defense Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM Plus), a


platform that adds eight non-ASEAN countries including
Japan to ADMM,[53] and holds HA/DR exercises.[54] Moving
forward, ASEAN member states are expected to further
develop such initiatives as dialogues, HA/DR exercises,
and expansion of relations with non-ASEAN countries,
in accordance with the principle and concepts of APSC.

See>> Part I, Chapter 3, Section 3-3 ((8) Southeast Asia)


53 In addition to the framework of the ADMM Plus, defense ministers’ meetings are held between the United States and ASEAN, China and ASEAN, and Japan and ASEAN. In April 2014, a U.S.-ASEAN defense
ministers’ meeting was held in the United States for the first time.

54 In May 2015, the fourth ARF Disaster Relief Exercise was held in Malaysia. The exercise was participated by more than 2,000 personnel from ARF member countries, including co-organizers Malaysia and China


-----

**Section 7** **South Asia**


**1 India**



- 1  General Situation

With a population of more than 1.2 billion on its vast
land, India is the world’s largest democratic country. It
has achieved steady economic growth in recent years, and
has signifi cant infl uence in the South Asian region. Also,
it is located in the middle of the Indian Ocean, which is of
strategic and geopolitical importance in terms of sea lines
of communication, connecting the Asia-Pacifi c region
with the Middle East and Europe.
India shares borders with many countries, and has
non-demarcated border issues with China and Pakistan.
India has multiple ethnic groups, religions, cultures, and
languages,[1] and there are concerns about the activities of
ultra-leftists and secession and independence movements,
as well as the movements of Islamic extremists stationed
across the India-Pakistan border.
On the diplomatic front, the Modi administration
that was inaugurated in May 2014 has maintained
the neighborhood fi rst policy, which emphasizes
strengthening relations with South Asian countries, while
expanding the focus of strengthening India’s external
relations to the Asia-Pacifi c region, in accordance with
the “Act East” policy.[2] In addition, the administration has
carried out proactive foreign policy, placing priority also
on India’s relations with the United States, Russia, Europe,
among other areas. In the defense domain, maintaining
preparedness at its land borders and addressing the threat
of terrorism remain major concerns. At the same time,
the administration has also recently attached importance
to ensuring maritime security, especially in the Indian
Ocean. Furthermore, the administration has made efforts
aimed at modernizing its military by expanding foreign
companies’ direct investment in India’s defense industry
under the “Make in India” initiative and promoting the
domestic production of equipment through enhancing
technological cooperation with other countries. Moreover,


the administration has deepened collaboration with other
countries to strengthen maritime security cooperation. In
February 2016, India held an international fl eet review
for the fi rst time in 15 years, inviting 24 foreign military
vessels from 21 countries.[3]

- 2  Military Affairs


India’s security environment is directly linked to its
neighboring countries and the regions of West Asia,
Central Asia, Southeast Asia, East Asia, and the Indian
Ocean; and India recognizes that strategic-economic
factors impose upon them an increasingly larger
responsibility. In view of the multifaceted security
concerns and the global dimensions of the challenges,
India has strengthened cooperative relations with other
countries and has long been actively participating in
U.N. PKOs. In order to respond rapidly and effectively
to diversifi ed security issues, the government and defense
forces remain fully prepared to tackle all challenges.
Based on the nuclear doctrine of 2003, India adheres
to the following policies: minimum nuclear deterrence,
the no-fi rst-use nuclear policy, no use against non-nuclear
weapon nations, and maintaining the unilateral moratorium


The country has a Muslim population exceeding 100 million, although the majority of the country’s population is Hindu.

It is regarded that based on the progress of the “Look East” policy intended to strengthen India’s relations with ASEAN, the “Act East” policy which advocates a more practical approach has been adopted since
the inauguration of the Modi administration.

On February 6, 2016, the Indian Navy held an international fl eet review off the coast of Visakhapatnam in eastern India participated by 70 Indian vessels as well as 24 vessels from 21 countries including the
United States, China, Brazil, Malaysia, Vietnam, Russia, and the United Kingdom. The destroyer Matsuyuki participated from the MSDF. President Pranab Mukherjee of India, who reviewed the international fl eet, li


-----

on nuclear tests that it announced immediately after the
nuclear test in 1998.[4] India promotes the development
and deployment of various ballistic missiles. In 2015,
India conducted launch tests including of “Prithvi 2,”
“Agni 3,” and “Agni 5,” and reportedly started developing
“Agni 6,” which is alleged to have a range of up to 10,000
km. It is deemed that the country aspires to extend the
ranges of ballistic missiles and make other performance
improvements. In regard to cruise missiles, India jointly
develops “BrahMos” with Russia and deploys them. India
is also developing a ballistic missile defense system.[5]
In recent years, India has been injecting efforts into
modernizing its naval and air forces in particular. As a part
of these efforts, it is expanding procurement of equipment
from foreign countries as well as joint development
with them, and has emerged as the world’s largest arms
importer.[6] With respect to its naval capabilities, India has
introduced one British-built aircraft carrier INS Viraat,
and in November 2013, the Russian-built conventional
powered aircraft carrier INS Vikramaditya. It is also
building one indigenous conventional powered aircraft
carrier INS Vikrant.[7] With regard to submarines, India
acquired one Russian-built Akula-class nuclear-powered
attack submarine INS Chakra in April 2012 under a lease
arrangement. In December 2014, India commenced
sea trials of its first indigenous nuclear submarine INS
Arihant. Furthermore, in 2009, India concluded an
agreement with the United States to purchase eight P-8
patrol aircraft. India has so far deployed all eight aircraft
to a base in southern India facing the Bay of Bengal. As
for its air force, in addition to remodeling its existing
fighters, in May 2015 India decided to purchase 36
French Rafale fighters as part of its medium multi-role


Fig. I-2-7-1 Military Forces of India and Pakistan (approximate)

Approx. 550,000 troops
Approx. 59 vessels
Approx. 94,000 tons
Approx. 460 aircraft

Pakistan

Approx. 1.15 million troops
Approx. 243 vessels
Approx. 480,000 tons
Approx. 980 aircraft

India

[Legend:]

Ground forces (200,000 troops)

The United States Geological Survey:

Naval vessels (100,000 tons) GTOPO30; and the United States National

Combat aircraft (200 aircraft) Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration:

ETOPO1

Notes: 1. Figures based on “The Military Balance 2016,” etc.
2. Combat aircraft include naval aircraft.


combat aircraft induction project.[8]
With Russia, India has concluded an agreement in
December 2012 to purchase 42 additional Su-30 fighters.
India has also been deepening military technological
cooperation with Russia, including the joint development
of the Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft based on the PAK
FA being developed by Russia. With the United States,
India has concluded an agreement in 2010 to purchase
ten C-17 transport aircraft and has inducted all of these
aircraft by 2014. In addition to aircraft carriers and
nuclear submarines, India undertakes the development
and indigenous production of tanks and light combat
aircraft. However, delays in their development present
challenges for India’s domestic production of equipment.

See>> Fig. I-2-7-1 (Military Forces of India and Pakistan (approximate))


The Bharatiya Janata Party led by Prime Minister Modi referred to revising the nuclear doctrine in its 2014 election manifesto. However, following criticism from inside and outside the country, Prime Minister
Modi later reportedly indicated that the party does not intend to revise the policy.

Regarding missiles that India possesses, the following have been indicated:

“Prithvi 2”: a mobile, single-stage liquid-fuelled ballistic missile with a range of about 250-350 km

“Agni 1”: a mobile, single-stage solid-fuelled ballistic missile with a range of about 700-1,250 km

“Agni 2”: a mobile, two-stage solid-fuelled ballistic missile with a range of about 2,000-3,500 km

“Agni 3”: a mobile, two-stage solid-fuelled ballistic missile with a range of about 3,000-5,000 km

“Agni 4”: a mobile, two-stage solid-fuelled ballistic missile with a range of about 4,000 km

“Agni 5”: a mobile, three-stage solid-fuelled ballistic missile with a range of about 5,000-8,000 km

“Agni 6”: a three-stage solid/liquid-fuelled ballistic missile with a range of about 8,000-10,000 km

“BrahMos”: a solid/Ramjet supersonic cruise missile with a range of about 300-500 km

Ballistic missile defense system: India is developing a two-stage intercept system consisting of a missile for high altitude interception (PAD) up to 80 km in altitude and a missile for low altitude interception
(AAD) up to 30 km in altitude

According to SIPRI.

The indigenous aircraft carrier INS Vikrant is 262.5 m long, has a standard displacement of 40,642 t, and is scheduled to be commissioned in 2018. The aging aircraft carrier INS Viraat is scheduled to be
decommissioned in 2016 without waiting for the commissioning of INS Vikrant. With the induction of Russian-built aircraft carrier INS Vikramaditya, 23 MiG-29 fighters have also been inducted from Russia to
serve as carrier-based aircraft.

Since 2007, India has implemented a project to induct 126 medium multi-role combat aircraft (MMRCA). In 2012, India announced that it selected the French Rafale aircraft. In April 2015, during his visit to


-----

**(2) Relations with the United States**
India is actively striving to strengthen bilateral relations
with the United States. The United States is also promoting
engagement with India in line with the expansion of
the relationship derived from the economic growth of
India. The two countries conduct joint exercises, such
as Malabar,[12] on a regular basis. In addition, in recent
years, the United States has become one of India’s major
equipment procurement destinations.[13]
In January 2015, President Obama visited India
to attend its Republic Day celebrations as Chief Guest.
The leaders agreed that they would expand technology
cooperation to include co-development and co-production
of equipment. Furthermore, the leaders affirmed that
they would deepen cooperation in the field of maritime
security, and agreed that cooperation between their navies
would be expanded, including upgrading their bilateral
naval exercise Malabar that is conducted between the
two countries. In December 2015, Minister of Defence
Manohar Parrikar of India visited the United States. The
two sides held talks on strengthening various defense
cooperation, and confirmed the progress made in the
technology cooperation consultations related to aircraft
carriers and jet engines conducted by their joint working
group. In such ways, their cooperation in the field of
security has expanded.

**(3) Relations with China**

See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 3-3-5 ((3) Relations with South Asian
Countries)



- 3  Relations with Other Countries

**(1) Relations with Pakistan**
India and Pakistan have disputes over the sovereignty
of Kashmir,[9] and have had three armed conflicts of
significant scope. The territorial dispute over Kashmir
has long been in contention between India and Pakistan,
with dialogues repeatedly resuming and suspending.[10]
More recently, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif of
Pakistan was invited to Prime Minister Modi’s swearingin ceremony in May 2014. In December 2015, on his
return from visiting Afghanistan, Prime Minister Modi
made a surprise informal visit to Pakistan that had not
been announced in advance. In this regard, both countries
have demonstrated readiness to improve their relations.
Meanwhile, it remains uncertain whether bilateral
dialogues would be sustained, with the postponement
of their vice foreign ministerial meeting in both August
2014 and January 2016.[11] Armed clashes between the two
militaries have repeatedly taken place in the Kashmir
region. The large-scale armed clashes in October 2014
reportedly killed and injured civilians. The Kashmir issue
thus remains a concern for both countries. Furthermore,
in January 2016, armed forces intruded into an Indian
Air Force base adjacent to the Kashmir area, killing and
wounding security personnel and others. While it has
been suggested that this incident was a terrorist attack
conducted by Islamic extremists, India has claimed that
it was a trans-boundary terrorist attack launched by
Pakistan and requests Pakistan to take appropriate steps.


**(4) Relations with Russia**

See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 4-5-2 (Relations with Asian Countries)

9 India asserts the accession of Kashmir to India, based on the Instrument of Accession document by which the ruler of Kashmir acceded to India at the time of Pakistan’s independence, and contends that this
matter should be resolved through bilateral negotiations on the basis of the 1972 Simla Agreement (an agreement on the peaceful resolution of disputes and the withdrawal of their military forces that was
reached following a summit meeting held in Simla in northern India). On the other hand, Pakistan declares that this should be decided through a referendum, in line with a 1948 U.N. resolution. The two countries
have taken a significantly different fundamental stance towards the resolution of the dispute.

10 Dialogue between the two countries was suspended due to the Mumbai terror attack in 2008, but it resumed following the February 2011 talks by their Vice-Ministers of Foreign Affairs. In 2011, both countries
affirmed the importance of peacefully settling all outstanding issues between the two countries through dialogue. Pakistan then decided to grant India most-favored nation status.

11 In December 2014, Minister of State for External Affairs Vijay Kumar Singh attributed the postponement of the meeting in August that year to the meeting between Pakistan’s High Commissioner and Kashmiri
leaders of organizations which seek Kashmir’s secession from India. The meeting was ultimately held in March 2015. It is suggested that the meeting in January 2016 was postponed due to the attack on the
Indian Air Force base that occurred in the same month.

12 The Malabar was initially a bilateral naval exercise between the United States and India. Then, Japan, Australia, and Singapore joined Malabar 07-2, and Japan participated in Malabar 09, Malabar 14, Malabar
15, and Malabar 16.


-----

**2** **Pakistan**



- 2  Military Affairs

Pakistan takes the position that maintaining nuclear
deterrence against the nuclear threat posed by India is
essential to ensure national security and self-defense. In
the past, the so-called Khan network was involved in the
proliferation of nuclear-related materials and technologies.[15]
Pakistan has been actively proceeding with the
development of ballistic missiles and cruise missiles
capable of carrying nuclear warheads, and has conducted
a number of test launches in recent years. In 2015,
Pakistan conducted two test launches of the ballistic
missile “Shaheen 3” in March and December, and a test
launch from an aircraft of the cruise missile “Raad” in
January 2016. It is deemed that Pakistan has steadily
increased the military capabilities of its ballistic and
cruise missiles.[16]
Pakistan is the world’s fi fth largest importer of
weapons, importing most of its weapons from China
and the United States.[17] Pakistan concluded a contract to
purchase four Sword-class frigates from China, which
have already been delivered. Pakistan jointly develops
the JF-17 fi ghter aircraft with China and has inducted
49 aircraft through indigenous production. Pakistan is
also considered to have recently conducted negotiations
with China to newly purchase four frigates and eight
submarines. Pakistan has inducted 18 F-16C/D fi ghter
jets by 2011 from the United States.



- 1  General Situation

Wedged between the powerful South Asian nation of
India and politically-unstable Afghanistan, and sharing
borders with China and Iran, Pakistan is placed in a
geopolitically signifi cant and complex position. In
particular, Islamic extremists conduct activities across
the Pakistan-Afghanistan border, and Pakistan’s attitude
towards the war against terrorism draws much attention
from the international community.
While supporting the United States’ war against
terrorism in Afghanistan, the government of Pakistan
has been struggling as its domestic security situation has
worsened, with issues such as growing anti-U.S. sentiment
and retaliatory terrorism by Islamic extremists. Prime
Minister Sharif who took offi ce in June 2013 conducted
peace consultations holding up a policy of dialogue with
armed forces. However, these forces committed a series
of terrorist attacks, and in June 2014, the Pakistan Armed
Forces launched a military operation against these forces.
Following a school attack in Peshawar in the same
year, upon revising the Constitution, Pakistan developed
the National Action Plan that includes establishing a
special military tribunal to try terrorist suspects, and
announced that the Armed Forces would continue with
and step up its mop-up operation. Subsequently, while it
appears that terrorist attacks have decreased considerably,
other attacks have been never ceasing. In January 2016,
an attack targeting a university in Charsadda in northeast
Peshawar occurred, killing and injuring many students
and others.[14]


14 On January 20, 2016, an armed group attacked Bacha Khan University using guns and bombs, killing 21 people including students and injuring dozens. A faction of Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) claimed
responsibility. In the attack against a military-run school in Peshawar in December 2014 believed to be perpetrated by TTP, a total of 148 people reportedly died, including students.

15 Pakistan is believed to have started its nuclear program in the 1970s and conducted its fi rst nuclear test near the Changai District of the Balochistan Province in 1998. In 2004, it came to light that nuclearrelated technologies, including uranium enrichment technology, had been transferred to North Korea, Iran, and Libya by Dr. Khan and other scientists, who had led the nuclear program in Pakistan.

16 Regarding missiles that Pakistan possesses, the following have been indicated:
“Nasr” (Hatf 9): a mobile, single-stage solid-fuelled ballistic missile with a range of about 60 km
“Ghaznavi” (Hatf 3): a mobile, single-stage solid-fuelled ballistic missile with a range of about 290 km
“Shaheen 1” (Hatf 4): a mobile, single-stage solid-fuelled ballistic missile with a range of about 750 km
“Ghauri” (Hatf 5): a mobile, single-stage liquid-fuelled ballistic missile with a range of about 1,300-1,800 km
“Shaheen 3” (Hatf 6): a mobile, two-stage solid-fuelled ballistic missile with a range of about 2,750 km
“Raad” (Hatf 8): a cruise missile with a range of about 350 km
“Babur” (Hatf 7): a supersonic cruise missile with a range of about 750 km


-----

dialogue was held again in January 2015. During his
visit to Pakistan, Secretary Kerry welcomed the mopup operation conducted by Pakistan’s Armed Forces
against insurgents, and announced the provision of
about US$250 million to assist temporary displaced
persons (TDPs). In October 2015, Prime Minister
Sharif of Pakistan visited the United States. During his
meeting with President Obama, the two sides confirmed
that the efforts of the two countries and the U.S. military
assistance were contributing to improving Pakistan’s
counter-terrorism capabilities.
Meanwhile, Pakistan urges the United States to
immediately end its drone attacks on Islamic extremists
in Pakistani territory, and the Pakistan government has
protested repeatedly.[18]
The United States, on the other hand, condemns
Pakistan for providing safe zones to Islamic extremists
in Afghanistan, which poses threats to the United States.
Attention will be paid to developments related to the
relationship between the two countries, including their
stance on the war on terror.

**(3) Relations with China**

See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 3-3-5 ((3) Relations with South Asian Countries)



- 3  Relations with Other Countries

**(1) Relations with India**

See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 7-1-3 ((1) Relations with Pakistan)


**(2) Relations with the United States**
Besides supporting the activities of the U.S. Forces in
Afghanistan, Pakistan cooperates with the war on terror by
launching mop-up operations against Islamic extremists
in the Pakistan-Afghanistan border area. Recognizing the
efforts of Pakistan, the United States designated it as a
“major non-NATO ally” in 2004.
The two countries conducted strategic dialogues
from 2010, and the United States provided Pakistan with
military support. However, these were suspended after
U.S.-Pakistan relations deteriorated as a consequence of
the Osama Bin Laden mop-up operation conducted by
the U.S. Forces in the territory of Pakistan in May 2011.
In October 2013, dialogue was resumed after summit
meetings were held between U.S. President Obama and
Prime Minister Sharif of Pakistan. In January 2014, a
strategic dialogue was held between U.S. Secretary of
State John Kerry and Advisor to the Prime Minister of
Pakistan Sartaj Aziz for the first time in three years. This


18 In November 2011, NATO forces conducted airstrikes on border posts in Pakistan, causing casualties to Pakistani soldiers. Pakistan strongly condemned this action and retaliated by closing the ground supply
route for ISAF. Additionally, it is reported that at an all-party conference organized by the leaders of the ruling and opposition parties in September 2013, the government adopted a resolution asserting that the


-----

**Section 8** **Europe**


**1 General Situation**


With the end of the Cold War, while many European
countries now recognize that the threat of large-scale
invasion by other countries has disappeared, diverse
security challenges have emerged, such as outbreaks of
regional confl ict within and around Europe, the rise of
terrorism, the proliferation of WMDs, and an increasing
number of cyberspace threats. With regard to terrorism
in particular, the outbreak of domestic incidents of
terrorism, including the terror attacks in Paris in
November 2015 and the terror attacks in Brussels in
March 2016, has made counter-terrorism efforts an urgent
task.[1] In addition, in recent years, the increasingly severe
fi nancial situation has had a signifi cant impact on the
security and defense policy of each country. Under these
circumstances, the growing tense situation in Ukraine has
made it imperative that countries reexamine their existing


strategies and design new concepts to deal with Russia’s
changes to the status quo by force or coercion and with
“hybrid warfare.” Furthermore, following the “Arab
Spring” democratization movement that spread across
the Arab world from 2010 to 2012, refugees from the
Middle East has continued to rise amid the sharp increase
in the number of people fl eeing their countries to escape
suppression and persecution. The number of refugees and
migrants crossing into Europe has soared especially since
last year, with the prolongation of the Syrian civil war,
making border security a challenge. To respond to such
challenges and situations, Europe has sought to further
strengthen and expand multilateral frameworks, such as
NATO and the EU.[2] At the same time, it is working to
contribute to the security and stability of the international
community by proactively participating in activities

|Fig. I-2-8-1|Expansion Situation of NATO/EU Member States|ates Joined the EU in May 2004 U in July 2013 82 Joined NATO in 1999 April 2009 amp secured victory.|
|---|---|---|
|Current members Expansion situation of the member st NATO (28 countries) U.K. France Germany Italy Belgium Netherlands U.S. Austria Luxembourg Canada Finland Spain Portugal Norway Sweden Greece Czech Republic Iceland Ireland Hungary Poland Turkey Malta Denmark Slovakia Albania Cyprus Lithuania Estonia Latvia Romania Bulgaria Slovenia Croatia Original EU members Joined the EU by 1995 EU (28 countries) (*As of March 2016) Joined the EU in January 2007 Joined the E Original NATO members Joined NATO by 19 Joined NATO in March 2004 Joined NATO in Note: On June 23, 2016, the United Kingdom conducted a national referendum to decide whether the country should leave the EU, and the pro-Brexit c|||


Countries such as France, Belgium, and Denmark are reviewing their security arrangements and strengthening their immigration control, due to acts or attempted acts of terrorism that occurred in those
countries. See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1.

NATO has continued expanding towards Central and Eastern Europe with the aim of stabilizing the entire European and Atlantic regions. In December 2015, NATO Foreign Ministers invited Montenegro to begin
accession talks. If Montenegro accedes to NATO, its membership will increase for the fi rst time since Albania and Croatia in 2009. Currently, two countries—Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina—have been
approved to participate in the Membership Action Plan (MAP), which is a program that provides support to future member states in their preparation to enter NATO (conditionally for Bosnia and Herzegovina). The
participation in the MAP of six other countries—Ukraine, Georgia, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Kazakhstan, and Moldova—is currently undecided, as these countries support initiatives for integration into the European


-----

outside the European region. Moreover, initiatives are
made at the national level for reviewing security and
defense strategies, reforming national defense systems,

**2 Enhancement of Multinational Security Frameworks**


- 1  Security and Defense Policy of NATO/EU


and strengthening bilateral[3] and multilateral[4] defense and
security cooperation.

See>> Fig. I-2-8-1 (Expansion Situation of NATO/EU Member States)

capacity by combining the concepts of Smart Defence
and CFI in reducing defense budgets in each country.[9]
Following Russia’s “hybrid warfare” over Ukraine as
well as the frequent “abnormal fl ights” of Russian Armed
Force aircraft over the European front, including the Baltic
states, NATO and member states reaffi rmed the threat
posed by Russia. In April 2014, they suspended practical
cooperation with Russia and took other steps, including
expanding its Baltic air policing mission.[10] Furthermore,
at the NATO Summit held in Wales in September 2014,
leaders adopted a joint declaration demanding Russia
to retract its “annexation” of Crimea and adopted the
Readiness Action Plan (RAP) for enhancing existing
readiness forces.[11] Nonetheless, differences are observed
in how member states regard Russia due to factors such as
their geographic proximity to the country. Meanwhile, as
the threat of terrorism spreads within Europe and Syrian
and other refugees cross into Europe, we are recently
seeing signs among member states to improve relations
with Russia, with an eye to strengthening international
collaboration on counter-ISIL efforts.[12]
With regard to ISIL, while no military action has
been taken under the NATO framework, the Wales
Summit Declaration strongly condemned ISIL’s violent


Founded for the core task of collective defense among
member states, NATO has expanded the scope of its
activities to confl ict prevention and crisis management
since the end of the Cold War.
In the NATO Summit held in Lisbon in November
2010, NATO adopted a new Strategic Concept[5] for the fi rst
time in 11 years to propose a guideline for the next decade
for the creation of a more effi cient and fl exible alliance.
In recent years, NATO has been promoting the
concept of Smart Defence[6] as the national defense
budgets of member states are declining and gaps in
military capability are widening among member states,
in particular between European countries and the United
States.[7] This concept is aimed at ensuring greater security
with fewer resources through multinational coordination.
At the NATO Summit held in May 2012, the
Connected Forces Initiative (CFI) was set up.[8] CFI is
intended to provide a framework for conducting joint
exercises and drills among member states. Furthermore, it
is designed to strengthen joint drills among member states
and with partner countries, enhance interoperability, and
make use of advanced technology. CFI is considered to
be aimed at maintaining NATO’s readiness and military


3 For example, the United Kingdom and France signed treaties relating to bilateral defense and security cooperation, and on the shared use of nuclear facilities, at a summit meeting held in November 2010. In
addition, at a U.K.-France summit meeting held in January 2014, the Declaration on Security and Defence was adopted, and the two countries agreed on conducting joint development of anti-ship missiles and
joint research on unmanned combat air vehicles, as well as on aiming to begin deploying a Combined Joint Expeditionary Force by 2016. With regard to unmanned combat air vehicles, in November 2014, the
U.K. and French governments reached agreement on contracts related to the development of unmanned combat air systems.

4 For example, in September 2010, the four European countries of France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Belgium established the European Air Transport Command (EATC) to jointly deploy transport aircraft of
the respective countries such as C-130 and A-310, as well as approximately 150 aerial refueling aircraft. Luxemburg joined EATC in 2012, Spain in July 2014, and Italy in December 2014.

5 The Strategic Concept is an offi cial document defi ning the objectives, characteristics, and basic national security responsibilities of NATO. The document has so far been formulated seven times (1949, 1952,
1957, 1968, 1991, 1999, and 2010). In the Strategic Concept, NATO identifi es major threats including the proliferation of WMDs and ballistic missiles, terrorism, confl ict and instability beyond NATO borders,
and cyber attack. The document prescribes NATO’s core tasks as follows: (1) collective defense in accordance with Article 5 of the Washington Treaty, the basic treaty of NATO; (2) crisis management including
preventing confl ict and post-confl ict stabilization and reconstruction assistance; and (3) cooperative security including active contribution to arms control, disarmament, and non-proliferation.

6 As regards concrete efforts undertaken under this concept, at the NATO Summit held in Chicago in May 2012, leaders declared that NATO gained an interim missile defense capability to defend the people
and the territory of NATO against ballistic missile attacks by linking together interceptor missiles and radars of the member states under NATO’s command and control. In addition, 13 member states of NATO
signed a procurement contract for fi ve Global Hawks (RQ-4), which will constitute the core of the Alliance Ground Surveillance (AGS) system that uses unmanned aircraft.

7 At present, the United States accounts for about 70% of the total defense spending of all NATO member states. NATO guidelines set forth that member states shall spend at least 2% of their GDP on defense.
Nonetheless, in 2014, only 3 (United States, United Kingdom, and Greece) out of 28 member states fulfi lled this criterion.

8 As regards concrete efforts undertaken based on this concept, at the NATO Summit held in Wales in September 2014, leaders approved a Readiness Action Plan (RAP). It was unveiled to respond to the impacts
of Russia’s strategies as well as the threats emanating from the Middle East and North Africa. RAP presented that NATO forces would have continued presence in eastern allies, that the response capabilities
of the existing multinational NATO Response Force (NRF) would be enhanced signifi cantly, and that the Very High Readiness Joint Task Force (VJTF) that can be mobilized in two to three days would be created.
The NRF is said to consist of 40,000 personnel as of April 2016, and the VJTF is expected to become a multinational force consisting of 20,000 personnel in total (including 5,000 land force personnel) who
will acquire operational capabilities by the end of 2016. From October to November 2015, Exercise Trident Juncture was conducted to verify the functions of the VJTF.

9 While cuts to defense spending had continued among NATO member states, the Annual Report released in January 2016 states that the cuts have practically stopped among European member states and
Canada and that further increases in defense spending are necessary.

10 NATO patrols in Baltic airspace, which commenced in 2004 assigning a mission to a country with 4 aircraft, has been reinforced since the crisis in Ukraine. Patrols were conducted by four countries with 16
aircraft, but in September 2015, the mission was reduced to two countries with 8 aircraft.

11 See Footnote 8 for more information on RAP.

12 For example, France held talks with President Putin of Russia following the terror attacks in November 2015, and the two sides agreed to exchange intelligence between their military forces. The United Kingdom,
in its strategy document SDSR2015, states that the issues of Ukraine would signifi cantly change the rules-based international order, while it also states that the country would seek ways to cooperate with Russia i


-----

acts and affirmed that NATO would activate its collective
defense if any ally were attacked by ISIL.
The EU tries to enhance its initiatives in security
under the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP)
and Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP).[13]
The first security strategy document adopted in 2003, “A
Secure Europe in a Better World,” states that the EU aims
to enhance its capabilities to deal with new threats, would
make a contribution to its security through involvement
in its immediate neighborhood, and would play a leading
role in building an international order based on effective
multilateralism by working with the United States,
other partner countries, and international organizations
including the U.N.[14]
Triggered by the reduction of defense expenditure
in EU countries and the capacity gap among members,[15]
the concept of “pooling and sharing” has been promoted,
in which member states jointly manage and use more
military capacities. Cooperation has been promoted in
the areas of air-to-air refueling, unmanned aerial vehicle,
satellite communication, and cyber defense. The EU
intends to make sure all the initiatives within this concept
will complement, rather than interfere with, the activities
covered by the NATO framework such as the Smart
Defence initiative.
Following the adoption of a resolution about
strengthening CSDP at the European Council Meeting
(EU Summit) held in December 2013, the European
Council adopted the EU Maritime Security Strategy[16] in
June 2014. At the EU Foreign Affairs Council meeting
in November 2014, the EU Cyber Defence Policy
Framework[17] was adopted.
In response to the crisis in Ukraine, the EU has


The European Union Naval Force Mediterranean rescues refugees in the Mediterranean Sea

[EU NAVFOR SOPHIA]

condemned the military responses of Russia and
implemented economic sanctions against Russia.[18] In
addition, to support the economic and political reforms
in Ukraine, the EU continues its engagement in nonmilitary affairs, including the provision of large-scale
financial assistance to Ukraine.[19]
To deal with the threat of ISIL, the EU extends funds
to carry out humanitarian assistance for Syria and Iraq.
Additionally, the EU works with countries in regions such
as the Middle East and North Africa to provide capacitybuilding assistance in counter-terrorism measures, among
other activities. In November 2015, in accordance with a
request from France after the terror attacks in Paris, the
EU, for the first time, activated the “mutual assistance
clause”[20] stipulating a mutual defense obligation, and EU
member states expressed their support to France.[21]
In May 2015, the EU started Operation Sophia
conducted by European Union Naval Force Mediterranean
(EUNAVFOR Med) to respond to the surge of refugees
and migrants crossing the Mediterranean Sea into Europe.
The first phase focusing on the monitoring of smuggling


13 The EU, although it has a property of non-binding multilateral cooperation, introduced the CFSP, which covers all areas of foreign and security policy based on the Treaty of Maastricht, which took effect in 1993.
In June 1999, the European Council decided to implement the European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) to offer peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance activities in conflict areas, as a part of the CFSP
framework. The Treaty of Lisbon, made effective in 2009, renamed the ESDP to CSDP and clearly positioned it as an integral part of the CFSP.

14 In June 2015, a report analyzing the changes in the global situation since 2003 entitled “Strategic Assessment” was submitted to the leaders of the EU and its member states. Based on this assessment,
the leaders and others instructed the establishment of a global strategy by June 2016, which will serve as a guideline for future foreign and security policies. The “Strategic Assessment” report analyzes
the current global situation from the perspectives of (1) connectivity, (2) contention, and (3) complexity. The new global strategic document that will be prepared on the basis of this report will examine
six policy areas of (1) security and defense, (2) counter-terrorism and organized crime measures, (3) cyber security, (4) energy and climate change, (5) migrant and refugee issues, and (6) humanitarian
assistance and economic prosperity.

15 The European Defence Agency (EDA), an organization established to improve the EU’s defense capabilities, reports that the military operations in Libya and elsewhere revealed the EU’s lack of air-to-air refueling
capability and precision-guided weapons and its dependency on the United States.

16 See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 3-3-3.

17 Its purpose is to implement the Cybersecurity Strategy that the European Commission released in February 2013. The Framework mainly focuses on: (1) supporting the development of member states’ cyber
defense capabilities; (2) promotion of civil-military cooperation; and (3) improved education and training opportunities.

18 The EU takes measures, such as capital regulations and ban on exports of equipment and dual use goods, along with asset freezes and travel bans.

19 The EU will extend 11 billion euros of assistance between 2014 and 2020. In addition, in response to a request for assistance from the Ukrainian government, the EU has decided to provide additional assistance
of 1.8 billion euros between 2015 and 2016. As of December 2015, 2.21 billion euros has been provided.

20 Article 42, Paragraph 7 of the Treaty on European Union provides for a mutual defense obligation, where if a EU member state is the victim of armed aggression on its territory, the other member states shall
have towards it an obligation of aid and assistance by all the means in their power in accordance with Article 51 of the U.N. Charter.

21 On November 17, 2015 after the terror attacks, Minister for Defence Jean-Yves Le Drian of France requested the application of the “mutual assistance clause” at the EU Foreign Affairs Council meeting. The
application was agreed upon unanimously. Based on the application of the clause, France requested other EU member states to: (1) contribute to counter-ISIL operations in Iraq and Syria; and (2) help reduce
the military burden of France by contributing to France’s counter-terrorism operations in Mali, Central Africa, and other areas. Nevertheless, the extent of cooperation has remained relatively small, except for


-----

and human trafficking networks was completed in
October 2015. The operation has entered the second phase
involving the search, seizure, and diversion on the high
seas of vessels suspected of being used for smuggling and
human trafficking.
In June 2016, the United Kingdom conducted a
national referendum to decide whether or not the country
should leave the EU. The victory of the pro-Brexit camp
could provide increased momentum for other countries to
exit the EU. In this regard, attention will be on the future
developments, including decline in centripetal force of
the EU.

**2  NATO/EU’s Activities Outside the Region[22]**

- 


capabilities. Since then, it has been actively committed
to the operations in crisis management and maintenance
of peace and order[24] by, for example, sending troops to
Bosnia-Herzegovina, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Chad, and Central Africa. Since February 2013,
the EU has been implementing a training mission to
support training Malian troops and realignment in Mali,
where Islamic guerrillas and others pose serious threats.
Also, in January 2014, the EU decided to dispatch security
forces to Central Africa, where the situation has been of
constant tumult. The forces commenced operations in
April 2014 and completed its mission by March 2015.
In the same month, the EU launched a military advisory
mission (EUMAM) to support preparations for security
sector reform in Central Africa.
In addition, NATO and the EU have actively been
engaged in anti-piracy operations off the coast of Somalia
and in the Gulf of Aden. Since October 2008, NATO has
deployed ships of the Standing NATO Maritime Group
(SNMG), comprised of the navies of member states, to
these waters for anti-piracy operations. In Operation
Ocean Shield which NATO has been conducting since
August 2009, it has the task of carrying out anti-piracy
operations by ship, as well as helping requesting
countries develop their capacities to combat piracy. Since
December 2008, the EU has been engaged in the antipiracy campaign, Operation Atalanta, in these waters, its
first maritime mission. The vessels and aircraft dispatched
from member states are engaged in escorting ships and
surveillance activities in the waters.[25]


Since August 2003, NATO had been leading ISAF in
Afghanistan. Its mission was completed in December
2014. In place of this mission, since January 2015, NATO
has been leading the Resolute Support Mission (RSM),
whose primary tasks are to provide training, advice, and
assistance to the Afghan National Defense and Security
Forces (ANDSF). NATO still deploys approximately
12,000 personnel to Afghanistan. At the NATO Foreign
Ministers meeting held in December 2015, ministers
agreed to sustain NATO presence in Afghanistan during
2016. NATO is continuing its mission within the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) framework such as maintaining security
since June 1999 in Kosovo, which declared independence
in February 2008.[23]
In 2003, the EU led peacekeeping operations for the
first time in Macedonia by using NATO’s equipment and


22 While NATO has mainly focused on leading military operations, the EU has undertaken a number of civilian missions. Meanwhile, the EU keeps the EU Battle Groups on standby on a rotating schedule in order
to lead peacekeeping missions when NATO is not involved (the number of countries on duty varies by the size of their forces). The division of roles between NATO and the EU is to be defined on a case-by-case
basis.

23 In July 2013, NATO announced that the Kosovo Security Forces (KSF) possess full operational capabilities in line with NATO standards to carry out their existing missions.

24 These are called Petersberg tasks. They consist of: 1) humanitarian assistance and rescue mission; 2) peacekeeping mission; and 3) combat mission in crisis management, including peacemaking.

25 To tackle piracy in this area, the EU has undertaken “European Union Training Mission to Somalia” and “Regional Maritime Capacity Building Mission for the Horn of Africa and the Western Indian Ocean”
in addition to Operation Atalanta. Based on a comprehensive approach, the EU not only implements piracy countermeasures, but is also working to develop and strengthen its coastal policing and judicial


-----

**3 Security / Defense Policies of European Countries**



- 1  The United Kingdom

After the end of the Cold War, the United Kingdom,
perceiving that there is no direct military threat
against the country, has advanced national defense
reform with particular focus on improving its overseas
deployment capability and readiness, in order to deal
with new threats such as international terrorism and
the proliferation of WMDs.
Against this backdrop, in November 2015, the
Cameron administration released the National Security
Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review
2015 (NSS-SDSR2015) in the face of destabilization
in the Middle East, including the rise of ISIL, the crisis
in Ukraine, and the threat posed by cyber attacks.
Recognizing that the United Kingdom confronts threats
from both states and non-state actors, the NSS-SDSR2015
sets out the challenges that the United Kingdom should
address in the coming decade as follows: terrorism
and extremism; resurgence of state-based threats;
technological developments including cyber threats;
and the erosion of the rules-based international order.
While the previous SDSR2010 committed to cutting the
troop strength, reducing key equipment, and reviewing
procurement plans due to pressure to decrease defense
spending,[26] the NSS-SDSR2015 calls for ending the
defense spending cuts and explicitly proposes to increase
the defense force in order to develop capacities to address
the entire list of expanded threats.[27] The NSS-SDSR2015
lays out that the United Kingdom would continue to be a
key player in the international community, and promote
procurement of equipment and formation of units with
high readiness and mobility, in view of dealing with
threats such as terrorism and cyber security.[28]
Since September 2014, the United Kingdom has
conducted airstrikes against ISIL in Iraq. In addition,
it carries out ISR activities using unmanned aerial
vehicles, provides education and training to forces
engaged in ground war such as the Iraqi Security Forces
and Peshmerga, a military organization of the Kurdistan


Regional Government, as well as extends humanitarian
assistance to refugees. Furthermore, following the
terror attacks in Paris, the United Kingdom decided in
December 2015 to extend the scope of the airstrikes from
Iraq to Syria, and commenced airstrikes in Syria on the
day after the Parliament gave its approval.[29]
With regard to the Asia-Pacifi c region, the NSSSDSR2015 presents the view that the region offers
signifi cant economic opportunities for the United
Kingdom, and has considerable infl uence on the future
integrity and credibility of the rules-based international
order. It then expresses commitment to attaching
importance to working with the United Kingdom’s
security partners including Japan. In particular, it
considers Japan as the United Kingdom’s closest security
partner in Asia. Based on this view, in this region, the
United Kingdom conducts Operation Patwin, a natural
disaster assistance mission to the Philippines, participates
in the multilateral combined exercise RIMPAC, and
conducts goodwill trainings with Japan.[30]
In June 2016, the pro-Brexit camp secured victory
in the national referendum held to decide whether or not
the United Kingdom should leave the EU. In this light,
attention will be given to the impacts this will have in
many domains, including security and defense.

- 2  France


Since the end of the Cold War, France has focused on
maintaining independence of its defense policies, while
having led initiatives to enhance the defense structure and
capability in Europe. It has worked on the development
of its military capacity by reducing military personnel
and integrating military bases, dealing with operational
requirements to strengthen its defense capability, as well
as enhancing its intelligence capabilities and modernizing
equipment required in the future.
The White Paper on Defence and National Security
published in April 2013 for the fi rst time in fi ve years


26 The SDSR2010 committed to decreasing defense spending by 8% by FY2014, including at least 4.3 billion pounds in non-front line savings, excluding spending for operations such as in Afghanistan. The
SDSR2010 decided to decrease, by 2015, Royal Navy personnel by 5,000, Army personnel by 7,000, and Royal Air Force personnel by 5,000, along with reduction of the holdings of main battle tanks by 40%.
In the Army realignment plan “Army 2020” released later in July 2013, the United Kingdom was to reduce the Army’s active military personnel from 102,000 to 82,000 by 2020, while increasing reservists
from 15,000 to 30,000 by 2018.

27 The NSS-SDSR2015 will maintain the size of the Armed Forces personnel and increase the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force by 700 personnel combined. It also decided to build two aircraft carriers, introduce
nine new maritime patrol aircraft, and maintain a fl eet of four strategic nuclear submarines. Underpinned by a stable economy, the NSS-SDSR2015 is to maintain defense expenditure amounting to 2% of GDP
which is the NATO’s target and to further increase defense spending, especially equipment procurement spending.

28 The NSS-SDSR2015 is to add two Typhoon squadrons, establish a F-35 squadron capable of operating from new aircraft carriers, create two strike brigades of up to 5,000 personnel, and have a system that
can deploy an expeditionary force of around 50,000 personnel overseas by 2025.

29 As of March 2016, the United Kingdom has mobilized ten Tornado fi ghters and six Typhoon fi ghters.


-----

larger budget for equipment, the maintenance of defense
industry capabilities, among other items.[32]
France has been conducting airstrikes against
ISIL in Iraq since September 2014 and in Syria since
September 2015.[33] Following the terror attacks in Paris in
November 2015, France applied the state of emergency
law domestically, and decided to deploy 10,000 military
personnel to maintain domestic security and suspend
troop reductions. Outside of France, the country enhanced
its airstrikes against ISIL in Syria and deployed mobile
units including the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle
to the Mediterranean Sea. Furthermore, France has
continued to provide education and training to the Iraqi
Security Forces and Peshmerga, as well as humanitarian
assistance for refugees.
France, which has territories in the Asia-Pacific
region, expresses the view in its White Paper on Defence
and National Security, that the region is a key actor of
growth worldwide, but at the same time is a region
where there is significant tension and many conflicts.
In October 2015, the Floréal-class frigate Vendémiaire
made a port call to display presence and conducted a
goodwill training with the MSDF. France actively
participates in multilateral exercises, including Croix
du Sud and Equateur.[34, 35]

- 3  Germany


outlines that although France does not face any direct,
explicit conventional military threat against its territory,
there is growing diversity in the types of threats
it faces as a result of globalization. These include
international terrorism, cyber threats, organized crime,
and the proliferation of WMDs. It continues to position
(1) intelligence, (2) nuclear deterrence, (3) protection,
(4) prevention, and (5) deployment[31] as the five key
mechanisms of the national security strategy, and states
that France would use a combination of these mechanisms
to respond to changes in the strategic environment over the
coming 15 years. Regarding France’s foreign relations,
it positions NATO’s functions as follows: (1) means of
securing collective defense of member states; (2) an
important instrument of the strategic partnership
between the two sides of the Atlantic; and (3) a common
framework for military action in dealing with threats
and crisis. On the other hand, with regard to the EU, the
White Paper clearly stipulates France’s leadership role in
strengthening defense and security capabilities, and aims
to drive forward the CSDP in a practical and realistic
manner. In May 2015, the Parliament enacted the 20152019 Military Programming Law, the updated version of
the 2014-2019 Military Programming Law, in order to
implement plans laid out in the White Paper for realizing
the national security strategy. This law stipulated a


While Germany has been implementing a large-scale
reduction of its military personnel since the end of the
Cold War, it has been gradually expanding the dispatch
of its federal forces overseas. At the same time, Germany
has advanced the reform of its defense forces to enable
them to execute multiple responsibilities encompassing
conflict prevention and risk management in the context of
multilateral organizations, including NATO, the EU, and
the United Nations.[36]
The Verteidigungspolitischen Richtlinien (VPR)
(Defense Policy Guidelines), formulated in 2011 for


31 In its White Paper on Defence and National Security released in April 2013, France identified the following regions as priority regions: (1) the periphery of Europe; (2) the Mediterranean basin; (3) part of Africa
(from Saharan Africa to Equatorial Africa); (4) the Persian Gulf; and (5) the Indian Ocean. In these regions, France will maintain independent or multinational operational capabilities. In Saharan Africa, the French
forces are singlehandedly engaged in a particularly large military operation called Operation Barkhane, which has its command center in Chad’s capital city of N’Djamena.

32 The White Paper on Defence and National Security presented that military personnel would be reduced by 24,000. On this basis, the government planned to cut 25,800 military jobs between 2015 and 2019.
However, following the acts of terrorism against Charlie Hebdo in January 2015, that same month President Francois Hollande held a Defense Council meeting and decided to scrap the loss of 7,500 jobs. In
May 2015, the Council of Ministers decided on the 2015-2019 military programming proposal whose main components include: (1) the long-term deployment of 7,000 military personnel in France; (2) a 3.8
billion euro total increase in the 2016-2019 defense budget; and (3) an increase in the number of Reserves and the number of days of activities.

33 As of May 2016, France has mobilized 17 aircraft, 1 frigate, and 1,000 personnel.

34 See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 3-5 regarding the maritime security strategy of France.

35 At the Shangri-La Dialogue in June 2016, Minister for Defence Le Drian affirmed France’s renewed commitment to the Asia-Pacific region, stating, “Could we not have European navies coordinate in order to
ensure as regular and as visible a presence as possible in the maritime areas of Asia? I will soon detail this proposal to my European counterparts.”

36 Germany decreased its military personnel strength which was once more than 500,000 at the time of its reunification to 250,000 by 2010. Since July 1994, when the Federal Constitutional Court judged that
dispatching the federal forces to international missions under multilateral frameworks such as the United Nations and NATO was constitutional, Germany has gradually expanded dispatch of its federal forces
to participate in various international operations, including security maintenance and reconstruction activities in the Balkan Peninsula and Afghanistan, and anti-piracy operations off the coast of Somalia and in


-----

the first time in eight years, states that the possibility of
attacks on Germany by conventional forces remains low,
and that risks and threats would come from failed states,
international terrorism, natural disasters, cyber attacks,
and proliferation of WMDs. It then indicates Germany’s
active participation in the prevention and containment of
crisis and conflict. It also states that promotion of military
collaboration, standardization, and interoperability within
the NATO and EU frameworks is essential, in addition to
taking cross-government measures.
The amended Military Law, which was enacted in
April 2011, stipulates the suspension of conscription
for basic military service and the reduction of total
personnel from 250,000 to 185,000, while it also aims
for the sustainable deployment of military personnel,
and thereby, enable the continuous deployment of up to
10,000 personnel.
Work on the next defense white paper, expected for
completion in 2014, had been postponed in order to reexamine the crisis in Ukraine, the rise of ISIL, and the
equipment procurement of the Bundeswehr. In February
2015, Germany announced that it started working on the


white paper. It is expected to be released in summer 2016.
In Iraq, Germany has thus far provided education
and training to the Iraqi Security Forces and Peshmerga,
supplied equipment and ammunition, extended financial
assistance for humanitarian assistance, as well as
conducted training of Kurdish troops in Germany. In
December 2015, following the terror attacks in Paris in
November 2015, the Cabinet approved plans to provide
logistics support to the French Armed Forces and the
Coalition that are conducting counter-ISIL military
operations. This expanded German engagement in
counter-ISIL military operations, albeit the commitment
is limited to logistics support missions, such as
reconnaissance and aerial refueling.[37]
With regard to the Asia-Pacific region, Germany
expresses the view that the region, in terms of its population
and economy, plays a central role in international politics,
while on the other hand, the region faces issues such as
being home to two-thirds of the world’s poor. Germany’s
military engagement in the region is limited to dispatches
in response to natural disasters and goodwill visits, and
does not include joint training.


37 The Cabinet approved the following commitment during the 12-month period from early January to end of December 2016: (1) dispatch the frigate Augsburg to escort the French aircraft carrier Charles de
Gaulle; (2) deploy Tornado fighters (up to six fighters) and aerial refueling aircraft to Incirlik Air Base in Turkey; and (3) deploy up to 1,200 personnel to areas of ISIL’s operations in Syria, their airspace, the eastern
Mediterranean Sea, Persian Gulf, and Red Sea to collect intelligence using reconnaissance satellites and share this intelligence with relevant countries. Furthermore, Germany strives to reduce the operational
burden of France by increasing the number of German personnel participating in the U.N. PKO in Mali (United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali [MINUSMA]) and training personnel


-----

**Issues in the International**

**Chapter**
**3**

**Community**


**Trends in Regional Confl ict and International Terrorism**
**Section 1**
**(with a Focus on the Middle East and Africa)**


**1 General Situation**


In a global security environment, there is a growing
risk that unrest or a security problem in a single
country or region could immediately develop into a
security challenge or destabilizing factor for the entire
international community.
The conf icts occurring in recent years in various
parts of the world are not necessarily of the same nature.
An array of problems is at the root of conf icts, including
ethnicity, religion, territory, and resources. The impacts
of climate change and other global issues have also been
suggested as causes of conf icts.[1] Conf icts can take
diverse forms, from armed conf icts, to the continuation of
military standoffs. Furthermore, human rights violations,
refugees, hunger, poverty, and other consequences of
conf icts can have impacts affecting not only the countries
in the conf ict but also a wider area. In many cases, areas
where civil wars or regional conf icts have created or
expanded a governance vacuum have become a hotbed
of the activities of terrorist organizations. Among them
are organizations which operate across national borders
and regions, which continue to pose imminent security
challenges to the international community. The presence
of states with weak governance has made it diff cult to
tackle risks such as the explosive outbreak and spread of
infectious diseases.
Particularly in states with unstable political situations
and weak governance, which are often found in the Middle
East and Africa, border control is inadequate, leading to
cross-border movement of terrorist organization members


and weapons, as well as narcotics that are a funding source
for terrorist organizations, posing threats to the region.
Furthermore, this region has seen renewed f ghting even
after a temporary ceasef re is achieved pursuant to a peace
agreement or other arrangements between the parties in
conf ict. The “Arab Spring,”[2] which grew into a full-scale
movement in 2011, encouraged transitions to democratic
systems in countries in the Middle East and North Africa.
However, political turmoil associated with the change in
government created clashes between tribes, religions, and
political parties, and these clashes have still not ended
in some countries. The underlying factors are deemed
to include public dissatisfaction, especially among
young people, with economic and social disparities as
well as with high unemployment rates. Furthermore,
in developed countries, such as the United States and
European countries, there has been a rise in young people
who sympathize with the extremism of international
terrorist organizations, including the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL)[3] that has gained strength in Iraq
and Syria, against the backdrop of dissatisfaction towards
estrangement from society, discrimination, poverty,
and disparities. In an increasing number of cases, these
people have joined the activities of international terrorist
organizations as f ghters and conduct “home-grown”
and “lone-wolf”[4] terrorism activities in their countries,
which in turn have heightened the risk of terrorism in
developed countries. As evidenced by the simultaneous
terrorist attacks in Paris in November 2015 and the


The Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) released by the U.S. Department of Defense in March 2014 regards climate change as one of key factors that will shape the future security environment. It claims that
climate change may accelerate instability and confl ict by causing water scarcity, sharp increases in food costs, and other effects. In addition, the Summary for Policymakers in the Working Group II report on
impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability of the Fifth Assessment Report which the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) published in the same month described that climate change may indirectly
increase the risk of confl ict by exacerbating poverty and other causes of confl ict.

The Arab Spring is a term generally used to refer to the series of democratization movements that were undertaken on a full-fl edged basis in Middle Eastern and North African countries starting in early 2011,
causing political regime changes in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, and Yemen. In 2011, Tunisia held National Constituent Assembly elections for creating a new constitution, which was adopted by the assembly in January
2014. In December 2014, Beji Caid Essebsi took offi ce as President following the election results. Libya held General National Congress elections for the establishment of a new constitution in July 2012, but
its democratization process including formulation of a new constitution still faces a variety of challenges.

ISIL is an outgrowth of Al Qaeda in Iraq (AQI), an Al Qaeda terrorist organization which was established in 2004 in Iraq.


-----

act of terrorism in Jakarta in January 2014,[5] the global
expansion of such extremism has resulted in growing
terror threats not only in the Middle East and Africa but
also in the rest of the world. In countries, such as Mali
and Central African Republic, the people’s dissatisfaction
with politics and economics under their weak governance
systems as well as clashes over territories and resources
have caused confl icts. The rapid, vast outbreak of the
Ebola virus disease in West Africa in 2014 threatened the
stability of the affected countries and spread the disease
to other countries including Western nations, shedding
light on the seriousness of the risk posed by the spread of
infectious diseases.
It has become increasingly important for the
international community to examine the shape of tailored
international frameworks and involvement measures,
and seek out appropriate responses for addressing these
complicated and diverse destabilizing factors.
The end of the Cold War was accompanied by rising
expectations for peacekeeping efforts, and, as a result,
many U.N. PKOs have been established. Their missions
have recently come to include a wide range of activities
including those by civilians and police, encompassing
such traditional roles as the monitoring of a ceasefi re
or military withdrawal as well as the monitoring of
disarmament, security sector reform, the monitoring of
elections and administrative activities, and humanitarian
assistance (e.g., return of refugees to their homeland). In

**2 Current Situation of Regional Confl icts and the International Response**


- 1  Situations in Syria and Iraq in Response to
**the Rise of ISIL**


this situation, the importance of the roles related to the
protection of civilians and peace-building increases, and
it leads to activities with a stronger mandate authorized
under Chapter 7 of the U.N. Charter.[6] At the same time,
U.N. PKOs face challenges including the availability of
required equipment, the protection of personnel safety,
and the improvement of troop capabilities.[7]

See>> Fig. I-3-1-1 (List of Peacekeeping Operations)

In addition to the U.N. PKO framework, multinational
forces authorized by the U.N. Security Council and regional
organizations engage in confl ict prevention, peacekeeping,
and peacebuilding. In Africa, regional organizations such
as the African Union (AU)[8] roll out their activities based on
U.N. Security Council resolutions, and their activities are
sometimes handed over to U.N. PKO later. The international
community also offers recommendations and training
assistance and supplies equipment from a long-term
perspective, prompting African nations to help themselves
so that they can enhance local government organizations
and improve the capabilities of their military and security
organizations.[9] Furthermore, the entire international
community is undertaking various efforts in response to
the rise of ISIL, including the adoption of a U.N. Security
Council resolution to prevent the international movement
of terrorist fi ghters, military actions such as the United
States-led Coalition’s airstrikes on ISIL, and humanitarian
assistance by partner countries that support the counterterrorism effort.

outbreak of anti-government demonstrations across the
country calling for democratization and the resignation
of President Assad. As a result, the clashes between the
military and the opposition parties[10] have continued to
take place throughout the country.[11] Taking advantage


**(1) Political Turmoil in Syria and the Rise of ISIL**
In Syria, since March 2011, the government has
mobilized military and security forces in response to the


5 See “3 Trends in Global Terrorism” for the recent state of international terrorism, including the simultaneous terrorist attacks in Paris.

6 As of the end of June 2016, 16 U.N. PKOs are operating globally, including about 104,000 military and police personnel and about 16,000 civilian personnel (as of the end of July 2015) from 123 countries.
Out of these U.N. PKOs, there are 12 operations in the Middle East and Africa. Ten U.N. PKOs are granted robust mandates under Chapter 7 of the U.N. Charter. (See Fig. I-2-1-1)

7 “A New Partnership Agenda Charting a New Horizon For U.N. Peacekeeping” was published in July 2009 to evaluate major policy and strategic dilemmas faced by U.N. PKOs and discuss solutions among
stakeholders.

8 The world’s largest regional organization comprised of 54 countries and regions in Africa. It was established in July 2002 by reorganizing the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) (established in May 1963). Its
objectives include achieving the integration and solidarity of African nations and people, accelerating political, economic, and social integration of Africa, and promoting peace, security, and stability in Africa.

9 For example, organizations such as the United Nations and the European Union are implementing initiatives in countries including Somalia and Mali.

10 According to an announcement by the U.N. Humanitarian Coordinator in January 2016, the clashes in Syria killed more than 250,000 people. Since the start of the Syrian civil war, over 11 million people have
become refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs).

11 In addition, Syria faces the issue of the Assad administration’s use of chemical weapons. In August 2013, when the United States, which called for a military response to the use of chemical weapons in Syria,
and Russia, which sought to place Syrian chemical weapons under the control of the international community, were at odds, chemical weapons were used in the suburbs of Syria’s capital city Damascus, which
killed many civilians. Following this attack, U.S. President Barack Obama who had stated previously that the use of chemical weapons would cross a red line, assessed that the Syrian government used chemical
weapons. The President stated he decided that military action should be taken against the Assad administration, further heightening military tension. In September 2013, following negotiations between U.S.
Secretary of State John Kerry and Minister of Foreign Affairs Sergey Lavrov of Russia, the United States and Russia agreed on a framework which demanded that the Syrian government declare its chemical
weapons stockpiles as well as accept international inspections, aimed at the complete destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons. The Syrian government submitted a list of its chemical weapons stockpile to
the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and took responses which were set out in the framework, including accession to the Chemical Weapons Convention. Due to these responses,
military action by the United States and other countries against the Assad administration was averted. Pursuant to OPCW decisions and related U.N. Security Council resolution, international efforts were made


-----

|Col1|Mission|Date Established|
|---|---|---|
|10|United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO)|May 1948|
|11|United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)|Jun 1974|
|12|United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)|Mar 1978|

|Asia|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||Mission|Date Established|
|13|United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP)|Jan 1949|

|Col1|Mission|Date Established|
|---|---|---|
|1|United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)|Apr 1991|
|2|United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)|Sep 2003|
|3|United Nations Operation in Côte d’lvoire (UNOCI)|Apr 2004|
|4|African Union/United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)|Jul 2007|
|5|United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)|Jul 2010|
|6|United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)|Jun 2011|
|7|United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS)|Jul 2011|
|8|United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)|Apr 2013|
|9|United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)|Apr 2014|

|Col1|Mission|Date Established|
|---|---|---|
|14|United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)|Mar 1964|
|15|United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)|Jun 1999|

|Col1|Mission|Date Established|
|---|---|---|
|16|United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)|Jun 2004|


Fig. I-3-1-1 List of Peacekeeping Operations

15

12

14 11

13

10

16 1

8

4 6

2 3 9 7

5

Note: According to the United Nations (as of the end of June 2016).

**Africa** **Middle East**

Mission Date Established Mission Date Established

United Nations Mission for the Referendum in United Nations Truce Supervision Organization

1 Apr 1991 10 May 1948

Western Sahara (MINURSO) (UNTSO)

United Nations Disengagement Observer

2 United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) Sep 2003 11 Jun 1974

Force (UNDOF)

United Nations Operation in Côte d’lvoire United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon

3 Apr 2004 12 Mar 1978

(UNOCI) (UNIFIL)

African Union/United Nations Hybrid Operation

4 Jul 2007

in Darfur (UNAMID) **Asia**

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in

5 Jul 2010 Mission Date Established

the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)

United Nations Military Observer Group in

United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei 13 Jan 1949

6 Jun 2011 India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP)

(UNISFA)

United Nations Mission in the Republic of

7 South Sudan (UNMISS) Jul 2011 **Europe/CIS**

United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Mission Date Established

8 Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) Apr 2013

United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus

14 Mar 1964

United Nations Multidimensional Integrated (UNFICYP)

9 Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic Apr 2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission

(MINUSCA) 15 Jun 1999

in Kosovo (UNMIK)

**The Americas**

Mission Date Established

United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti

16 Jun 2004

(MINUSTAH)


-----

of the instability after the “Arab Spring” democratic
movement, al-Nusrah Front,[12] designated by the United
States as a terrorist organization related to Al Qaeda, and
ISIL[13] have gained strength in Syria.
Meanwhile, following the withdrawal of U.S.
Forces in December 2011, the security situation in Iraq
deteriorated rapidly against the backdrop of political
feuds and religious confrontations. In January 2014,
ISIL, which had increasingly gained strength from its
stronghold in Syria, seized the unstable situation in Iraq
to begin invading areas in western Iraq, and occupied
Fallujah, a city west of the capital city of Baghdad. In
June 2014, ISIL took control of the second largest city,
Mosul, in northern Iraq. Following this, ISIL’s leader
Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, a self-proclaimed “caliph,”[14]
unilaterally declared the establishment of the “Islamic
State” and has called on Islam followers throughout the
world to pledge their allegiance to him.

**(2) Trends in Military Operations against ISIL**
In August 2014, ISIL launched an offensive against the
Kurdish Autonomous Region in northern Iraq, and made
advances towards Erbil where the U.S. Consulate and
other facilities are located. Based on this situation, the
United States and other countries[15] began airstrikes on
ISIL in order to protect U.S. citizens in Iraq, among other
purposes.[16] In an address on the U.S. strategy for ISIL
delivered in September 2014, President Obama stated that
the military action would be extended to cover Syria.[17]
The Coalition’s military action in Iraq includes
providing education, training,[18] and providing equipment,[19]
as well as extending military supports, such as operation
assessments and advice, to the forces fighting the ground
war, including the Iraqi Security Forces (including
paramilitary troops and the police, in addition to the Iragi


forces) and the Kurdistan regional government’s military
organization known as Peshmerga. At the same time, in
coordination with its own airstrikes and relevant forces,
the Coalition works to thwart the advancement of ISIL
and recapture some of the strategic areas.[20] Although
the Iraqi Security Forces were reportedly plagued with
problems such as weak command functions and low
morale,[21] primarily among the Iraqi forces, they appear to
have improved their operational capabilities, through the
Coalition’s education and training, among other means. In
contrast, the Peshmerga has experience with the Iraq War.
The Peshmerga is considered to have relatively advanced
training and a functioning chain of command, and plays
a critical role in the military action against ISIL. In April
2015, with the support of Shiite militias and others, the
Iraqi Security Forces succeeded in recapturing Tikrit,[22]
a key area that continues onto Mosul. In November
and December 2015, the Iraqi forces recaptured Sinjar
and Ramadi,[23] key points for transit between Syria and
Iraq, from ISIL. In March 2016, furthermore, the Iraqi
Security Forces launched an operation to recapture Mosul
and strengthened an offensive in the areas surrounding
the city. In June, the Iraqi Security Forces recaptured
Fallujah, which is symbolic as the first Iraqi city where
ISIL took control and established a foothold. In this way,
ISIL is gradually being driven back in Iraq.
In Syria, meanwhile, Al Qaeda affiliate al-Nusrah
Front and other opposition parties expanded their control
to the vicinity of Latakia, a northwestern Syrian city
where the majority of residents are supporters of the
Assad administration, from around March 2015 and
advanced close to Latakia in September. Under such
circumstances, Russia sent its air force and other units
to Syria, launching airstrikes[24] in an apparent bid to
support the survival of the Assad administration and


12 In April 2013, ISIL announced unilaterally that it would absorb and merge with al-Nusrah Front. Following protests from al-Nusrah Front, the Al Qaeda core conducted mediation. However, ISIL did not comply
with the mediation, and its relations with the Al Qaeda core have deteriorated. On February 2, 2014, Al Qaeda’s leader Ayman al Zawahiri released a statement on the Internet declaring that Al Qaeda severed
ties with ISIL: “ISIL is not a branch of the Al Qaeda group...does not have an organizational relationship with it and (Al Qaeda) is not the group responsible for their actions.”

13 For organizational characteristics of ISIL, see “3 Trends in the Spread of International Terrorism.”

14 The term means “successor” in Arabic. After Prophet Muhammad died, the term has been used to refer to those who led the Islamic community. Since then, a number of the heads of hereditary dynasties,
including the Umayyad and Abbasid dynasties, utilized this title.

15 The United States has simultaneously announced airstrikes for humanitarian purposes, namely, to release the minority Yazidi sect who have been subject to ISIL’s persecution. According to the Combined Joint
Task Force, as of June 1, 2016, Coalition forces as a whole have executed over 12,600 airstrikes.

16 In addition to the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Australia, Denmark, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Jordan participated in the airstrikes against ISIL in Iraq as of June 2016.

17 President Obama stated that the military action would be extended to cover Syria to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL. President Obama announced that the United States would not only lead a broad coalition
to conduct airstrikes, but also provide military supports to the Iraqi Security Forces fighting a ground war and to moderate opposition parties in Syria. As of April 2014, the United States, the United Kingdom,
France, Australia, the Netherlands, Bahrain, Turkey, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates were participating in airstrikes against ISIL in Syria. In addition, Russia has been conducting airstrikes in
Syria separately from the Coalition.

18 The Coalition has completed the training of 22,120 Iraqi Securities Forces and Peshmerga members (as of May 10, 2016) through its operations.

19 In 2014, the United States provided over 1,500 Hellfire missiles to the Iraqi government. In 2015, the United States provided 250 MRAP (including the distribution to the Kurdish Autonomous Region) and several
tens of thousands of small arms and ammunition, among other assets. In May 2015, the United States decided to provide 2,000 anti-tank rockets. In addition, in January 2016, the United States decided to
sell 5,000 Hellfire missiles, ammunition and missiles for F-16 fighter aircraft, and other arms to Iraq.

20 The forces have recaptured 25,000-26,000 km[2] or about 45% of the 55,000 km[2] area held by ISIL in Iraq (April 2016 U.S. Central Command announcement).

21 In May 2015, U.S. Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter stated that “the Iraqi forces just showed no will to fight,” whereas U.S. Vice President Joe Biden stated that the Iraqi forces have made “enormous sacrifice
and (shown) bravery.”

22 After the recapture, new problems have emerged, including confrontation between Shiites and Sunnis.

23 Ramadi suffered ISIL attacks before falling under ISIL control in May 2015.


-----

A U.S. B-52 long-range bomber is deployed to the Middle East for operations against ISIL

[U.S. DoD website]

protect Russian interests.[25] After concluding that the
October 2015 crash of a Russian airliner was a terrorist
attack by ISIL, Russia used various platforms including
strategic bombers and precision satellite-guided bombs[26]

to enhance airstrikes.[27] It has been noted that Russia was
supporting the Assad administration through information
cooperation with Iraq and Iran. As a result of the Russian
military intervention, Syrian opposition parties and ISIL
have weakened, and the Syrian government forces have
recovered their strength and enhanced their offensive
against opposition parties.[28]
Since September 2014, the Coalition, including the
United States, has implemented airstrikes on ISIL in
Syria.[29] However, the challenge was how to nurture ground
forces that can counter ISIL.[30] Under such circumstances,
the Syrian Democratic Forces, including Kurdish forces
controlling areas in Northern Syria near Syria’s border
with Turkey, approached Ar-Raqqah, known as an
effective foothold for ISIL, in May 2016. The Syrian
Democratic Forces are conducting ground operations in
coordination with Coalition airstrikes. Coupled with the
Syrian government forces’ action to recover control from
opposition parties, ISIL is being driven back in Syria as
well as Iraq.[31]


The Australian Defence Force offers training to the Iraqi forces

[Australian Department of Defence website]

**(3) Future Outlook on ISIL**
ISIL has been extending its infl uence not only in Iraq and
Syria but also in other countries, reportedly having 38
branches in a total of 13 countries.[32] Through cooperation
with local terrorist organizations and other measures,
ISIL is deemed to be building bases in regions where
state control is insuffi cient.[33]
Anti-ISIL military operations by the Washington-led
Coalition and Russia have fragmented ISIL’s command
and control functions and ISIL members’ morale through
the killing of ISIL fi ghters, including commanders, and
airstrikes on oil facilities. As a result, ISIL’s governance
is believed to have been compromised. It has been noted
that ISIL has been gradually driven back and weakened
in Iraq and Syria.[34] As ISIL has lost areas under its control
in Iraq and Syria, ISIL fi ghters are feared to be spreading
outside these countries. An early end to the Syrian civil
war, the enhancement of the Iraqi forces and many other
challenges need to be solved to eliminate ISIL from Iraq
and Syria. Future trends involving ISIL are still uncertain.


**(4) Syrian Peace Process**
The United States, the European Union (EU), and other
countries are requesting President Assad to step down


25 Russia dispatched Su-24, Su-25, Su-30 and other fi xed-wing fi ghters, as well as Mi-24, Ka-52 and other attack helicopters, among other aircraft, to Latakia.

26 In addition to airstrikes with strategic bombers, Russia has used cruisers deployed in the Caspian Sea and Kilo-class submarines deployed off Syria for Kalibr cruise missile attacks.

27 In response to ISIL’s attacks, Peshmerga, the military organization of the Kurdistan regional government, arrived in Ayn al-Arab via Turkey. In addition, forces opposed to the Syrian regime, such as the Free
Syrian Army, reportedly participated in the operation against ISIL in Ayn al-Arab.

28 For example, in January 2015, ISIL announced that armed groups in Afghanistan and Pakistan swore allegiance to ISIL and that it would name this region ISIL Khorasan Province.

29 In the airstrikes in Syria, airstrikes were also conducted against the Khorasan group which was considered to threaten U.S. interests along with ISIL.

30 U.S. Forces had initially attempted to train some 5,400 moderate opposition members in Syria. However, those subjected to the fi rst training were limited to 54 persons, most of whom have been detained or
killed. (Testimony at the U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee on September 16, 2015)

31 The government forces have recaptured 9,000-9,200 km[2] or about 30% of the total ISIL-controlled area in Syria (April 2016 U.S. Central Command announcement).

32 As of June 2014, in addition to branches that the ISIL core had approved in Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iraq, Libya, Nigeria, Russia, Pakistan, Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, Syria and Yemen, self-declared ISIL
branches are deemed to exist in Bangladesh, Indonesia, the Philippines, India, France and Belgium.

33 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, “Worldwide Threat Assessment 2015” (January 2015). In Egypt, Ansar Bayt al Maqdis has been active on the Sinai Peninsula. See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1, Paragraph 2,
Item 6 “Situation in Egypt.” For ISIL operations in Libya, see Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1, Paragraph 2, Item 3 “Situation in Libya.”

34 U.S. Secretary of Defense Carter stated that the United States cannot commit to completing the military action against ISIL in three years (March 11, 2015, U.S. Defense Secretary Carter’s testimony to the


-----

and are imposing sanctions against Syria, including
an oil embargo. They have also supported the Syrian
National Coalition, established as an opposition party in
November 2012. In January 2014, while the first direct
peace talks between the Assad administration and the
opposition parties were held under the mediation of the
U.N., the talks achieved no concrete progress. In January
2015, peace talks on Syria were convened for the first
time in about one year with the mediation of Russia.
However, the Syrian National Coalition and other groups
did not participate. The talks failed to achieve concrete
progress. In June 2015, individual talks between Staffan
de Mistura, U.N. Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for
Syria, and relevant countries commenced in Geneva.
While both the Assad administration and the opposition
parties participated in the talks, they fell short of reaching
any agreement.
In the absence of progress in the peace process, the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG), including
the United States, Russia and the EU, met in Vienna in
November 2015 to discuss the realization of an early
ceasefire and a government transition process and
reached a concrete agreement including a government
transition schedule. In December, the U.N. Security
Council adopted Resolution 2254[35] as a roadmap for
the peace process. In February 2016, the United States
and Russia agreed on a cessation of hostilities other than
those against terrorist organizations such as ISIL and alNusrah Front in Syria. Later, the U.N. Security Council
adopted Resolution 2268 on the cessation of hostilities in
Syria. However, ceasefire violations have been identified
mainly in Aleppo, northern Syria. The future of Syria,
including a possible final end to the Syrian civil war, thus
remains uncertain.

**(5) Growing Number of Refugees and their Impact on Europe**
Against the backdrop of the unrest in the Middle East
Situation, a growing number of refugees and immigrants
mainly from the Middle East and North Africa have
recently fled to Europe mainly via a route through the
Mediterranean Sea or a route that passes through Turkey
and Greece heading north on the Balkan Peninsula. In
2015 alone, more than 1 million refugees and immigrants


fled to Europe, with the international community,
including Europe, struggling with how to respond.
The refugee problem has led to increased terror
threats in Europe, as ISIL and other terrorists have
concealed themselves among the refugees, flowing into
Europe and joining potential terrorists in various parts
of Europe to form networks. The terrorists who attacked
Paris in November 2015 included at least one terrorist
who was identified as having hidden among refugees
and immigrants to enter Europe. European countries
thus face various challenges including the acceptance of
many refugees, the prevention of ISIL fighters’ flow into
Europe, the crackdown on refugee smuggling boats and
the rescue of refugees on smuggling boats that capsize in
the Mediterranean Sea.
In a bid to resolve problems brought about by the
rapid influx of refugees and immigrants, the United
Kingdom, France and other European countries are
making diplomatic efforts such as engaging in the Syrian
peace process and participating in military operations
against ISIL to stabilize Syria and Iraq.[36]

- 2  Situation in Yemen


**(1) Political Turmoil**
In Yemen, anti-government demonstrations from February
2011 following the Arab Spring democratic movement,
as well as international pressure,[37] led to a peaceful
government transition from then President Ali Abdullah
Saleh to new President Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi.
President Hadi implemented the national dialogue
process. Nevertheless, from August 2014, demonstrations
led by the opposition insurgent group Houthis,[38] based in
northern Yemen, occurred in the capital city of Sana’a. In
September 2014, clashes broke out between the Houthi
militia and Yemeni public security forces, leading to the
Houthis’ occupation of key government buildings in the
city. Following an armed clash that occurred in January
2015, President Hadi and others submitted their letters
of resignation, creating further tension in the situation.
In February 2015, the Houthis forced the dissolution of
the parliament and announced the establishment of a
transitional national council and a presidential council.


35 U.N. Security Council Resolution 2254 calls for (1) establishing inclusive and non-sectarian governance and setting a schedule and process for drafting a new constitution within six months, and (2) holding free
and fair elections, pursuant to the new constitution, within 18 months.

36 However, it has also been pointed out that Russian airstrikes have resulted in increasing the number of refugees and immigrants.

37 In April 2011, the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), which Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Oman, Qatar and Kuwait established in 1981 for their coordination, integration and cooperation in all
fields including defense and economic policies, proposed a GCC initiative including a clause that the president would avoid indictment in exchange for transferring the post to the vice president.

38 The Houthis are followers of the Zaydi branch of Shiite Islam and are based in Saada governorate in northern Yemen. In 2004, the Houthis staged an armed uprising as an anti-government group, and an armed l


-----

**(2) Military Intervention in Yemen and Islamic**
**Extremists’ Expansion of Power**

Later, President Hadi withdrew his resignation and based
his government in Aden in southern Yemen. Meanwhile,
the Houthis advanced into the Red Sea’s coastal areas
and key cities between the capital city of Sana’a and
Aden. In response to this situation, President Hadi’s
faction requested the support of Arab countries. Then,
in March 2015, a Saudi Arabia-led coalition launched
airstrikes against the Houthis in the so-called Operation
Decisive Storm. In this operation, Saudi Arabia allegedly
conducted airstrikes against the bases of the Houthis and
the Yemeni military that support the Houthis, destroying
ballistic missiles and other assets. Nonetheless, there
were civilian and other casualties in Yemen and near the
Saudi Arabian border, attributed to their involvement in
the exchange of rocket fire and airstrikes, prompting the
international community to express strong concerns to
both sides. In April 2015, Operation Renewal of Hope
was launched with the aim of settling the conflict through
political dialogue. In addition, the U.N. Security Council
adopted Resolution 2216,[39] implementing initiatives to
bring the situation to a close. Nevertheless, the Houthis
continued attacks on border areas in Saudi Arabia,[40]
while Saudi Arabia and other Arab countries[41] continued
airstrikes against the Houthis.
Meanwhile, Yemen has become a foothold for Al
Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), which is based
in southern Yemen. Amid the politically unstable situation
following the Houthis’ takeover of government, Islamic
extremists gained strength, with ISIL setting up a branch
in Yemen and conducting terror attacks on key government
officials and Shiite mosques.[42] AQAP and ISIL have taken
advantage of the confusion to recruit fighters and gained
strength, creating a new matter of concern.[43]


**(3) Trends in Peace Talks**
Although ceasefires and peace talks have been
implemented under mediation by the United Nations since
June 2015,[44] no final peace agreement has been reached.
Some observers pointed out that the recent confrontation
between Iran and Saudi Arabia[45] impeded progress in
peace talks. In April 2016, however, a ceasefire took
effect again, paving the way for peace talks to resume.
Peace talks, though suspended intermittently for the
reason of ceasefire violations, have continued.

- 3  Situation in Libya


**(1) Collapse of the Gaddafi Regime**
The anti-government demonstrations that erupted in
February 2011 spread throughout Libya, leading the
Gaddafi regime to crush the demonstrations by force. In
response, a multinational force led by the United States,
the United Kingdom, and France commenced military
action.[46] In October 2011, the National Transitional
Council consisting of anti-Gaddafi forces announced the
death of Colonel Gaddafi and declared the liberation of all
of Libya. In July 2012, elections for a General National
Congress were held. However, progress has not been made
in the rehabilitation of the military and public security.[47]
Militia and tribal leaders exert strong influence,[48] and
while receiving their support, secular and Islamic groups
struggle for power. In March 2014, a no-confidence
motion was passed against Prime Minister Zeidan. In
June 2014, elections for the Council of Representatives
were held. Nonetheless, confrontation between Islamic
and secular groups intensified. Consequently, Libya
became fragmented with two assemblies existing in
parallel – the Islamic groups’ General National Congress
based in the capital city of Tripoli and the secular groups’


39 The resolution provides for the withdrawal by the Houthis and others from government buildings they seized, the return of weapons they acquired from Yemeni forces, an arms embargo, a freeze on assets and
other measures.

40 In June 2015, the Houthis and Yemeni forces units supporting former President Saleh fired a Scud missile at Khamis Mushait in southern Saudi Arabia. Saudi forces fired two Patriot missiles to intercept the
Scud and identified and destroyed the Scud launching site in southern Saada governorate. It has been suggested that the Yemeni Scud missile was purchased from North Korea.

41 In addition, Egypt, among other countries, dispatched naval ships.

42 For example, in March 2015, suicide bombings took place simultaneously at two Shiite mosques in Sana’a, killing 142 people. Later, ISIL claimed responsibility for the attacks.

43 AQAP took control of Zinjibar in southern Yemen in December 2015.

44 The first round of peace talks under the mediation by the United Nations took place in Geneva. Both the Yemeni government and anti-government forces participated in the talks and had indirect consultations,
but fell short of reaching any final agreement. In Switzerland in December 2015, the Yemeni government and anti-government forces held the second round of peace talks, realizing their first direct negotiations.
Although a ceasefire was agreed on before the second round, repeated ceasefire violations occurred, leading the second round to be suspended without any major achievement. The two sides’ negotiating
teams stayed in different rooms and held talks via the United Nations.

45 In January 2016, rioters set fire to the Saudi Arabian Embassy in Iran to protest the Saudi government’s execution of Shiite cleric Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr and others for leading anti-government demonstrations in
eastern Saudi Arabia in 2011. In response, Saudi Arabia severed diplomatic relations with Iran and ordered the Iranian diplomatic mission to leave within 48 hours. In the same month, meanwhile, Iran claimed
that Saudi air force planes bombed the Iranian Embassy in Yemen, injuring security personnel and the building. However, the dominant view is that there was no major damage.

46 The U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 1973 on March 17, 2011, authorizing every measure to protect civilians. The resolution became the grounds for the military action.

47 According to The Military Balance 2011 and 2014, Libyan troop strength has decreased from 76,000 before the Arab Spring to 7,000 as of 2014.


-----

Council of Representatives based in Tobruk in eastern
Libya which has the support of the United States and
other countries. In December 2015, the United Nations
mediated an agreement to form a national consensus
cabinet. In March 2016, the national unified government
entered Tripoli, launching a process to establish an
administration. Given many challenges including
the creation of a security force, the national unified
government is expected to face problems in establishing
domestic governance and security.

**(2) Islamic Extremists’ Expansion of Power**
Amid the political instability, Islamic extremists have
gained strength in Libya.[49] In December 2014, the U.S.
African Force pointed out that there was an ISIL training
camp in eastern Libya, indicating that the ISIL camp
was kept under its surveillance. From January 2015,
ISIL-related organizations in Libya conducted a series of
terrorist attacks.[50] In response, the Egyptian and Libyan
governments carried out anti-ISIL retaliatory airstrikes.
ISIL has three branches in Libya now, with the number
of its fighters almost doubling from the previous year to
about 6,000. The ISIL branches in Libya are considered
the most developed ones.[51] Based in Sirte, in particular,
they have allegedly been gaining strength mainly through
attacks on coastal oil facilities. Under such circumstances,
a large number of refugees and immigrants from North
Africa, including Libya, have been using smuggling
boats to land in Europe. It has been pointed out that ISIL
fighters have concealed themselves among these refugees
and immigrants.[52, 53] In May 2016, a ministerial meeting
supporting the national unified government came up with
a policy of easing an embargo on lethal weapons to fight
against ISIL. The international community is expected
more than ever to take anti-ISIL initiatives in Libya.



- 4  Situation in Afghanistan

**(1) Trends after U.S. Terrorist Attacks**
In Afghanistan, following the so-called 9.11 terrorist
attacks in the United States, Operation Enduring Freedom
(OEF) that the U.S. Forces launched in November 2001
has been engaged in the mop-up operation of the Taliban
and other groups. Furthermore, the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) and the Afghan National Defense
and Security Forces (ANDSF) have conducted security
duties. These efforts have been reducing the Taliban’s
assault capabilities. Nevertheless, the Taliban allegedly
maintains the capability to conduct intermittent attacks.
In September 2015, the Taliban occupied provincial
government, police headquarters and central government
office buildings in Kunduz, northern Afghanistan,
regaining strength.[54]
In September 2014, the Ghani administration was
inaugurated based on the results of the presidential
elections in Afghanistan in April and June 2014,
putting an end to problems left by the previous Karzai
administration regarding the stationing of foreign forces
in Afghanistan.[55]


**(2) Security Situation after Completion of ISAF Mission**
In December 2014, ISAF’s mission was completed. In
January 2015, the Resolute Support Mission (RSM)[56]
was launched, which primarily provides education,
training, and advice under the leadership of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). Additionally, the
U.S. Forces, while providing training to Afghan forces
as a member of NATO, implements Operation Freedom
Sentinel (OFS) against terrorism. In October 2015, given
the deterioration of the security situation in Afghanistan,
U.S. President Obama announced that the U.S. troop


49 In September 2012, an Islamic extremist group attacked the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi, killing four Americans, including the Ambassador. In January 2014, the U.S. Department of State designated Ansar
al-Sharia, an offshoot of Al Qaeda that is deemed to have been involved in this incident, as a terrorist organization.

50 In January 2015, an armed group attacked an upscale hotel in the capital city of Tripoli, killing at least 13 people. ISIL’s “Tripoli Province” claimed responsibility for the attack. In February 2015, an extremist
organization that has sworn allegiance to ISIL posted a video on the Internet of what is believed to be the murder of 21 Egyptian Coptic Christians.

51 Congressional testimony by the U.S. Director of National Intelligence on global threat assessment in February 2016.

52 For refugees, see Paragraph 1 “Situations in Syria and Iraq in Response to the Rise of ISIL” and Part I, Chapter 2, Section 8 “Europe.”

53 For the flow of refugees and immigrants to Europe from the Middle East and North Africa, see Paragraph 1 “Situations in Syria and Iraq in Response to the Rise of ISIL.”

54 The Taliban has vowed to continue fighting until foreign forces withdraw completely.

55 The Bilateral Security Agreement (BSA) between the United States and Afghanistan, which sets forth the legal framework of the stationing of the U.S. Forces in 2015 and beyond, and the Status of Forces
Agreement (SOFA) for the support mission in Afghanistan led by NATO forces in 2015 and beyond were signed before being approved by both the upper and lower houses of Afghanistan’s parliament in
November 2015.

56 As of March 2016, about 13,000 troops were participating in the RSM. Based in Kabul, they were active in five locations (Kabul, Mazar-e-Sharif, Herat, Kandahar, and Laghman). See Part I, Chapter 2,


-----

strength in Afghanistan would be kept at about 9,800 for
2016 before being reduced to 5,500 from 2017. In June
2016, however, U.S. Defense Secretary Ashton Carter
indicated that the U.S. Forces would expand its missions
in Afghanistan to cover (1) close air support to increase
firepower and (2) accompanying and advising Afghan
ground and air units. As there are destabilization factors
including the Taliban’s expansion of influences, there is a
possibility that U.S. Forces may again expand engagement
in Afghanistan. In July 2016, President Obama reaffirmed
the policy of maintaining the troop strength at around
8,400 through the end of his administration.
As ISAF completed its mission in December 2015,
its security authorities in Afghanistan were transferred to
ANDSF, which is appreciated as having a certain level
of security capability in drafting operational plans and
cracking down on armed insurgents. The Afghan Ministry
of Defense decided on a new national military strategy
in August 2015, implementing various initiatives.[57]
As ANDSF has problems with logistics, morale, air
capabilities and leadership, the Taliban is expanding its
own areas of control.[58] Meanwhile, ISIL has established
a Khorasan branch in Afghanistan and its vicinity and
claimed responsibility for a terror attack in Jalalabad
in April 2015. However, its attacks in Afghanistan have
been sporadic, leading observers to view ISIL as posing
no major threats to Afghanistan.[59]
Afghanistan faces not only security problems but
also a plethora of challenges related to reconstruction,
including preventing corruption, enhancing the rule of
law, strengthening the crackdown on narcotics trafficking,
and promoting regional development. Ensuring peace


and stability in Afghanistan is a common challenge of
the international community, which requires continuing
engagement with the country.

- 5  Situation of the Middle East Peace Efforts


In the Middle East, there have been four wars between
Israel and Arab countries since the foundation of Israel
in 1948. Meanwhile, a peace process between Israel and
Palestine made temporary progress including the 1993
Oslo Agreement, but has fallen short of achieving peace.[60]
In July 2013, Middle East peace talks between
Israel and Palestine resumed for the first time in nearly
three years at the strong urging of the United States.
Nevertheless, the peace talks had to be discontinued in
March to April 2014 owing to various developments,
including Israel’s suspension of the release of Palestinian
prisoners, Palestine’s international treaty accession
applications, and the agreement reached between the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) dominated by
the Fatah and the Islamic fundamentalist organization
Hamas that has effective rule over Palestine and the Gaza
Strip[61] to form a national unity cabinet. In this context,
in June to July 2014, tensions grew between Israel and
Palestine, developing into an armed clash.[62] In July
2014, Israeli forces launched a ground operation.[63] Later
in the month, Israel and Palestine agreed to a ceasefire,
accepting a request from Egypt to do so.[64]
Meanwhile, in Europe, national parliaments have
begun to call for the recognition of a Palestinian state
since October 2014.[65] Furthermore, in January 2015, the
International Criminal Court (ICC)[66] accepted Palestine’s


57 The strategy defined such priority goals as the organizational strengthening of the Defense Ministry and the national forces, and the increased professionalism of the forces. In addition, to improve the literacy
rate, which has posed as a challenge, efforts are under way including the implementation of various curriculums.

58 In July 2015, the death of supreme Taliban leader Mullah Mohammad Omar was confirmed. While the Taliban has elected Mullah Akhtar Muhammad Mansour as its new supreme leader, an internal strife
between pro- and anti-Omar groups has been confirmed. The Taliban has mounted offensives in northern, southern and western parts of Afghanistan, as well as in Kabul, effectively expanding areas under
its control.

59 This is according to the “Worldwide Threat Assessment 2016” by the U.S. Director of National Intelligence (released in February 2016). According to a report released in December 2015 by the Soufan Group,
a think tank studying regional conflicts, some 50 ISIL fighters from Afghanistan are operating in Syria and Iraq.

60 Between Israel and Palestine, a peace process through full-fledged negotiations started through the 1993 Oslo Agreement. In 2003, both Israel and Palestine accepted a roadmap for realizing a peace initiative
featuring their coexistence. However, its implementation has made little progress. Following rocket attacks on Israel from the Gaza Strip, Israeli forces launched a large-scale military action from late 2008 to
early 2009 that included airstrikes on the Gaza Strip and the mobilization of ground forces. In November 2012, Israeli forces again conducted airstrikes on the Gaza Strip. By 2012, Israel thus conducted two
major clashes on the Gaza Strip. In both cases, fighting ceased under mediation by Egypt and others.

61 Hamas does not recognize Israel.

62 Following the murder of Israeli boys in June 2014, Palestinian boys were killed in an alleged retaliation in July 2014, increasing tensions between Israel and Palestine. Later in the month, sporadic rocket attacks
on Israel came from the Gaza Strip, leading to a clash between both sides.

63 According to the U.N. Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs report (August 2014), at least 2,133 Palestinians in the Gaza Strip died in the fighting.

64 The main components of the ceasefire agreement are: (1) opening of the crossings between the Gaza Strip and Israel; (2) speedy entry of humanitarian assistance supplies, relief supplies, and supplies
necessary for reconstruction; (3) fishing permissions from six nautical miles; and (4) indirect negotiations between the two parties over other topics (e.g., construction of an airport and seaport in the Gaza Strip,
disarmament of Hamas) in one month’s time after ceasefire is ensured. However, the consultations in (4) have remained at a standstill.

65 Sweden has recognized a Palestinian state. The U.K., French and Spanish parliaments have taken relevant actions such as the adoption of a resolution calling for the recognition of a Palestinian state.

66 The International Criminal Court is the first permanent international criminal judicial body in history to prosecute and punish, based on international law, individuals who committed the most serious crimes of


-----

application to accede to the ICC and opened a preliminary
examination into whether or not Palestine conducted
war crimes.[67] Palestine officially acceded to the ICC
in April 2015. Israel has protested such moves by the
international community. In September 2015, Palestinian
Authority President Mahmoud Abbas touched on the
potential abolition of the Oslo Agreement in his address
to the U.N. General Assembly. Israel-Palestine relations
are thus beginning to deteriorate.
As Israel has yet to sign peace treaties with Syria
and Lebanon,[68] the international community needs to take
further initiatives.

- 6  Situation in Egypt


for national reconciliation, and former Defense Minister
Abdel-Fattah el-Sisi was elected. In a parliamentary
election held from October to December 2015, the “For
the Love of Egypt” alliance of groups supporting the Sisi
administration’s policies won.[71]
In response to situations in neighboring countries
including Yemen, where tensions are high, meanwhile,
Egypt has been proactively procuring military equipment
from foreign countries. As Egypt plans to procure two
Mistral-class amphibious assault ships[72] from France,
Egyptian Navy troops have reportedly undergone
relevant training.
Furthermore, Egypt has enhanced counterterrorism
measures, including crackdown operations, in light of the
rise in terror attacks by Islamic extremists in the Sinai
Peninsula in recent years. Recently, however, ISIL’s Sinai
Province[73] has gained strength, carrying out repeated
terror attacks on security forces and other targets. The
group is said to have implemented operations based on
very advanced, organized plans, including an attack on a
coast guard ship in August 2015.[74]
In October, a Russian jetliner crashed due to the
explosion of a bomb set on the aircraft, killing all 224
passengers and crewmembers. Later, ISIL’s Sinai Province
claimed responsibility for the incident. It has been pointed
out that airport workers supported the ISIL attack. This
kind of incident has become a new matter of concern
that suggests that the ISIL network has been gradually
penetrating into Egypt. In addition to the Sinai Peninsula,
terror attacks have occurred in the Egyptian capital of
Cairo.[75] ISIL claimed responsibility for these attacks,
indicating that ISIL threats have been spreading not only
in the Sinai Peninsula but also in the rest of Egypt.


In January 2011, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak’s
dictatorship ended in response to anti-government
demonstrations under the “Arab Spring” democratization
movements.[69] Mohamed Mursi from the Muslim
Brotherhood[70] was elected as the new president through
the presidential election in June 2012. In June 2013,
however, large-scale demonstrations demanding the
resignation of President Mursi occurred due to an
economic impasse and the chasm between Islamic
groups and liberal, secular groups, which resulted in a
large number of victims from clashes between some
demonstrators and groups supporting the President. While
this sort of disorder spread in the country, the national
forces intervened in July 2013 and dismissed President
Mursi, establishing a provisional government. In May
2014, a presidential election was held in line with the
roadmap drafted by the provisional government, which
addresses the comprehensive democratization process


67 In the preliminary examination, the ICC collects evidence, conducts hearings with relevant stakeholders of both parties, among other activities. No deadlines for the preliminary examination are provided in the
ICC Rome Statute.

68 Israel and Syria disagree on issues such as the return of the Golan Heights that Israel has occupied since the Third Middle East War. The United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) has been
deployed in the Golan Heights to observe the implementation of the ceasefire and military disengagement between the two countries. Concerning Israel and Lebanon, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) increased its presence following the 2006 clash between Israel and Hezbollah, a Shiite Muslim organization. Military observers of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) are also
active in this region.

69 See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1-1, Footnote 2.

70 A Sunni political organization established in Egypt in 1928 as an organization targeting the general public to “revive Islam.” In the 1950s, it became a target of a clampdown for plotting the assassination of
President Gamal Abdel Nasser. However, by the 1970s, the organization became moderate to the extent of conducting political activities through parliament. Meanwhile, extremist organizations were derived,
with Muslim Brotherhood serving as the parent organization.

71 It has been pointed out that many winners in the election were those who had been close to the Mubarak administration, including former security and military force executives.

72 In December 2010 after their long negotiations, Russia and France agreed on a contract for Russia to purchase two Mistral-class amphibious assault ships. In response to the Ukraine crisis in 2014, however,
the French and Russian governments agreed to cancel the contract in August 2015. As French President Francois Hollande and Egyptian President Sisi agreed later to enhance cooperation in military fields,
including counterterrorism, Egypt agreed in principle in September 2015 to procure the two ships. Egypt has also procured Mig-29 fighter aircraft and Ka-52 attack helicopters from Russia.

73 The predecessor of ISIL’s Sinai Province is said to have been Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis, an Islamic extremist organization based in the Sinai Peninsula that aimed to overthrow Israel. It is deemed that the organization
intensified its terrorism activities targeting Egyptian security authorities following the collapse of the Morsi government in July 2013.

74 According to “Worldwide Threat Assessment 2016” by the U.S. Director of National Intelligence.


-----

specific ethnic groups spread to different areas, resulting
in a large number of casualties, refugees, and internally
displaced persons (IDPs). Under these circumstances,
on December 24, the U.N. Security Council adopted
Resolution 2132 and decided to enhance UNMISS by
increasing the maximum military personnel by 5,500.
In addition, the “Intergovernmental Authority on
Development” (IGAD)[80] assisted by the U.N. and the AU
initiated efforts to start dialogues among South Sudanese
leaders and enable their reconciliation. The IGAD helped
the government and anti-government group to sign an
agreement in January 2014 on ceasing hostile activities in
South Sudan. As confrontation between the government
and anti-government group intensified due to repeated
ceasefire violations, however, the U.N. Security Council
in May 2014 adopted Resolution 2155, which stipulated
that the mandate of UNMISS would be restricted to the
four areas of the protection of civilians, monitoring and
investigating human rights, creating the conditions for
delivery of humanitarian assistance, and supporting the
implementation of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement.
Later, IGAD added international organizations (the U.N.,
AU, and EU), the United States, the United Kingdom,
Norway, China, and African countries (South Africa,
Chad, Algeria, Nigeria, and Rwanda) to its mediation
mission and continued the mediation. In August 2015,
the government and anti-government group reached an
agreement on the resolution of clashes in South Sudan,
including the establishment of a transitional government.
In response to the agreement, the U.N. Security Council
adopted Resolution 2241 in October 2015 to add support
for the implementation of the agreement and other
missions to the UNMISS mandate, and Resolution 2252
in December to extend the mandate until the end of July
2016. Later, efforts to implement the agreement were
made. On April 29, 2016, a transitional government of
national unity was established.



- 7  Situation in Sudan[76] and South Sudan

The North-South civil war that continued since 1983
between the government of Sudan, composed of Arab
Muslims in the north, and anti-government groups,
composed of African Christians in the south, concluded
with the establishment of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) in 2005 under the mediation of
neighboring countries, the United States, and others. As a
result of a referendum in accordance with the rules of the
CPA in January 2011, the Republic of South Sudan gained
independence on July 9, 2011. On the same day, the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS) was established with the adoption of U.N.
Security Council Resolution 1996 in order to maintain
peace and stability, and to support the establishment
of an environment contributing to help with the further
development of South Sudan.[77] After the independence,
Sudan and South Sudan held negotiations over the issues
of demarcation, such as the treatment of the Abyei area,[78]
the distribution of oil income,[79] and other problems under
the mediation of the international community including
the AU. The two countries signed a series of agreements
regarding security measures in the border area, oil
production, and other issues in September 2012 as well
as a document specifying an agreement implementation
schedule in March 2013.
The President of South Sudan dismissed the Vice
President in July 2013, bringing to the surface a political
conflict between the two groups. In December of the same
year, fighting broke out among the President’s security
forces in the capital city of Juba, which evolved into
clashes between the pro-President faction (government)
and the pro-Vice President faction (anti-government
group). Subsequently, following an outbreak of the
clashes between the South Sudanese government and the
anti-government group, fighting and violent acts targeting


76 Since around 2003, the Darfur region in the west of Sudan has experienced heightened conflicts between the Arab Sudanese government and African anti-government groups. In response to the Darfur Peace
Agreement (DPA) entered between the government and some anti-government groups in 2006, the U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 1769 in order to establish the African Union/United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in 2007. In 2011, the government and an anti-government group, “Liberation and Justice Movement” (LJM), signed the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur (DDPD). However,
other anti-government groups rejecting the implementation of this document still continue to fight against the government forces.

77 The initial mandate period was one year with up to 7,000 military personnel and up to 900 police personnel. Specifically, according to the initial mandate, UNMISS would: (1) support peace consolidation and
thereby foster long-term state building and economic development; (2) support the government of the Republic of South Sudan in exercising its responsibilities for conflict prevention, mitigation, and resolution
and protect civilians; and (3) support the government of the Republic of South Sudan in developing its capacity to provide security, to establish the rule of law, and to strengthen the security and justice sectors.

78 The Abyei area was one of the bloodiest battlefields during the North-South civil war. Both the North and the South claim sovereignty over the area due to its abundant oil resources. Whether the area belongs to
the North or the South remains uncertain, as a referendum that will settle the territorial issue has not yet been held. In May 2011, immediately before the independence of South Sudan, a battle began between
the Sudan Armed Forces (SAF) and Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA), which was a major military organization in southern Sudan. In June 2011, the Security Council established by its Resolution 1990
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in the region.

79 A vast majority of oil wells are located in South Sudan, while most pipelines and ports for export are located in Sudan.


-----

period of the TFG in August 2012 and convened a
new federal assembly. A new president was elected
in September 2012 and a new cabinet was formed in
November 2012. This newly-integrated government
established for the first time in 21 years aims to stabilize
the situation in the country.

- 9  Situation in Mali



- 8  Situation in Somalia

Somalia has been in a state of anarchy since its government
collapsed in 1991.[81] In 2005, the “Transitional Federal
Government” (TFG) was established as the product of
mediation by neighboring countries, but fighting was
escalated with opposing groups such as the “Union
of Islamic Courts” (UIC). In 2006, Ethiopian forces
intervened with assistance from the United States
and drove away the UIC. In 2007, the African Union
Mission to Somalia (AMISOM)[82] was established based
on the approval of United Nations. On the other hand,
Al Qaeda-related extremist insurgents derived from the
UIC, “Al-Shabaab”, gained strength in the central and
southern parts of the country and resisted the TFG. In
response to this, neighboring countries dispatched
troops to AMISOM and other organizations, and seized
Kismayo, a major stronghold of Al-Shabaab, in October
2012. In August 2014, AMISOM launched Operation
Indian Ocean and successfully recaptured some of the
cities in the central and southern areas which had served
as the bases of Al-Shabaab. In the following month, AlShabaab‘s leader Godane was killed by the attacks of the
U.S. Forces. In retaliation, Al-Shabaab frequently staged
terrorist attacks on AMISOM troops and member states.[83]
It has been pointed out that these attacks are designed to
restrain AMISOM member countries.[84]
Additionally, in Somalia, especially the northern
part of it, there are considered to be outposts for pirates
who are active off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf
of Aden. The international community implements a
series of initiatives to enhance the security capabilities
of Somalia based on the perception that instability of
Somalia triggers the piracy issues.[85] The international
community has continued to implement initiatives off
the Somalian coast, which have contributed to steadily
reduce the number of pirate attacks.
Somalia saw the end of transitional governance


In Mali, an anti-government Tuareg[86] insurgent group,
the National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad
(MNLA), triggered a riot in January 2012, joined by other
groups including “Ansar Dine,” an Islamic extremist
group. The MNLA conquered northern cities and declared
the independence of the northern region in April 2012.
Subsequently, Islamic extremist groups including Ansar
Dine that expelled the MNLA, “Movement for Unity and
Jihad in West Africa” (MUJAO), and “Al Qaeda in the
Islamic Maghreb” (AQIM), governed the country based
on the sharia law, aggravating the humanitarian and
security situations in northern Mali.
In response to this situation, in December 2012,
the U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 2085 and
approved the deployment of the African-led International
Support Mission to Mali (AFISMA),[87] whose tasks
included revitalizing the capabilities of Malian troops and
security organizations and helping Malian authorities. In
January 2013, France dispatched its troops to the country
based on a request from the Malian provisional government
following the invasion of central and southern regions by
terrorists including Ansar Dine. Subsequently, the Malian
provisional government recaptured its major cities in the
northern part of the country, assisted by the deployment
of AFISMA. In April 2013, the U.N. Security Council
adopted Resolution 2100 to determine the establishment
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),[88] whose
tasks include the stabilization of densely-populated areas


81 “Somaliland” located in the Northwest declared its independence in 1991. “Puntland” located in the Northeast declared the establishment of an autonomous government in 1998.

82 AMISOM is composed mainly of troops from Uganda, Burundi, Djibouti, Kenya, and Sierra Leone, and joined by Ethiopia in January 2013. Resolution 2124 decided to increase the number of troops from 17,731
to 22,126.

83 In January 2016, Al-Shabaab attacked an AMISOM base in El Adde, southern Somalia, killing and injuring a large number of people.

84 Al-Shabaab carried out a terror attack on a shopping mall in the Kenyan capital of Nairobi in September 2013 and a terror assault on Garissa University College in Kenya in April 2015.

85 See Part III, Chapter 3, Section 2 for counter-piracy initiatives implemented by the MOD and the SDF and other countries.

86 The Tuareg Tribe is a nomadic ethnic minority in the Sahara Desert. It is pointed out that the tribe has been in conflict with the government of Mali seeking for autonomy in northern Mali.

87 AFISMA receives troops from member states of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), including Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Niger, and Nigeria.

88 In June 2016, the U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 2295, under which it was decided to extend the mandate period to June 2017, expand the maximum military personnel from the existing 11,240 to
13,290, and increase the maximum civilian police personnel from the existing 1,440 to 1,920. In case MINUSMA is exposed to imminent danger, based on a request from the U.N. Secretary-General, French


-----

and the reconstruction of national capabilities throughout
Mali. Based on this resolution, MINUSMA, which had
its authority delegated by AFISMA, became operational
in July 2013. With the support of MINUSMA, a
presidential election was held in a peaceful manner, and
a new government was established in September of the
same year.[89]
Later, large-scale clashes broke out between Malian
troops and MNLA in May 2014. However, in the same
month, a ceasefire agreement was established between the
two parties under the mediation of the AU. In July 2014,
under the mediation of the U.N., Algeria and other parties,
peace talks commenced between the Malian government
and the Tuareg insurgent group, including MNLA. In June
2015, the government and the insurgent group reached a
comprehensive peace agreement. In response, the U.N.
Security Council adopted Resolution 2227 to renew the
mandate for MINUSMA.[90] Nonetheless, AQIM and other
armed extremist groups have conducted intermittent
attacks against MINUSMA units.[91] The situation in the
region still remains unstable.[92]
In August 2014, French troops integrated and
reorganized its units in Mali, Chad, and Niger in order
to deal effectively with the expanding threat of terrorism
across the whole Sahel region including Mali,[93] and
launched Operation Barkhane covering the entire region.[94]
French troops are currently working with MINUSMA
and the troops of the countries in the region to stabilize
the Sahel region including northern Mali.[95]

- 10 Situation in Burundi


multi-party system and the democratic constitution in
June 1993, Melchior Ndadaye from the Hutus won and
assumed the presidency. As confrontation intensified
between the Hutus and the Tutsis, however, President
Ndadaye was assassinated by the military led by the
Tutsis in October 1993 after serving as the President for
only 100 days. In January 1994, Cyprien Ntaryamira
from the Hutus was elected by the National Assembly
(lower house) as the President. In April 1994, however,
an aircraft with President Ntaryamira aboard was shot
down in Rwanda and he was killed along with Rwanda
President Juvénal Habyarimana also aboard the aircraft.
The situation thus remained unstable.
In July 1996, a new government led by Pierre
Buyoya from the Tutsis emerged as a result of a coup,
prompting the international community to impose
sanctions on Burundi. A peace process started in June
1998, and in August 2000, most of the parties to the
peace process, excluding anti-government Hutu armed
groups, established the Arusha Peace Agreement as a
result of mediation led by former South African President
Mandela. As a result, a three-year transitional government
was inaugurated in November 2001. In the first half of the
three years, Pierre Buyoya from the Tutsis served as the
President. In the second half, Domitien Ndayizeye from
the Hutus served as the President after working as the
Vice President in the first half.
While the peace process made progress, antigovernment Hutu groups refused to sign the Arusha
Agreement and continued to fight against the government.
In November 2003, however, the transitional government
concluded a ceasefire agreement with Conseil National
pour la Défense de la Démocratie-Forces de Défense de
la Démocratie (CNDD-FDD), the largest among antigovernment Hutu groups. In response to the agreement,
CNDD-FDD leader Pierre Nkurunziza joined the Cabinet
as the Minister for Good Governance.
In February 2005, a new constitution was established


In Burundi, the majority Hutus, which account for about
85% of the total population, have continued to antagonize
the minority Tutsis, which account for about 14% of the
population, since its independence from Belgium in 1962.
From the independence through 1993, the Tutsis ran the
government. In the first presidential election under a


89 In June 2013, the provisional government and MNLA reached an agreement on such issues as allowing the northern area to participate in the presidential election and approving the dispatch of Mali troops to
northern cities.

90 U.N. Security Council Resolution 2227 added a number of new missions to the mandate, including the deployment of at least 40 military observers to monitor and direct the ceasefire agreement to support the
implementation of the ceasefire and peace agreements.

91 In November 2015, a rocket attack was carried out in a MINUSMA station in Kidal, killing two MINUSMA members. Ansar Dine claimed responsibility for the attack.

92 In November 2015, extremists assaulted a hotel in the Malian capital of Bamako, killing 22 hostages.

93 The Sahel region refers to the southern edge of the Sahara Desert. The countries in the Sahel region include Mauritania, Senegal, Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger, and Chad.

94 Operation Barkhane consists of a total of around 3,500 personnel. The Operation’s headquarters are in Chad, and it has bases in Mali, Niger, and Burkina Faso. The operation is executed through the swift
deployment of units to various areas. In northern Mali, French troops collaborate with MINUSMA units, and in other areas, collaborate with the military forces of the countries in the region. The Operation mainly
conducts mop-ups of terrorists and joint patrol.

95 A U.N. Security Council resolution authorizes French troops to take every measure to support MINUSMA personnel under urgent and serious threats at the request of the U.N. Secretary General. Germany has


-----

through a national referendum. From June to August
2006, the CNDD-FDD, which had become a political
party, won the ensuing election, with Minister for Good
Governance Nkurunziza elected as the President.
In September 2006, the government established
a comprehensive ceasefi re agreement with Forces
Nationales de Libération (FNL), the only anti-government
Hutu group that had continued an armed struggle against
the government. Later, a process for a peace agreement
stagnated. In 2009, however, the peace process was
completed through the approval of the FNL as a political
party and its integration into the Burundi National Forces
and police.
When President Nkurunziza vowed to run for a third
presidential term in April 2015 despite its unconstitutionality,
this triggered protests by opposition groups in the capital
city of Bujumbura. After the ruling party, police and
national forces clashed repeatedly with opposition groups,
President Nkurunziza was reelected in July, which escalated
the clashes. The Burundi crisis resulted in approximately
200,000 people who fl ed the country.

**3 Trends in the Spread of International Terrorism**


- 1  Characteristics of Recent International Terrorism


The international community has enhanced its
engagement in Burundi since early 2016. The U.N.
Security Council sent an inspection mission to Burundi
in January, and U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon
visited Burundi in February. In the same month, the
AU also dispatched a high-level delegation to Burundi.
Furthermore, the East African Community (EAC)
appointed former Tanzanian President Benjamin Mkapa
as a facilitator for peace talks in Burundi, in addition
to Uganda’s President Yoweri Museveni as a mediator,
striving to facilitate national dialogue in Burundi. In
April, the U.N. Security Council unanimously adopted
Resolution 2279 requesting the Secretary General to
submit options to send a police mission to Burundi. In
response, the Secretary General proposed three options –
(1) sending some 3,000 police offi cers for missions
including the protection of citizens, (2) sending a
228-member police monitoring mission, and (3) sending
an assessment mission comprising several dozens
of people for three months. Deliberations have been
underway on these options as of the end of June.

terror attacks.[97] Some organizations are said to have the
potential to conduct cyber attacks.[98]
While Western countries have led the War on Terror
since the September 2001 terror attacks in the United
States, the number of victims of terror attacks in recent
years is increasing.[99]
In European countries and the United States, “homegrown” terrorism in which residents are inspired by the
extremism espoused by Al Qaeda or ISIL and conduct
terrorist attacks has become a threat. In particular, there
are concerns that their nationals would conduct terrorist
attacks after accumulating combat training and combat
experiences in confl ict-torn regions such as Iraq and
Syria,[100] becoming indoctrinated into extremism and
returning to their countries.[101]


International terrorist organizations including Al Qaeda
and ISIL are based primarily in countries and regions
where governing systems have been weakened or
collapsed mainly in the Middle East and Africa. They cross
insuffi ciently controlled national borders to expand and
boost their operations. Some organizations are capable
of implementing terror attacks in locations far from their
bases. These terrorist organizations, though alleged to
differ depending on their objectives and capabilities,[96]
generally tend to use cyberspace, including social media,
for information sharing and coordination, and to form
global networks to obtain weapons and funds. Some
organizations use advanced public relations strategies to
skillfully promote themselves, recruit fi ghters and inspire


96 U.S. Department of State, “Country Reports on Terrorism 2012” (May 2013).

97 ISIL uses the Internet and social media to recruit young people as fi ghters. According to a U.N. report in May 2015, the international community is called on to cooperate in efforts to address the issue of women
joining terrorist organizations. See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1, Paragraph 3, “The Spread of International Terrorism.”

98 In January 2015, a cyber attack was lodged against the U.S. Central Command’s Twitter account.

99 The number of victims in terror attacks hit an all-time high of about 32,000 in 2014 (according to International Terrorism Report 2014 (June 2015)). ISIL and other Islamic extremists have increased attacks on
soft targets, leading to a rise in the number of ordinary citizens becoming victims of terrorist attacks.

100 See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1 for the situation in Syria.


-----

Japanese nationals were murdered, Japan is not in any way
immune from the threat of international terrorism.[102]
The proliferation of the threat of terrorism has
gained momentum. The diversification of its perpetrators,
coupled with the growing complexity of regional
conflicts, has made it further difficult to prevent their
occurrence. For this reason, international cooperation
on counter-terrorism measures has become even more
important. Currently, the international community
as a whole is taking various steps, including military
actions as well as cutting off the funding sources of
terrorist organizations and preventing the international
movement of terrorist fighters.[103]

- 2  Trends of Major International Terrorist Organizations


In recent years, “lone-wolf” terrorism, in which
individuals or groups become extremists through
information found on the Internet and elsewhere, without
having any official relations with terrorist organizations
such as Al Qaeda and ISIL, and plan and conduct terrorist
attacks, is also seen as a threat because it is difficult to
detect signs of such attacks and prevent them. Given that
ISIL has continued to call for terrorist attacks in Europe
and other parts of the world, terrorist attacks are feared to
take place in the future as well.
In connection with Japan, in early 2015, when there
was a terrorist incident involving the murder of Japanese
nationals in Syria, ISIL declared clearly that its acts of
terrorism would target Japanese nationals. In October 2015,
ISIL claimed responsibility for the murder of a Japanese
national in Bangladesh. An ISIL magazine has also cited
Japanese nationals as terror attack targets. In light of the
terrorist attack in Bangladesh in July 2016, in which 7


**(1) ISIL**
ISIL, unlike traditional terrorist organizations, is
said to be characterized by its substantial funding,[104]
powerful and accomplished military forces,[105] developed
organizational structure, and effective control of certain
areas. In addition, it is deemed that ISIL has excellent
military operational capabilities with the participation
by Ba’ath Party members from the former Iraqi regime
and former Iraqi military officers, and include numerous
foreign fighters. Thanks to an adept public relations
strategy,[106] about 25,000 foreign fighters including 6,900
from the West are said to be participating in ISIL’s
activities.[107] Since launching the invasion of Iraq, ISIL
has utilized equipment seized from the Iraqi Security


102 The seventh issue of the ISIL propaganda magazine “Dabiq” published in February 2015 included descriptions of the murder of two Japanese nationals in Syria and renewed a call for terror attacks on Japanese
nationals and interests. Furthermore, the 11th issue (published in September 2015) called for terror attacks on Japanese diplomatic missions in Bosnia, Malaysia and Indonesia. The 12th issue (published in
November 2015) described the murder of a Japanese national in Bangladesh and warned anew that Japanese nationals and interests would be the targets of terror attacks.

103 In September 2014, the U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 2178 on the issue of foreign terrorist fighters. The Resolution requested member states to make exits from their countries for the purpose of
executing acts of terrorism punishable under domestic laws. The Resolution also includes measures obligating member states to prevent entry or transit through their territories of any individual about whom
that state had credible information which demonstrates reasonable grounds for believing that the individual is attempting to enter or transit through its territory for the purpose of participating in acts of terrorism.
In addition, at the G7 Summit held in Germany in June 2015, the leaders reaffirmed their commitment to effectively implement the established international framework for the freezing of terrorists’ assets.

104 According to a U.N. report, ISIL’s estimated revenue from crude oil ranges from US$846,000 to US$1,645,000 per day (approx. 100 to 200 million yen). The report notes that ISIL’s revenue sources also include
unilaterally-imposed levies, including ransom from kidnapping and taxation (U.N. Security Council Al Qaeda Sanctions Committee report [November 14, 2014]). Amid speculations that revenue from crude oil is
becoming no longer a major source of ISIL’s funding due to the Coalition’s airstrikes and fluctuations in crude oil prices, some have indicated that ISIL has diversified its revenue sources by increasing the taxes
levied on residents and companies in the areas under ISIL’s control. Some also suggest that ISIL earns profits from asset management made through its overseas supporters. However, it has been noted that
pay to ISIL fighters has halved as ISIL’s income from oil smuggling, which is its main income source, has been declining resulting from Coalition airstrikes that destroy ISIL-held oil facilities.

105 ISIL boasts of advanced equipment including tanks (M1A1 Abrams, T-72s, and T-55s), artillery guns and rifles. Some reports allege that ISIL has fighter aircraft. However, there is no information indicating ISIL’s
operation of fighter aircraft in battlefields.

106 ISIL uses the Internet and social media to recruit young people as fighters. According to a U.N. report in May 2015, the international community is called on to cooperate in efforts to address the issue of women
joining terrorist organizations.

107 According to a report on foreign ISIL fighters (December 2015) by the Soufan Group, a think tank studying regional conflicts, about 60% of foreign ISIL fighters are from the Middle East and North Africa. A
country-by-country breakdown of foreign ISIL fighters indicate (1) 6,000 from Tunisia, (2) 2,500 from Saudi Arabia, (3) 2,400 from Russia, (4) 2,200 from Turkey, and (5) 2,000 from Jordan. Fighters from the
West account for slightly less than 20% of the total foreign ISIL fighters, including 1,700 from France, 760 from the United Kingdom and Germany, 470 from Belgium, and 300 from Sweden and Austria. Foreign ii


-----

**y**

**ISIL’s Use of Cyberspace** **Column**

ISIL has used cyberspace for a variety of purposes that include recruiting foreign fi ghters, raising funds, and communicating and coordinating
between members. The expansion of ISIL’s activities has steered Western intelligence agencies to step up its monitoring effort, resulting in the
exposure of a series of ISIL’s plots based on online communication. For example, according to media reports, a photo published online by an
ISIL magazine enabled the Coalition to identify the location of ISIL’s forces and to subsequently launch airstrikes.
While ISIL has been an active user of Facebook, Twitter, and other existing social networking services (SNS), recently ISIL members
have given priority to using more secure ways of communicating, and thus, have been found utilizing an independently developed messaging
application. In the Paris terror attacks in November 2015, for example, it is suggested that the terrorists utilized a commercially home-use video
game console which offers highly secure means of communication.
ISIL is also said to be acquiring software programs for cyber attacks as well as training and recruiting the necessary personnel. Furthermore,
ISIL’s own manuals that call on members to conduct cyber attacks have been discovered. It is a cause for concern that ISIL could carry out
new terror attacks by way of cyber attacks, whose targets include national critical backbone infrastructure such as power plants and airports.


Forces and other forces, and has conducted deceptive
tactics,[108] has successively taken control of key cities, oil
fi eld areas, and military facilities in Iraq and Syria, at one
point expanding areas under its control, and increasing its
supporters in the world.[109]

**(2) Al Qaeda**
With regard to Al Qaeda that is believed to have directed
the 9/11 attacks in 2001, Osama Bin Laden, the group’s
leader who was hiding in Pakistan, as well as many
executives of affi liated organizations, were killed in
a U.S. operation in May 2011. The Al Qaeda core is
now said to be focused on ensuring the survival of the
organization. Nonetheless, the possibility of Al Qaeda
attacks has not disappeared. While the command and
control capabilities of Al Qaeda’s leadership have been
declining, Al Qaeda affi liates have reportedly gained
strength and are perpetrating terrorism from their bases
mainly in North Africa and the Middle East.[110]


**(3) Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP)**
AQAP is a Sunni extremist organization based in Yemen,
established in 2009 by its founder Nasser al-Wuhayshi
along with Al Qaeda members active in Saudi Arabia to
found a caliphate in the Arabian Peninsula and the entire
Middle East and implement sharia law.[111] AQAP[112] is said
to have been involved in attempted terrorist attacks on
multiple aircraft[113] and an assault on a French weekly
magazine head offi ce in January 2015. While Yemen has
remained in a state of confusion,[114] AQAP has expanded
operations based in Yemen and taken control of a Yemeni
military base. AQAP is feared to take advantage of the
power vacuum to gain further strength. Meanwhile, the
United States killed AQAP leader Wuhayshi in a mopup operation using drone strikes. Arab coalition forces
recaptured Al Mukalla in southern Yemen, which had
been a base for AQAP since April 2015. Anti-AQAP
operations have thus shown a degree of success.


108 It has been pointed out that ISIL uses combat uniforms, etc., obtained from the Iraqi Security Forces and others to approach security checkpoints and vehicles to conduct suicide bombings. ISIL is also reported
to have camoufl aged seized armored personnel carriers and ordinary vehicles with armor plates for suicide bombings.

109 Recently, ISIL has established branches in the Middle East, Africa, Central Asia, and South Asia, gaining strength from allegiances sworn by local Islamic extremists. According to a report on ISIL by the U.N.
Secretary General, 34 organizations have sworn allegiance to ISIL as of December 15, 2015. According to U.S. think tank IntelCenter, ISIL is alleged to have 41 branches, including those whose operations
remain unknown, in 16 countries as of January 2016.

110 U.S. Director of National Intelligence, “Worldwide Threat Assessment” (February 2016).
111 Sharia is an Arabic word meaning “Islamic law.” Islamic law is applied to the whole of Islam, covering ibadah, moral codes, private laws, and social relations laws, as well as criminal codes, and international
and war laws. However, there is no comprehensive written law representing sharia. In practice, sharia is applied according to interpretations by clerics based on the Koran.

112 AQAP was established in 2009 by its founder Nasser al-Wuhayshi along with Al Qaeda members active in Saudi Arabia to found a caliphate in the Arabian Peninsula and the entire Middle East and
implement Sharia.

113 AQAP was reportedly involved in an attempted bombing attack on a Northwest Airlines jet in December 2009 and in an incident where explosives were found in multiple air cargoes on a fl ight from Yemen to
the United States in October 2010. The fi rst issue of Inspire published by AQAP in July 2010 explained how to make a simple bomb.


-----

**(4) Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM)**
AQIM, a Sunni extremist organization based in Algeria,
has kidnapped mainly Algerians, Europeans and
Americans. AQIM swore allegiance to Al Qaeda in 2006,
with its strength peaking at about 30,000. However,
Algerian forces’ counterterrorism operations have
reportedly reduced the AQIM strength to around 1,000.
The strength of AQIM in northern Mali has declined due
to a French-led military intervention started in 2013,
while it is expanding its influence in Libya and Tunisia.
In November 2015, AQIM attacked a U.S. hotel in Mali.
In this attack, AQIM was found to have cooperated
with Al-Murabitoun, which was founded by Mokhtar
Belmokhtar, an offshoot from AQIM. In December 2015,
Al-Murabitoun offered to join AQIM.[115] It has been
pointed out that its integration was designed to counter
ISIL, which had been gaining strength in western Africa
as well and hurting AQIM’s vested interests. AQIM is
reportedly expected to scale up its terror attacks.

- 3  Trends in Global Terrorism


Karkeren Kurdistan (PKK),[119] which has long clashed
with the government, have continuously occurred.[120]
Furthermore, alleged ISIL terror attacks have emerged in
Turkey. Among them, a suicide bombing attack on Kurds
in Suruc in July 2015 killed 31 people. In October 2015,
a bombing attack was carried out at a demonstration held
by Kurds at a central station in the Turkish capital of
Ankara, killing 102 people.
Furthermore, in June 2016, a shooting and bombing
attack on Istanbul’s Ataturk International Airport killed
41 people and injured more than 200 others. Turkish
authorities allege that the attack was carried out by ISIL.
Among North African countries, Algeria, Egypt,[121]
Libya[122] and Tunisia have seen frequent terrorist attacks
in recent years, indicating that ISIL and Al Qaeda
affiliates have been operating in these countries. In
January 2013, a masked brigade of Al-Murabitoun led by
Mokhtar Belmokhtar[123] launched an assault on a natural
gas plant in In Amenas, southeastern Algeria, killing
numerous people including 10 Japanese nationals. In
Tunisia, an Islamic extremist group attacked the Bardo
National Museum in Tunis in March 2015, killing 21
people, including foreign tourists, among which were
three Japanese nationals. In June 2015, an armed man
fired indiscriminately at a hotel beach in the tourist spot
of Sousse, killing 38 people. ISIL claimed responsibility
for the attack.

**(2) Sub-Saharan Africa**
In Sub-Saharan Africa, Islamic extremists have gained
strength in countries such as Kenya, Mali,[124] Somalia, and
Nigeria. In Kenya, Al-Shabaab[125] launched an assault on
luxury commercial facilities killing 67 people in Nairobi
in September 2013 and attacked Garissa University


**(1) Middle East and North Africa[116]**
Terrorist attacks by ISIL, which is gaining strength in
Iraq and Syria, by Al Qaeda-affiliated groups and other
Islamic extremist organizations continue to take place in
various parts of the Middle East. Saudi Arabia, cited by
AQAP and ISIL as their attack target, has continued to
crack down on those alleged to have connections with
these organizations.[117] In particular, ISIL has frequently
conducted terror attacks on Shiite mosques[118] and issued
statements vowing to continue such attacks. Therefore,
ISIL is feared to continue expanding terror attacks. In
Turkey, terror attacks by such organizations as Partiya


115 Terror attacks in Burkina Faso in January 2016 and in Grand-Bassam of Cote d’lvoire in March 2016 are attributed to Al-Murabitoun.
116 The state of terrorism in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria and Yemen are described in Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1, Second Paragraph – “Situation in Afghanistan,” “Situations in Syria and Iraq in Response to the Rise of
ISIL,” and “Situation in Yemen.”

117 In July 2015, Saudi security authorities arrested 431 people alleged to have connections with ISIL, enhancing the domestic crackdown on terrorists.
118 In 2015 alone, bombing terror attacks on mosques or security forces occurred in May, July, August and October.
119 The PKK is a separatist organization that operates from footholds in southeastern Turkey and northern Iraq for the purpose of establishing a Kurdish state. Its attacks target mainly the Turkish government and
security forces.

120 In February 2016, a bombing terror attack, alleged to have targeted Turkish military forces, came near the Air Force command in Ankara, killing 29 people. A PKK affiliate known as Teyrêbazên Azadiya Kurdistan
(TAK) (Kurdistan Freedom Hawks) claimed responsibility for the attack, which it described as retaliation against the Turkish government continuing attacks on the PKK.

121 See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1-2-6 “Situation in Egypt” for terror attacks in Egypt.
122 See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1-2-3 “Situation in Libya” for terror attacks in Libya.
123 Whether Mokhtar Belmokhtar is alive or not after U.S. airstrikes in June 2015 remains unknown.
124 See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1-2-9 “Situation in Mali” for trends related to Islamic extremists in Mali.
125 Al-Shabaab, an official Al Qaeda affiliate, has attacked Somali military forces and foreign forces stationed in Somalia to found an Islamic state, overthrow the Somali government, and remove foreign forces.
Most Al-Shabaab members are Somali and foreign fighters. In February 2015, Al-Shabaab called on Islamic followers in the United States, United Kingdom, France, and Canada to conduct attacks at shopping


-----

Fig. I-3-1-2 Major Terrorist Groups Based in Africa and the Middle East Regions

Al Qaeda in the Islamic Islamic State of Iraq Al Qaeda

Al-Nusrah Front

Maghreb (AQIM) and the Levant (ISIL)

Taliban

ISIL Libya Branch Hizballah
(Total: 3 branches)

SyriaSyria

Hamas Lebanon

IraqIraq AfghanistanAfghanistan

PalestinePalestine ISIL Khorasan

Branch PakistanPakistan

AlgeriaAlgeria

LibyaLibya Egypt

Saudi ArabiaSaudi Arabia

ISIL Algeria Branch ISIL Bahrain Branch

Tenrik-e Taliban Pakistan

Mali ISIL Sinai Branch

YemenYemen ISIL Yemen Branch

(Total: 5 branches)

ISIL Saudi Arabia Branch

NigeriaNigeria (Total: 3 branches)

SomaliaSomalia

Al Qaeda in the Arabian
Peninsula (AQAP)

Ansar al-Dine ISIL West Africa Branch

(Boko Haram)

: ISIL-related group Al-Shabaab

: Al Qaeda affiliate

: Group whose relation with Al Qaeda has been pointed out

: Other major Islamic extremist terrorist group Source: Created based on Worldwide Threat Assessment (February 26, 2015), etc.


College in northeastern Kenya leaving 148 dead in April
2015. In Somalia, the same organization has continued
attacks on AMISOM units[126] and coordinated an attack in
which a personal computer-shaped bomb exploded on a
plane from Mogadishu to Djibouti in February 2016. In
Nigeria, Boko Haram,[127] which aims to create an Islamic
state, has stepped up its activities since 2009, repeatedly
carrying out terrorist attacks[128] in retaliation against
crackdowns by police and other authorities.[129] The
international community, including the U.N. Security
Council, has been implementing initiatives to address
the Boko Haram problem. Boko Haram is expanding
into foreign countries such as Niger, Cameroon and
Chad. In March 2015, Boko Haram swore allegiance to


ISIL, in a move to gain further strength. However, some
observers point out that anti-Boko Haram operations in
neighboring countries have contributed to reducing the
organization’s strength.

**(3) Europe, Americas, Australia**
In Europe, people inspired by Islamic extremists and
fi ghters returning mainly from Iraq and Syria have been
conducting terrorist attacks. In January 2015, French
nationals with origins in Algeria and elsewhere who
were deemed to have been inspired by Islamic extremism
were involved in shooting attacks, including those at
the head offi ce of the French weekly newspaper Charlie
Hebdo in central Paris.[130] In November 2015, large-scale


126 See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1-2-8 “Situation in Somalia” for AMISOM.
127 Boko Haram, aiming to overthrow the Nigerian government, implement Islamic law and deny Western education, has repeatedly conducted suicide bombings and other terrorist attacks on military, police, and
government offi cials, as well as Christian facilities, mainly in northern Nigeria (primarily Borno State where there are numerous Muslims). Recently, soft targets such as markets have come under Boko Haram
attacks. At present, Boko Haram operates as ISIL’s western Africa branch.

128 Recently, Boko Haram has reportedly repeated suicide bombings using women and girls who are less likely to raise alarm.
129 In April 2014, Boko Haram abducted over 200 female students. In response, the United States dispatched drones and other assets to support the search activities of the Nigerian government. In addition, the
U.N. Security Council Sanctions Committee added Boko Haram to its list of sanction targets.

130 Of the two brothers who conducted the shooting attack at the Charlie Hebdo head offi ce, one is known to have received training at an AQAP camp. In addition, AQAP released a statement saying it had issued
instructions directly to the brothers. Amedy Coulibaly, who attacked a Jewish grocery store, is believed to have posted a video on the Internet in which he swears allegiance to ISIL, although no clear link between i


-----

**(4) Southeast Asia**
In Southeast Asia, while some progress has been
observed in the crackdown on terrorist organizations and
other anti-terror efforts,[134] it has been pointed out that
moves to support ISIL nevertheless exist, as indicated by
cleric Abu Bakar Bashir,[135] a spiritual leader of Islamic
extremists in Indonesia, who has sworn allegiance and
provided funds to ISIL from behind prison walls.[136] In
addition, young people from Indonesia, Malaysia, and
other countries have reportedly gone to Iraq and Syria as
foreign fighters, posing a new threat to the region.[137]
While Indonesia has enhanced its crackdown on
ISIL supporters, a bombing/shooting incident occurred
at a Western coffee shop and its vicinity in Jakarta in
January 2016. ISIL Indonesia claimed responsibility
for the incident alleged to represent the first ISIL terror
attack in Southeast Asia. While no major terror attacks
have been seen in Malaysia, more than 50 ISIL supporters
have been arrested since 2014, leading some observers
to believe that the layers of ISIL supporters have been
expanding.[138] In Thailand, meanwhile, an explosion took
place at Erawan Shrine in central Bangkok in August
2015, killing more than 20 people.[139]

**(5) South Asia**
South Asia is subject to frequent terror attacks. In Pakistan,
particularly, Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan (TTP) and other
terrorist organizations have frequently conducted terror
attacks on educational, military and other facilities. TTP
attacked a military school in Peshawar, northwestern
Pakistan, in December 2014, killing more than 141
people. In January 2016, TTP launched an assault on a
university in Charsadda, northwestern Pakistan, resulting


coordinated terror attacks hit the national stadium, a
theater and other facilities, killing 130 people. ISIL France
claimed responsibility for these attacks in a statement.
In Belgium,[131] suicide bombing attacks were carried out
at an airport and a subway station in Brussels in March
2016, killing 35 people, including three suicide bombers.
ISIL Belgium later claimed responsibility for the attacks
in a statement. It is alleged that the groups responsible for
the terror attacks in Paris and Brussels cooperated with
each other. These attacks demonstrate ISIL’s intention to
exercise its operational capabilities even outside Syria
and Iraq, prompting European governments to grow
more alert.[132] Terror threats have spread to the Americas.
In December, two terrorists fired at random at a welfare
facility in California, resulting in 14 deaths.[133] ISIL’s
Al Bayan radio station issued a statement praising the
attack. In June 2016, a man who was allegedly inspired
by ISIL’s extremism shot 49 people at a nightclub in
Florida. While ISIL has claimed responsibility for the
shooting, a clear relationship between the perpetrator
and ISIL has not been established. This series of terror
attacks led to concern that the extremism espoused by
ISIL and other groups is spreading in the United States.
In Canada, a male convert to Islam, who is believed to
have sympathized with ISIL’s extremism, shot and killed
a soldier of the Canadian forces in front of the Parliament
in Ottawa in October 2014.
In Australia in December 2014, a man who is believed
to have been inspired by ISIL took hostages at a Sydney
café, resulting in the deaths of three people, including the
perpetrator himself. Since the incident, those suspected of
planning terror attacks have been continuously identified
and arrested in Australia.


131 In May 2014, a French national who had allegedly joined an Islamic extremist group in Syria opened fire at the Jewish Museum, killing four people.
132 After the Charlie Hebdo attack in January 2015, the French government raised the terror alert to the highest level in Paris, mobilizing numerous police officers and troops. It has also extended its emergency
declaration issued just after the U.S. terror attacks. For the French government’s response after the coordinated terror attacks in Paris, see Part I, Chapter 2, Paragraph 8.

133 Much ammunition, bombs, automatic rifles and other weapons were found at the residence of the suspect.
134 It is pointed out that the terrorist organizations have weakened in the Philippines, such as the Islamic extremist terrorist organization Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG), which have been the foremost security concern in
the country. See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 6-2 for the situation in the Philippines.

135 Cleric Bashir is the founder of Jemaah Islamiyah.
136 However, it has been pointed out that cleric Bashir withdrew his allegiance to ISIL in early 2016.
137 In Indonesia, the government banned participation in ISIL in August 2014. Under the existing legal system, however, it is said that authorities do not have the authority to arrest ISIL supporters unless there is
evidence of their clear involvement in terrorism activities.

138 It has been pointed out that security force members, public servants and other government employees, as well as housewives and other ordinary citizens, were among those arrested.


-----

in the deaths of more than 20 people, including students.
In India, in January 2016, an armed group attacked an
air force base in the northwestern state of Punjab, killing
seven security force members. A local extremist group
claimed responsibility for the attack. In Bangladesh, an
Italian national was shot to death in September 2015, as
was a Japanese national in October 2015. In addition, a
terrorist attack was carried out on a restaurant in Dhaka
in July 2016, in which 20 people, including 7 Japanese
nationals, were murdered. ISIL Bangladesh claimed
responsibility for these incidents (responsibility for the
incidents in September and October 2015 was claimed in
an ISIL magazine), and in particular, ISIL is said to have
been involved in the attack in July.
ISIL has unilaterally established a Khorasan branch
in Afghanistan and Pakistan. In the Indian subcontinent,
in September 2014, Al Qaeda’s leader Ayman al Zawahiri
announced the establishment of a new branch in India.[140]


Given these developments, Islamic extremists are feared
to intensify terror attacks in South Asia.

**(6) Russia**
ISIL has gained strength in southern Russia, establishing
a Caucasus branch in June 2015.[141] Meanwhile, ISIL
issued statements in October and November 2015 calling
for terror attacks on Russia for implementing airstrikes in
Syria. While no major terror attack has been confirmed
in Russia, there have been some terror attacks including
an assault on a military facility and a suicide bombing.[142]
Given that the northern Caucasus region is one of major
fighter suppliers for ISIL, ISIL-inspired fighters and
ISIL supporters in the region are feared to increase terror
attacks. Terror threats are also feared to spread in Russia.

See>> Fig. I-3-1-2 (Major Terrorist Groups Based in Africa and the Middle
East Regions)


140 Al Qaeda’s leader Ayman al Zawahiri has stated that the goal of Al Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS) is to free Muslim followers who are oppressed in Bangladesh, India, Myanmar, and Sri Lanka.
141 Islamic extremists in the Republics of Dagestan, Chechnya, Ingushetia, Kabardino-Balkaria, and Karachay-Cherkessia have been organized, pledging allegiance to ISIL.
142 In September 2015, a Russian military base came under an attack in southern Dagestan. In February 2016, a suicide bombing also occurred in Dagestan. The ISIL Caucasus branch claimed responsibility for


-----

**Section 2** **Transfer and Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction**


The transfer and proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs), such as nuclear, biological and
chemical (NBC) weapons, and ballistic missiles that
deliver such weapons, have been recognized as a signifi cant

**1 Nuclear Weapons**


During the Cold War, the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962
raised awareness of the danger of a full-scale nuclear
war between the United States and the Soviet Union.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) that took effect in 1970 prohibited countries other
than those that exploded a nuclear weapon or other
nuclear explosive device in or before 1966[1] from having
nuclear weapons, and provided that arms control and
disarmament of nuclear forces would be pursued through
two-way negotiations.[2]
The NPT is currently signed by 191 countries and
regions.[3] While some countries that had previously
possessed nuclear weapons became signatories of this
treaty as non-nuclear weapon states by abandoning these
weapons,[4] India, Israel, and Pakistan still refuse to accede
to this treaty as non-nuclear weapon states. There are
other countries that have declared the development and
possession of nuclear weapons, such as North Korea,
which announced that it conducted nuclear tests in October
2006, May 2009, February 2013, and January 2016.[5]
U.S. President Obama’s speech in April 2009
in which he expressed his hopes for a world without
nuclear weapons demonstrated U.S. determination to
take concrete steps towards this world, specifi cally: the
reduction of the role of nuclear weapons in U.S. national
security while maintaining nuclear deterrence; the signing


threat since the end of the Cold War. In particular, there
still remain strong concerns that non-state actors, including
terrorists, against which traditional deterrence works less
effectively, could acquire and use WMDs.

of a new treaty to replace the Strategic Arms Reduction
Treaty I (START I) between the United States and Russia;
and pursuit of ratifi cation of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT)[6] by the U.S. government.
This in turn encouraged the international community to
take initiatives towards nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation.
In April 2010, the presidents of the United States
and Russia signed the New Strategic Arms Reduction
Treaty (New START) to replace START I, which was put
into effect in February 2011.[7] In addition, in June 2013,
President Obama made a speech in Berlin in which he
announced his intention to negotiate with Russia on the
reduction of the number of U.S. deployed strategic nuclear
weapons by up to one-third, among other cuts.[8] The United
Kingdom also stated in the Strategic Defense and Security
Review (SDSR) in October 2010 that the country would
decrease the number of its nuclear warheads.[9]
In the area of “nuclear security” which addresses
terrorism activities that utilize nuclear and other
radioactive materials, in April 2010, the fi rst Nuclear
Security Summit was held in Washington, D.C. The
Summit adopted a Communiqué stating that measures
should be taken to secure all vulnerable nuclear material
in four years to reduce the threat of nuclear terrorism,
among other matters. The second Nuclear Security


The United States, the then Soviet Union (now Russia), the United Kingdom, France, and China. France and China acceded to the NPT in 1992.

Article 6 of the NPT sets out the obligation of signatory countries to negotiate nuclear disarmament in good faith.

As of June 2016.

South Africa, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and Belarus.

After North Korea announced its withdrawal from the NPT in 1993, it pledged that it would remain a contracting state to the NPT. However, North Korea again declared its withdrawal from the NPT in January
2003. In the Joint Statement of the Six-Party Talks adopted in September 2005, North Korea pledged to return to the NPT at an early date. Nonetheless, North Korea subsequently announced the implementation
of four nuclear tests. North Korea’s nuclear tests constitute a major challenge to the NPT.

Adopted in 1996, this treaty bans all nuclear test explosions regardless of the location. Of the 44 nations that are required to ratify it for the treaty to enter into force, 8 nations have not yet ratifi ed the treaty
(United States, China, India, Pakistan, Iran, Israel, Egypt, and North Korea). Brunei ratifi ed the CTBT in January 2013, Chad in February 2013, Guinea-Bissau and Iraq in September 2013, Congo in September
2014, and Angola in March 2015. The United States participated in the Conference on Facilitating the Entry into Force of the CTBT in September 2011, following on from 2009 which marked the fi rst time in
10 years that the United States participated in the Conference.

The treaty stipulates that both countries would reduce the number of deployed strategic warheads to 1,550 and the number of deployed delivery vehicles to 700 by seven years following the treaty’s entry into
force. In April 2016, the United States reported that it had 1,481 deployed strategic nuclear warheads and 741 deployed delivery vehicles, while Russia reported that it had 1,735 deployed strategic nuclear
warheads and 521 deployed delivery vehicles. These numbers are as of March 1, 2016.

Regarding this proposal, Russia explained its position that all elements impacting strategic stability including missile defense, space weapons, and non-nuclear strategic weapons need to be taken into
consideration, and that negotiations concerning the further reduction of strategic nuclear weapons require a multilateral framework involving all countries that have nuclear weapons.

The National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015 (NSS-SDSR2015) unveiled in November 2015 also affi rmed that there was no change in the United Kingdom’s nuclear warhead


-----

Summit that was convened in Seoul in March 2012
adopted the Seoul Communiqué, which incorporates
issues to be addressed by the international community
to achieve nuclear security, such as the management,
transportation, and illicit traffi cking of nuclear materials,
as well as nuclear forensics.[10] The third Nuclear Security
Summit that was held in The Hague in March 2014
adopted a Communiqué, which included a statement that
went so far as to say that the leaders encourage countries
to minimize their stocks of highly enriched uranium
and to keep their stockpile of separated plutonium to
the minimum level, both as consistent with national
requirements. The fourth Nuclear Security Summit that
was held in Washington, D.C. in March-April 2016

**2 Biological and Chemical Weapons**


Biological and chemical weapons are easy to manufacture
at relatively low cost and are easy to disguise as most
materials, equipment, and technology needed to
manufacture these weapons can be used for both military
and civilian purposes. For example, water purifi cation
equipment used to desalinate sea water can be exploited to
extract bacteria for the production of biological weapons,
and sodium cyanide used for the process of metal coating
can be abused for the production of chemical weapons.[12]
Accordingly, biological and chemical weapons are
attractive to states and non-state actors, such as terrorists,
seeking asymmetric means of attack.[13]
Biological weapons have the following characteristics:
(1) manufacturing is easy and inexpensive; (2) there
is usually an incubation period of a few days between
exposure and onset; (3) their use is hard to detect; (4) even
the threat of use can create great psychological effects; and
(5) they can cause mass casualties and injuries depending


adopted a Communiqué outlining the need for continuous
efforts to prevent nuclear materials from getting into the
hands of non-state actors.
The fact that the international community has
begun to make steady and major strides towards nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation contributes to
improving the international security environment, and is
a welcome development. In contrast, China is deemed to
have increased its inventory of nuclear warheads as well
as developed and deployed their means of delivery,[11]
and thereby, continued to enhance the capability of its
nuclear forces. It has been pointed out that initiatives
for reducing nuclear weapons involving China will be
needed in the future.

on the circumstances of use and the type of weapon.[14]
As has been pointed out, advancements in life
science could be misused or abused for the development
of biological weapons. In view of these concerns, in
November 2009, the United States established guidelines[15]
on responding to the proliferation of biological weapons
and their use by terrorists. The guidelines set out that the
United States would take measures to ensure the thorough
management of pathogens and toxins.[16]
As for chemical weapons, Iraq repeatedly used
mustard gas, tabun, and sarin[17] in the Iran-Iraq War. In
the late 1980s, Iraq used chemical weapons to suppress
Iraqi Kurds.[18] It is believed that other chemical weapons[19]
that were used included VX, a highly toxic nerve agent,
and easy-to-manage binary rounds.[20] In August 2013,
sarin was used in the suburbs of Damascus, Syria, where
Syrian troops clashed with antigovernment groups.[21] The
Syrian government denied using chemical weapons, but


10 Nuclear forensics aims to provide evidence for the prosecution of perpetrators of illicit traffi cking or malicious use, through identifi cation of the source of detected nuclear and other radioactive materials.

11 See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 3-2 for China’s ballistic missile development.

12 The export of related dual-use items and technologies that can be used to develop and produce these biological and chemical weapons is controlled by the domestic laws of member states, including Japan,
pursuant to an agreement of the Australia Group, a framework for international export control.

13 They refer to means of attack to strike an adversary’s vulnerable points and are not conventional means. They include WMDs, ballistic missiles, terrorist attacks, and cyber attacks.

14 Then Japan Defense Agency, “Basic Concept for Dealing with Biological Weapons” (January 2002).

15 In November 2009, the National Strategy for Countering Biological Threats was released. It presents guidelines on responding to the proliferation of biological weapons and their use by terrorists. In the State
of the Union Address in January 2010, President Obama said that the United States was launching a new initiative to respond promptly and effectively to bioterrorism and infectious diseases.

16 U.S. Executive Order (July 2, 2010).

17 Mustard gas is a slow-acting blister agent. Tabun and sarin are fast-acting nerve agents.

18 It has been reported that a chemical weapons attack against a Kurdish village in 1988 killed several thousand people at once.

19 Iraq joined the CWC in February 2009.

20 A weapon in which two types of relatively harmless chemicals that serve as ingredients for a chemical agent are contained separately within the weapon. It was devised so that the impact of the fi ring of the
weapon or other action mixes the chemical materials in the warhead, causing a chemical reaction and thereby synthesis of the chemical agent. Binary rounds are easier to store and handle than weapons
containing chemical agents from the outset.


-----

entered into the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)
in line with an agreement between the United States and
Russia. Subsequently, international efforts have been
underway for the overseas transfer of chemical agents
and other measures based on the decisions made by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW)[22] and a U.N. Security Council resolution.[23] In
August 2014, the operation to destroy Syria’s chemical
weapons on the U.S. Navy transport vessel Cape Ray
was completed.[24] Furthermore, OPCW has indicated that
ISIL,[25] which is gaining strength in Iraq and Syria, may
have utilized chlorine gas against Iraqi forces.[26] In this
connection, in August 2015, the U.N. Security Council

**3 Ballistic Missiles**


Ballistic missiles enable the projection of heavy payloads
over long distances and can be used as a means of
delivering WMDs, such as nuclear, biological, and
chemical weapons. Once launched, ballistic missiles
follow an orbital fl ight trajectory and fall at a steep angle
at high speed. As such, effectively countering them
requires a highly advanced interceptor missile system.
The deployment of ballistic missiles in a region where
armed confl ict is under way runs the risk of intensifying
or expanding the confl ict. Additionally, it has the risk of
further heightening tension in a region where military
confrontation is ongoing, leading to the destabilization of
that region. Furthermore, ballistic missiles are used as a
means of attacking from a distance or threatening another
country that has superior conventional forces.


adopted a resolution that establishes a Joint Investigative
Mechanism of the U.N. and OPCW to identify users
of chemical weapons in the Syrian civil war, and
investigation is under way.
North Korea is an example of a country that is still
presumed to possess these chemical weapons and which
has not entered into the CWC. Furthermore, the Tokyo
subway sarin attack in 1995, as well as incidents of
bacillus anthracis being contained in mail items in the
United States in 2001 and that of ricin being contained
in a mail item in February 2004, showed that the threat
of the use of WMDs by terrorists is real and that these
weapons could cause serious damage if used in cities.

In recent years, along with the threat of ballistic
missiles, analysts have pointed to the threat of cruise
missiles as a weapon which is comparatively easy for
terrorists and other non-state actors to acquire and which
has the potential for proliferation.[27] Because cruise missiles
are cheaper to produce compared to ballistic missiles and
are easy to maintain and train with, many countries either
produce or modify cruise missiles. At the same time, it
is said that cruise missiles have a higher degree of target
accuracy and that they are diffi cult to detect while in
fl ight.[28] Moreover, because they are smaller than ballistic
missiles, cruise missiles can be concealed on a ship to
secretly approach a target, and present a serious threat if
they carry WMDs in their warheads.[29]


22 (The 33rd and 34th) meetings of the Executive Council of OPCW.

23 U.N. Security Council Resolution 2118.

24 According to the OPCW, 600 tons of Category 1 extremely toxic chemical materials, including sarin and VX gas, were disposed of (August 19, 2014, Statement by the OPCW Director-General). In addition, U.N.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon reported to the Security Council that 97.8% of Syria’s chemical weapons have been disposed of as of October 22, 2014 (Letter dated October 27, 2014 from the U.N. SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security Council).

25 See Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1 for ISIL.

26 On February 10, 2015, OPCW Director-General Ahmet Üzümcü formally acknowledged that Iraqi authorities had notifi ed the OPCW of ISIL’s use of chlorine gas against Iraqi soldiers in October 2014. In
November 2015, the OPCW noted that at least two people were exposed to mustard gas close to Aleppo in Syria in August 2015. The U.S. Director of National Intelligence’s “Worldwide Threat Assessment” of
February 2016 refers to ISIL’s contribution to this incident, and assesses that non-state actors are using chemicals in warfare in Syria.

27 In the July 2006 confl ict between Israel and Lebanon, it is believed that Hezbollah used a cruise missile to attack an Israeli naval vessel. Israel announced in March 2011 that it had uncovered six anti-ship
cruise missiles among other items on cargo ships subject to inspection.

28 United States Congressional Research Service, “Cruise Missile Proliferation” (July 28, 2005).


-----

**4 Growing Concerns about Transfer and Proliferation of WMDs and Other Technologies**


Even weapons that were purchased or developed for selfdefense purposes could easily be exported or transferred
once domestic manufacturing becomes successful. For
example, certain states that do not heed political risks
have transferred WMDs and related technologies to other
states that cannot afford to invest resources in conventional
forces and attempt to offset this with WMDs. Some of
these states that seek WMDs do not hesitate to put their
land and people at risk, and furthermore, due to their
weak governance, terrorist organizations are active in their
countries. Therefore, it is conceivable that in general, the
possibility of actual use of WMDs would increase.
Moreover, since it is uncertain whether such states can
effectively manage the related technology and materials,
there is a concern that chemical or nuclear substances
will be transferred or smuggled out from these states with
high likelihood. For example, there is a danger that even
terrorists who do not possess related technologies would
use a dirty bomb[30] as a means of terrorist attack so long as
they gain access to radioactive materials. Nations across
the world share concerns regarding the acquisition and
use of WMDs by terrorists and other non-state actors.[31]
The proliferation of WMDs and other related
technologies has been noted in numerous instances.
For example, in February 2004, it came to light that
nuclear-related technologies, mainly uranium enrichment
technology, had been transferred to North Korea, Iran, and
Libya by Dr. A.Q. Khan and other scientists in Pakistan.
It has also been suggested that North Korea supported
Syria’s secret nuclear activities.[32]
Furthermore, there has been signifi cant transfer and
proliferation of ballistic missiles that serve as the means
of delivery of WMDs. The former Soviet Union and
other countries exported Scud-Bs to many countries and
regions, including Iraq, North Korea, and Afghanistan.
China and North Korea also exported DF-3 (CSS-2) and


Scud missiles, respectively. As a result, a considerable
number of countries now possess ballistic missiles. In
addition, Pakistan’s Ghauri and Iran’s Shahab-3 missiles
are believed to be based on North Korea’s Nodong
missiles. Further still, it has been suggested that North
Korea conducted missile-related trade with Syria and
Egypt until recently.[33]
The international community’s uncompromising and
decisive stance against the transfer and proliferation of
WMDs and other technologies has put signifi cant pressure
on countries engaged in related activities, leading some of
them to accept inspections by international organizations
or abandon their WMD and other programs altogether.[34]
Meanwhile, it is pointed out that, in recent years, states
of proliferation concern have sustained their proliferation
activities by averting international monitoring, through
illicitly exporting WMDs and other technologies
overseas by falsifying documentation, diversifying
transport routes, and utilizing multiple front companies
and intermediaries. Additionally, intangible transfer of
technology has arisen as a cause for concern. Namely,
states of proliferation concern have obtained advanced
technologies which could be adapted for the development
and manufacturing of WMDs and other technologies via
their nationals—researchers and students who have been
dispatched to leading companies and academic institutions
in developed countries.[35] Following North Korea’s
nuclear test and ballistic missile launches in January and
February 2016, the U.N. Security Council adopted a new
resolution in March 2016 containing sanctions banning
the export and import of all items that could contribute
to North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic missile programs,
and furthermore, preventing the provision of technical
training related to nuclear and ballistic missiles to North
Korean nationals.


30 Dirty bombs are intended to cause radioactive contamination by spreading radioactive materials.

31 Based on these concerns, the U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 1540 in April 2004, which sets forth the decision that all U.N. member states would refrain from providing support to non-state actors
that attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer, or use WMDs and their means of delivery, as well as adopt and enforce laws that are appropriate and effective for prohibiting these
activities. The International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism also entered into force in July 2007.

32 DNI “Worldwide Threat Assessment” from January 2014 states, “North Korea’s assistance to Syria in the construction of a nuclear reactor (destroyed in 2007) illustrates the reach of the North’s proliferation
activities.” The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) report of May 2011 states that the destroyed reactor was very likely a nuclear reactor that Syria should have declared to the IAEA.

33 The February 2016 report of the Panel of Experts of the U.N. Security Council Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) Sanctions Committee states North Korea attempted to export principal components
of liquid propellants and replacement parts likely for Scuds, to Syria and Egypt until recently.

34 Extensive behind-the-scenes negotiations began in March 2003 between Libya and the United States and the United Kingdom. In December 2003, Libya agreed to dismantle all of its WMDs and to allow an
international organization to carry out inspections. Later, in August 2006, Libya ratifi ed the IAEA Additional Protocol. Meanwhile, after the military activity against Libya by a multinational force, in March 2011,
North Korea denounced the military attacks against Libya, saying that attacking after disarmament was an “armed invasion.”

35 The February 2016 report of the Panel of Experts of the U.N. Security Council DPRK Sanctions Committee states that over the past 20 years since 1996, North Korea has dispatched more than 30 engineers to
the Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacifi c, which receives technical support from the U.N. Offi ce for Outer Space Affairs. These engineers participate in research programs
concerning topics such as satellite communications, space science and atmospheric chemistry, and satellite navigation systems. The report notes that such knowhow regarding space science and satellite


-----

**5 Iran’s Nuclear Issues**


Since the 1970s, Iran has been pursuing a nuclear
power plant construction project with cooperation from
abroad, claiming that its nuclear-related activities are for
peaceful purposes in accordance with the NPT. In 2002,
however, Iran’s covert construction of facilities including
a large-scale uranium enrichment plant was exposed
by a group of dissidents. Subsequent IAEA inspection
revealed that Iran, without notifying the IAEA, had been
engaged for a long time in uranium enrichment and
other activities potentially leading to the development of
nuclear weapons. In September 2005, the IAEA Board of
Governors recognized Iran’s breach of compliance with
the NPT Safeguards Agreement.
In September 2009, it was revealed that Iran had failed
to abide by the reporting duties based on the Safeguards
Agreement with the IAEA and was constructing a new
uranium enrichment plant near Qom in central Iran.
Moreover, in February 2010, Iran began enriching
uranium to increase the enrichment level from below 5%
to up to around 20%, saying that the reason was to supply
fuel to a research reactor for medical isotope production.
In December 2011, Iran started the enrichment process
at the above-mentioned new enrichment plant.[36] The
IAEA has expressed concerns that these Iranian nuclear
activities may have military dimensions including those
related to the development of a nuclear payload for
a missile.[37] The IAEA notes that it has been unable to
obtain confi rmation that the activities are for peaceful use
purposes since Iran has not permitted IAEA personnel
to access military facilities, which are suspected to have
been involved in the experiments using high explosives,
and has not offered other necessary cooperation to dispel
these concerns.
The international community expresses strong
concerns, saying that there lacks concrete proof of Iran’s
claim that it had no intent to develop nuclear weapons


and that all of its nuclear activities were for peaceful use
purposes. The international community has demanded that
Iran suspend all of its enrichment-related and reprocessing
activities through a series of U.N. Security Council
resolutions[38] and IAEA Board of Governors resolutions.
Regarding this issue, the United States and the EU
have taken individual measures to strengthen sanctions
against Iran. In December 2011, the United States enacted
a bill that would prohibit foreign fi nancial institutions,
which conduct signifi cant transactions with the Central
Bank of Iran or other Iranian fi nancial institutions,
from opening or maintaining bank accounts in the
United States. The EU started to ban imports of Iranian
crude oil and petrochemical products in January 2012.
Iran, meanwhile, started negotiations with the IAEA
towards resolving pending problems. In April 2012, Iran
resumed talks with the EU3+3 (United Kingdom, France,
Germany, United States, China, and Russia) on its
nuclear program, but no major progress was made under
the former Ahmadinejad administration.
However, with Hassan Rouhani winning the
presidential election in Iran in June 2013, the
discussions with the EU3+3 were advanced under the
new administration with the consent of the supreme
leader, Ali Hosseini Khamenei. This resulted in the
announcement of the Joint Plan of Action (JPOA)
towards the comprehensive resolution of nuclear issues in
November 2013. The execution of the fi rst step measures
of the JPOA commenced in January 2014.[39]
On April 2, 2015, consultations held in Lausanne,
Switzerland resulted in an agreement regarding the key
parameters of the fi nal agreement. On July 14, 2015, the
fi nal agreement concerning the nuclear issues of Iran,
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), was
announced in Vienna. Following this, on July 20, 2015,
U.N. Security Council Resolution 2231 approving the


36 The IAEA Director General estimated in a report published in February 2014 that Iran had so far produced a total of 447 kg of enriched uranium with a concentration of around 20%, out of which the country had
stored 160 kg in the form of uranium hexafl uoride. Furthermore, the IAEA Report by the Director General released in May of the same year contend that in accordance with the fi rst step measures elaborated
later, Iran diluted to less than 5%, or converted into oxide, a total of approximately 409 kg of uranium hexafl uoride enriched up to 20%. Uranium 235 with a concentration of 20% or more is defi ned as highly
enriched uranium, which is generally used for research purposes. If this substance is used for weapons, a concentration ratio is usually 90% or greater.

37 In November 2011, the IAEA published a report describing possible military aspects of Iran’s nuclear program in detail by referring to information regarding the explosion of high explosives.

38 U.N. Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1696 adopted in July 2006, UNSCR 1737 in December 2006, UNSCR 1747 in March 2007, UNSCR 1803 in March 2008, and UNSCR 1929 in June 2010.

39 First step measures include the limited relaxation of sanctions by the EU3+3, provided that for six months, Iran: (1) retains half of its current inventory of enriched uranium with a concentration of approximately
20% as oxide and dilutes the remaining half to less than 5%; (2) does not enrich uranium to a level of 5% or greater; (3) does not make any further advances of its activities conducted in uranium enrichment


-----

JCPOA was adopted. In the agreement, it was decided
that Iran would reduce its enriched uranium stockpile and
number of centrifuges, ban the production of weapons
grade plutonium, and accept IAEA inspections, among
other measures, in exchange for the suspension or lifting
of the sanctions based on previous U.N. Security Council
resolutions and the U.S., EU, and other countries’
nuclear-related sanctions.[40]
In response, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
of Israel, in his address to the U.N. General Assembly
in October 2015, strongly criticized the Iranian nuclear
agreement for making war more likely. In the United
States, while the Republican Party that makes up the
majority of Congress had been opposed to the agreement,
the motion of disapproval was not supported by at least


two-thirds of both the House of Representatives and the
Senate necessary to override the President’s veto. Thus,
the disapproval of the agreement was avoided.
Subsequently, the JCPOA was adopted on October
18, 2015, 90 days after the Security Council resolution
was adopted. On January 16, 2016, the IAEA released
a report confirming Iran’s completion of the necessary
preparatory steps to start the implementation of the
JCPOA. Accordingly, the United States suspended its
nuclear-related sanctions against Iran. In addition, the EU
terminated some of its sanction and lifted the sanctions
imposed by previous U.N. Security Council resolutions
concerning the nuclear issues of Iran, in accordance with
U.N. Security Council Resolution 2231.


40 The major nuclear-related restrictions on Iran in the JCPOA include the following: with regard to uranium enrichment, limiting the number of centrifuges for uranium enrichment to 5,060 or less, keeping the
level of uranium enrichment at up to 3.67%, and restricting Iran’s enriched uranium stockpile to 300 kg; and with regard to plutonium production, redesigning and rebuilding the Arak heavy water reactor to
not produce weapons grade plutonium and shipping spent fuel out of Iran, and not engaging in reprocessing spent fuel including R&D and not constructing reprocessing facilities. According to U.S. Secretary
of State Kerry, with this agreement Iran’s breakout time (the time it takes to manufacture nuclear fuel for a single nuclear weapon) will be extended from 90 days or less before the JCPOA to a year or more.


-----

**Section 3** **Maritime Trends**


Maritime security is of critical importance to Japan, a
maritime nation surrounded by sea. For example, Japan
relies on sea transport to import energy resources.
Accordingly, ensuring secure sea lanes is vital for the
survival of the nation. Securing the stable use of one

**1 Trends Related to the “Principle of the Freedom of the High Seas” in the East and South China Seas**


The U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS)
provides for the principles of “freedom of navigation in
the high seas” and “freedom of overfl ight over the high
seas.”[2] Nevertheless, in the waters and airspace in the
periphery of Japan, especially the East and South China
Seas, it has become increasingly common for countries
to unilaterally assert their rights or take actions, based
on their unique assertions which are incompatible with
the existing international law and order. This has caused
situations of undue infringement upon such principles.
Numerous cases of acts which go against the principle
of freedom of the high seas have been recently seen in the
East China Sea. In March and April 2011 and in April
2012, Chinese helicopters and other aircraft apparently
of the State Oceanic Administration (SOA) fl ew close to
Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force (MSDF) destroyers
which were engaged in monitoring and surveillance in
the East China Sea. In January 2013, a Chinese naval
vessel directed its fi re-control radar at a MSDF destroyer
navigating in the East China Sea and is suspected to have
directed fi re-control radar at a helicopter carried onboard
a MSDF destroyer. In May and June 2014, fi ghters of
the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) of China fl ew
abnormally close to aircraft of the MSDF and of the Japan
Air Self-Defense Force which were fl ying over the East
China Sea. In June 2016, a Chinese fi ghter is speculated
to have conducted a dangerous act by approaching a U.S.
Air Force reconnaissance aircraft at a high speed over the
East China Sea.
On November 23, 2013, the Chinese government
declared “the East China Sea Air Defense Identifi cation
Zone (ADIZ)” including the Senkaku Islands as if they


of the global commons, the “seas,” is a key security
issue for the international community. In recent years,
maritime trends in the countries concerned are drawing
attention, including their compliance with relevant
international norms.[1]

were a part of China’s “territory.” China’s Ministry of
National Defense announced that it would enforce rules
it set on any aircraft fl ying in the ADIZ and that the PLA
would take “defensive emergency measures” if aircraft
does not follow the instructed procedures. Japan is deeply
concerned about such measures, which are profoundly
dangerous acts that unilaterally change the status quo in
the East China Sea, escalating the situation, and that may
cause unintended consequences in the East China Sea.
Furthermore, the measures unduly infringe the freedom
of overfl ight over the high seas. Japan is demanding China
to revoke any measures that could go against the principle
of freedom of overfl ight over the high seas. The United
States, the Republic of Korea (ROK), Australia, and the
EU have expressed concern about China’s establishment
of such zone.
Such actions have been seen in the South China
Sea. In March 2009, Chinese ships, including a naval
vessel, a maritime research ship of the SOA, a Bureau
of Maritime Fisheries’ patrol ship, and fi shing vessels,
approached a U.S. Navy acoustic research ship operating
in the South China Sea to obstruct its operations. In
addition, in December 2013, a Chinese naval vessel
cut across the bow of a U.S. Navy cruiser operating in
the South China Sea at point blank range. In August
2014, a Chinese fi ghter is speculated to have fl own
abnormally close to and obstructed a U.S. Navy patrol
aircraft over the South China Sea. In May 2016, Chinese
fi ghters are speculated to have fl own abnormally close
to a reconnaissance aircraft of the U.S. Navy over the
South China Sea.[3] These cases go against the principles
of freedom of navigation in the high seas and freedom


For example, the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) comprehensively sets forth the rights and obligations under international law related to the use and development of the oceans and their
regulations. UNCLOS was adopted in 1982 and entered into force in 1994 (Japan ratified it in 1996).

UNCLOS, Article 87, Paragraph 1 (a) and (b).

Some analysts have noted that these incidents occur as many countries including the United States regard an exclusive economic zone (EEZ) as being equivalent to the high seas based on UNCLOS from the
perspective of freedom of navigation, whereas China views EEZs as areas similar to territorial waters. It is considered that the United States respects the provisions of UNCLOS while it has not concluded the


-----

of overfl ight over the high seas, and are dangerous acts
that could cause unintended consequences.[4]
Additionally, China, on the grounds of the so-called
“nine-dash line”[5] whose validity under international
law has been described as ambiguous, has asserted
sovereignty over the Spratly Islands, among other areas,
and friction between China and ASEAN member states
and other countries has surfaced over issues including
sovereignty. Against this backdrop, China went ahead
with land reclamation on multiple features on a rapid
and massive scale, as well as proceeded to develop bases
such as runways, harbors, and radar facilities without
ruling out their use for military purposes. Furthermore,
Chinese government vessels have obstructed fi shing and
other vessels of countries approaching the features, etc.
by fi ring warning shots and water cannons at the vessels.
Claimants as well as the international community
including the United States have repeatedly said they are
deeply concerned about China’s unilateral changes of the
status quo, further advancement of efforts to create a fait
accompli, and assertive and dangerous acts that could
cause unintended consequences.
Despite these numerous acts that could pose risks
to securing the stable use of oceans, in recent years
progress has been made on efforts to avert and prevent
unintended consequences in the sea. In April 2014,
navies of participating countries of the Western Pacifi c
Naval Symposium (WPNS), including Japan, the United
States, and China, reached agreement on the Code for

**2 Trends in the Arctic Ocean**


The Arctic Ocean, which covers most of the Arctic
Region, borders Russia, the United States, Canada,
Denmark, and Norway.[8]
In recent years, decrease in sea ice has increased
the potential for utilization of the Northern Sea Route
and exploration of natural resources. For these reasons,
the Arctic states have been more proactively promoting
efforts to secure their interests in resource development


Unplanned Encounters at Sea (CUES).[6] CUES sets forth
a code of conduct for unexpected encounters by vessels
or aircraft of the navies of each country. In November
2014, the United States and China agreed on measures
pertaining to mutual notifi cation of military activities, as
well as on rules of behavior to avert collisions in waters
and airspace in accordance with UNCLOS, CUES, and
other frameworks. In September 2015, the two countries
announced an agreement concerning an additional annex
stipulating rules of behavior to avert air encounters. In
addition, the Fourth Joint Working Group Consultation
and the Fifth Joint Working Group Consultation were held
in January and June 2015, respectively, with a view to
implementing the “Maritime and Aerial Communication
Mechanism between Japan-China Defense Authorities”[7]
for averting incidental collisions between Japan and
China. Additionally, the two countries confi rmed that they
would aim to quickly make this mechanism operational
at the Japan-China Defense Ministerial Meeting on the
margins of the Third ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting
plus (ADMM Plus) held in Malaysia in November 2015.
It is strongly hoped that these initiatives designed to avert
and prevent unintended consequences in the seas and
skies will supplement the existing international law and
order, and that the countries concerned, including China,
refrain from unilateral actions that heighten tension and
act on the basis of the principle of the “rule of law.”

See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 3 (China); Part I, Chapter 2, Section 6
(Southeast Asia)

and use of the sea route. On the other hand, there are
unresolved issues among the Arctic states over the
demarcation of maritime boundaries based on UNCLOS
and extension of the continental shelf. It is considered
that some of these Arctic states including Russia are
promoting efforts to deploy new military capabilities
for the purpose of securing their interests and defending
their territories. Traditionally, the Arctic Ocean has been


According to the written testimony of U.S. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Asian and Pacifi c Security Affairs David Shear before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations dated May 13, 2015, the United
States has enhanced its presence in and around the South China Sea to protect U.S. national interests in the South China Sea, such as peaceful resolution of disputes, freedom of navigation in the high seas,
and freedom of overfl ight over the high seas. For example, U.S. military forces are conducting port calls of naval vessels, carrying out ISR activities, and exercising with neighboring countries. In addition, the
U.S. Forces conduct the Freedom of Navigation Operations to counter China’s excessive claims over maritime interests. See Paragraph 3 of this section for more details (Maritime Security Efforts of Countries).

See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 6-4 (Trends concerning Sovereignty and Other Issues over the South China Sea).

CUES sets forth safety procedures and notifi cation methods for unplanned encounters at sea by the naval vessels and air force aircraft of participating countries of the WPNS. CUES is not legally binding and
does not supersede the annexes of the Convention on International Civil Aviation and other international treaties.

During the Fourth Joint Working Group Consultation, the two sides agreed to coordinate on the mechanism’s naming to “Maritime and Aerial Communication Mechanism” in order to clarify its coverage of aircraft.

The Arctic Region is the area north of the latitude line of 66 degrees 33 minutes north latitude. There are eight countries in the Arctic Region – the fi ve countries that border the Arctic Ocean and Finland, Sweden,
and Iceland that do not border it. In 1996, the Arctic Council was established, which aims to promote cooperation, coordination, and interaction among the Arctic states, with the involvement of the indigenous


-----

used for the deployment of strategic nuclear forces and as
their transit route. In addition, due to the decrease of sea
ice, ships can navigate for a longer period of time and in
wider areas than before. In this regard, the region could
be used for deploying maritime forces or maneuvering
military forces using the maritime transport capabilities
of military forces in the future. Therefore, strategic
importance of the region is increasing.
In the Russian Federation’s National Security
Strategy revised in December 2015, Russia continues
to maintain that Russia would secure its interests in
resource development and use of the sea route. Russia
has been actively involved with the Arctic, underpinned
by Russia’s possession of the largest exclusive economic
zone (EEZ) among the coastal states, the potential
abundance of resources in the waters of the Arctic
Ocean, the geographic and security importance of the
Northern Sea Route located off the coast of Russia, and
Russia’s military superiority ensured by the deployment
of military forces directly facing the Arctic Ocean coast.[9]
In the Arctic Strategy released by the U.S. DoD in 2013,
the United States expresses its desire for the Arctic to
become a secure and stable region where U.S. national
interests are safeguarded, the U.S. homeland is protected,
and nations work cooperatively to address challenges. In
March 2016, the U.S. Navy hosted Ice Exercise 2016, a
roughly fi ve-week exercise designed to conduct research,
tests, and evaluations of operational capabilities in the

**3 Maritime Security Efforts of Countries**


With regard to oceans, not only for economic development
but also for the national security of each country, it has
become even more important to promote appropriate rulemaking and to make concerted efforts by the international
community to address risks and ensure freedom of
navigation while respecting such rules. “Open and Stable
Seas” constitute the basis for peace and prosperity of the
international community as a whole. In this regard, each
state has been tackling on its own or with others various
issues including piracy, unidentifi ed vessels, illegal
dumping, contraband, human smuggling, maritime
disasters, and the removal of hazardous substances, for
maintaining the stability of sea lanes of communication.


Arctic. The United Kingdom, Canada, and Norway also
participated in the exercise.[10]
Aside from coastal states in the Arctic Ocean, 12
countries including Japan and China have observer status
in the Arctic Council. Notably, China has shown active
involvement in the Arctic Ocean, deploying the polar
research vessel Xue Long to the Arctic Ocean for six
times since 1999.[11] In August 2015, it was confi rmed for
the fi rst time that fi ve Chinese naval vessels sailed in the
Bering Sea between the Arctic Ocean and the Pacifi c.
Focus will be on whether or not such activities would have
any relation to the Chinese Navy’s future advancements
into the Arctic Ocean.

**1**

-   United States


The U.S. National Security Strategy unveiled in February
2015 presents that the United States has an enduring
interest in freedom of navigation and the safety and
sustainability of the maritime environment, and therefore,
would maintain the capability to ensure the free fl ow of
commerce, to respond quickly to those in need, and to
deter those who might contemplate aggression. Since
around May 2015, the United States has repeatedly
expressed concerns over China’s reclamation of features
in the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea, underpinned
by the U.S. position of supporting the principles of rule


9 See Part I, Chapter 1, Section 4 “Russia” regarding the Northern Joint Strategic Command in charge of the Arctic, the deployment and training of the Northern Fleet vessels, the development of military facilities,
strategic patrols by strategic nuclear submarines, patrol fl ights by long-range bombers, and large-scale exercises and trainings in the Arctic.

10 Since 1958, the U.S. Forces have conducted over 26 exercises in the Arctic involving submarines (as of March 2016). As regards activities of other coastal nations, Canada states that the Arctic is a priority
region under its policies in Canada’s Northern Strategy (released in 2009), and every summer since 2007, has conducted the Operation NANOOK joint exercise among the Navy, Army, Air Force, and Special
Operations Forces Command designed to strengthen the capabilities of the Canadian Armed Forces in the Arctic. Denmark and Norway have also developed the Kingdom of Denmark Strategy for the Arctic
2011-2020 (released in 2011) and the Norwegian Government’s High North Strategy (released in 2006), respectively, which outline their stances of attaching importance to the Arctic, including the perspective
of security.

11 In 2012, Xue Long became the fi rst polar research vessel to sail across the Arctic Ocean. In 2013, a cargo vessel Yong Sheng became the fi rst Chinese commercial ship to cross the Arctic Ocean. Currently,


-----

of law and freedom of navigation.[12] In August 2015,
the DoD released the Asia-Pacific Maritime Security
Strategy, indicating U.S. intentions to have the U.S.
Pacific Command maintain a robust presence in and
around the South China Sea and engage in wide-ranging
activities including trainings, exercises, and port calls
with allies and partners, and to have the U.S. Navy, U.S.
Air Force, and U.S. Coast Guard conduct Freedom of
Navigation operations[13] as part of routine activities.
Based on this policy, in order to counter excessive
claims over maritime interests asserted by coastal states
in the South China Sea, the United States sent the U.S.
Navy missile destroyer USS Lassen to navigate within
12 nautical miles of Subi Reef of the Spratly Islands in
October 2015. In January 2016, the United States sent
the U.S. Navy missile destroyer USS Curtis Wilbur to
navigate within 12 nautical miles of Triton Island of
the Paracel Islands, and in May 2016, sent the U.S.
Navy missile destroyer USS William P. Lawrence to
navigate within 12 nautical miles of Fiery Cross Reef
of the Spratly Islands. In this manner, the United States
has consistently made clear that it would continue its
Freedom of Navigation operations.
Additionally, the United States deems that its safety
and economic security depend upon the secure use of
the world’s oceans, and that the United States has a vital
interest in maritime security. Based on this recognition,
the United States leads the Combined Maritime Forces
(CMF)[14] to counter piracy and advance maritime safety,
including tackling terrorism in waters surrounding the
Middle East and Africa, such as the Gulf of Aden, the
Persian Gulf, and the Indian Ocean. In waters surrounding
Central America, the United States conducts operations
to counter illicit trafficking, primarily drug trafficking
with European and Western Hemisphere countries.[15] The
United States thus dispatches vessels to the various sea
areas of the world and takes actions to combat piracy,
organized crime, terrorism, and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).



- 2  NATO

NATO has the Standing NATO Maritime Groups, which
are a multinational, integrated force made up of vessels
from member countries. Through routine exercises and
maintenance of rapid deployment capability, NATO has
provided deterrence in the sea to member countries. In
response to the threat of piracy, NATO has deployed
vessels of the Standing NATO Maritime Groups to off
the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of Aden. In Operation
Ocean Shield that NATO has been conducting since
August 2009, NATO’s mission is to carry out counterpiracy activities by boat, as well as to help countries that
requested it build up their capacities to counter piracy.
NATO also identifies acts of terrorism as a threat to its
member countries. Following the 2001 terrorist attacks
in the United States, NATO has conducted Operation
Active Endeavour since October 2001 and has been
implementing counter-terrorism activities, including
maritime patrols in the Mediterranean Sea, as part of
the collective defense pursuant to Article 5 of the North
Atlantic Treaty. Furthermore, in February 2016, NATO
decided to deploy the Standing NATO Maritime Groups
to the Aegean Sea to deal with the large influx of refugees
and migrants, and notifies information regarding refugee
boats to Greek and Turkish authorities.
In January 2011, NATO unveiled the Alliance
Maritime Strategy. The advancement of globalization
has facilitated terrorism and the proliferation of WMDs.
Based on this recognition, the Strategy outlines NATO’s
intention to carry out efforts to ensure its contribution
to deterrence, crisis management, collective defense,
maritime security, among other areas. These efforts
include: (1) deepening cooperative relations with
appropriate countries and international actors, such
as the EU and the United Nations; and (2) developing
fully capable, flexible, rapidly deployable, interoperable,
and sustainable maritime forces. The Wales Summit
Declaration adopted at the NATO Summit in September


12 The United States has expressed concerns about China’s land reclamation in the South China Sea and repeatedly hinted at the possibility of conducting a Freedom of Navigation Operation. For example, the
U.S. DoD’s “Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2015” unveiled in May 2015 referred to China’s land reclamation in the Spratly Islands.
Furthermore, in May 2015, Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter expressed concerns about the pace and scope of land reclamation activities in the South China Sea, and stated that the United States would sail,
fly, and operate wherever international law allows to protect freedom of navigation and overflight. In September 2015, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Asian and Pacific Security Affairs David Shear testified
at a Congress hearing that the United States was considering conducting Freedom of Navigation Operations. In the same month, President Obama stated at his press conference following talks with President
Xi Jinping that “the United States will continue to sail, fly, and operate anywhere that international law allows.”

13 The Freedom of Navigation Operations are operational activities conducted by the U.S. Forces for countering excessive claims over maritime interests asserted by coastal states to protect the rights, freedoms,
and uses of the sea and airspace guaranteed to all states under international law. It is deemed that the Operations have been conducted on an ongoing basis since 1979.

14 CMF is a multinational force, which operates to promote maritime security, stability, and prosperity, under the U.S. Central Command. Forces from 31 countries participate in CMF, and the CMF Commander
concurrently serves as the Commander of the U.S. Fifth Fleet. CMF is comprised of three combined task forces: Combined Task Force 150 (CTF-150), which is tasked with maritime security operations;
Combined Task Force 151 (CTF-151) with counter piracy operations; and Combined Task Force 152 (CTF-152) with maritime security operations in the Persian Gulf. The Japan Self-Defense Forces deploy units
to CTF-151.

15 Fourteen European and Western Hemisphere countries, including the United States, conduct Operation Martillo to combat illicit trafficking, including the trafficking of narcotics, precursor chemicals, bulk cash,
and weapons, as well as organized crime along the sea areas surrounding Central America. From the U.S. Forces, Joint Interagency Task Force South under the U.S. Southern Command carries out the operation.


-----

2014 states that NATO would continue to intensify and
expand its implementation of the measures outlined in the
Strategy, and further enhance the Alliance’s effectiveness
in the maritime domain.

- 3  EU


security is synonymous with the advancement and
protection of the United Kingdom’s national interests,
at home and abroad. Based on this recognition, the
Strategy identifies objectives, such as promoting a
secure international maritime domain and upholding
international maritime norms, developing the maritime
governance capacity and capabilities of states in areas of
strategic maritime importance, and assuring the security
of vital maritime trade and energy transportation routes.
To these ends, the Strategy lists measures, including: (1)
attain a comprehensive understanding of the maritime
domain through the use of information resources across
departments and agencies, among other means; (2) work
closely with maritime partners through championing
regional initiatives as a proponent of freedom of
navigation; (3) share information with partners and
support capacity-building efforts in areas of strategic
importance; and (4) coordinate joint operations between
maritime departments and agencies and seek to procure
common equipment. In the NSS-SDSR2015[19] released in
November 2015, it was decided that the United Kingdom
would introduce nine P-8 patrol aircraft to strengthen
maritime patrol capabilities.

- 5  France


With many of its member states facing the ocean, the
EU has high maritime traffic and economic activity in
the sea. To date, the EU has actively engaged in counterpiracy activities off the coast of Somalia and in the
Gulf of Aden in order to maintain maritime stability.[16]
In June 2014, the European Council adopted the EU
Maritime Security Strategy, for purposes including
presenting a framework for the development of the
maritime policies of EU member states and protecting
the strategic maritime interests of the countries. The
Strategy construes piracy, terrorism, the proliferation of
WMDs, and restrictions to the freedom of navigation
as threats. It sets forth comprehensive, cross-sectoral,
coherent, and efficient approaches to maritime security,
including: (1) promote rules-based good governance
at sea; (2) promote coordination amongst member
states and with other international organizations and
partners; and (3) enhance the role of the EU as an actor
that conducts conflict prevention, crisis response, and
management of maritime interests.

- 4  United Kingdom


France, with its many overseas territories, is deemed to
have the second largest EEZ in the world. About 62%
of this EEZ is in the Pacific region, and about 24% is
in the Indian Ocean. France attaches importance to its
maritime strategy in the Asia-Pacific, identifying itself
as “a sovereign power and a player in the security of
the Indian Ocean and the Pacific” in the White Paper
on Defence and National Security. The French Armed
Forces station their units in French territories, including
Polynesia and New Caledonia, and deploy frigates,
landing ships, and other equipment. “France and
Security in the Asia-Pacific,” which the Ministry of
Defense released in April 2014, underscores that France
is a maritime nation and has participated in various
regional cooperation forums on maritime issues.[20] It then
outlines France’s intention to build strong partnership
relations with Asia-Pacific countries.[21]


The United Kingdom is an island nation surrounded by
sea, and has a heritage of engaging actively in maritime
activities, including maritime trade. Furthermore, the
United Kingdom has many overseas territories and has
an EEZ which extends about 25 times the U.K. terrestrial
extent. Due to these factors, the United Kingdom
proactively deploys its forces to NATO-and EU-led
multinational forces[17] in order to ensure the maritime
security of the sea areas surrounding the United Kingdom,
including its overseas territories, and by extension, the
seas of its neighboring countries.
In May 2014, the U.K. government released the
U.K. National Strategy for Maritime Security.[18] The
United Kingdom considers that ensuring maritime


16 The EU has conducted the counter-piracy operation Operation Atalanta in this sea area, which became the EU’s first maritime mission, since December 2008. Vessels and aircraft that countries deploy escort
ships, conduct patrols in these waters, among other activities.

17 The United Kingdom rotationally deploys forces to Operation Ocean Shield organized by NATO and Operation Atalanta organized by the EU. The headquarters of both operations are located at the Northwood
Maritime Command Headquarters in the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom also deploys forces to CMF-led operations.

18 This Strategy is a strategy document released jointly by four departments: the Foreign and Commonwealth Office; the Home Office; the Ministry of Defence; and the Department for Transport.

19 See Chapter 1, Section 8-5 regarding the NSS-SDSR2015.

20 France has actively taken part in such forums as the IISS Asia Security Summit (Shangri-La Dialogue), the Indian Ocean Naval Symposium, and the South Pacific Defence Ministers’ Meeting.

21 For example, France and India have established a strategic partnership. They conduct joint exercises among their land, naval, and air forces, respectively, and have equipment cooperation. In addition, France


-----

the military in Djibouti. Additionally, China supports
the construction of port infrastructure in Indian Ocean
countries. In this regard, China is likely aiming to build
bases for conducting operations in the Indian Ocean and
other areas.
Meanwhile, in the South China Sea, China and
ASEAN member states have conflicting assertions over
the sovereignty of such areas as the Spratly Islands[27]
and the Paracel Islands.[28] In recent years, the countries
concerned, including China, have stepped up their
activities to assert their sovereignty. Developments
associated with the freedom of navigation in the sea have
been subject to increasing international concern.

- 8  Southeast Asia



- 6  Australia


Australia’s Defence White Paper unveiled in 2016
considers the security of sea lanes as a strategic defense
interest, along with the security and resilience of
Australia. Especially as Australia depends on maritime
trade with Southeast Asia and maritime trade transiting
Southeast Asia, Australia sees a need to ensure the
security of trade routes in the country’s proximate
waters and in Southeast Asia.
Based on this policy, the Australian Defence Force
(ADF) conducts patrol activities called “Operation
Gateway” in the North Indian Ocean and the South China
Sea, which includes establishing a base at the Butterworth
airbase in Malaysia.[22] The ADF also engages in expanding
naval cooperation with India, providing patrol vessels to
South Pacific countries,[23] and conducting coastal patrols
by mobilizing ADF assets.

- 7  China


Southeast Asia is located at the crossroads of traffic,
linking the Pacific and the Indian Oceans, such as the
Straits of Malacca and the South China Sea. This region,
however, has maritime security issues, including disputes
over the sovereignty of the South China Sea and piracy.
In 2002, ASEAN and China signed the Declaration
on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC)[29]
aimed at peacefully setting the issues over the South
China Sea. Currently, official consultations are held with
a view to establishing the Code of the Conduct of Parties
in the South China Sea (COC). The COC is deemed to
contain more specific content than the DOC and be legally
binding. In addition, there have been developments
related to settling issues through arbitral proceedings set
out in UNCLOS.
Furthermore, there have been developments related
to settling issues through arbitral proceedings set out in
UNCLOS. In January 2013, the Philippines instituted
arbitral proceedings pursuant to UNCLOS for the dispute
between the Philippines and China over its assertions
and actions in the South China Sea, and the Philippines
presented oral arguments in July and November 2015.
The arbitral tribunal ruled that it has jurisdiction with
respect to the matters raised in some of the Philippines’
submissions, and in July 2016, rendered a final award in


China also relies on sea transport for over 90% of its trade
cargo.[24] Accordingly, ensuring the security of China’s sea
lanes constitutes a critical part of the “basic safeguards for
ensuring sustainable economic and social development,”[25]
one of China’s “core interests.” Therefore, as a member
of the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating
Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia
(ReCAAP),[26] China shares information and participates
in cooperative arrangements related to piracy in Southeast
Asia. Since December 2008, China has deployed naval
vessels to off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of Aden
and has been involved in international efforts to repress
piracy. Through such activities, China has contributed
to ensuring maritime security. China’s commitment to
ensuring the security of its sea lanes is also considered
to be connected to the Chinese Navy’s objective of
building up capacity for continuous operations in more
distant waters. In particular, China and Djibouti, a
country facing the Gulf of Aden, have agreed that China
would build facilities for providing logistics support to


22 In December 2015, the Australian Department of Defence admitted that as part of these activities, Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) aircraft conducted patrol activities in the South China Sea from November
to December. This was preceded by the BBC’s release of the content of the radio communications that allegedly took place between RAAF aircraft and China’s Navy, claiming that Australia was carrying out
“freedom of navigation” flights in the South China Sea.

23 See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 5-3-4.

24 According to the website of the Central People’s Government of China, over 90% of China’s export and import cargo, such as crude oil, iron ore, food, and container, are transported by sea.

25 Then State Councilor Dai Bingguo, “China will unswervingly follow path of peaceful development” (December 7, 2010, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China website).

26 As of May 2016, the contracting parties to ReCAAP are the following 20 countries: Australia; Bangladesh; Brunei; Cambodia; China; Denmark; India; Japan; the ROK; Laos; Myanmar; the Netherlands; Norway;
the Philippines; Singapore; Sri Lanka; Thailand; United Kingdom; United States; and Vietnam.

27 The area surrounding the Spratly Islands is expected to have offshore resources such as oil and natural gas. In addition, the area is a maritime transport hub and is blessed with rich fishery resources.

28 China, Taiwan, Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Brunei assert sovereignty over the Spratly Islands. China, Taiwan, and Vietnam assert sovereignty over the Paracel Islands.


-----

which nearly all of the Philippines’ submissions were
ruled in favor of the Philippines.[30] This award will be
legally binding on both parties, and will be final and
without appeal. Moreover, Vietnam, another claimant,
has requested the tribunal to take into consideration
Vietnam’s assertions over the South China Sea. In this
regard, there has been a trend among some countries
concerned to work towards a peaceful solution of the
issue in accordance with international law.


In the Southeast Asia region, multilateral cooperation
has also made progress to deal with wide-ranging security
issues, including piracy and other transnational issues.
With regard to counter-piracy measures, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand conduct the Malacca
Strait Patrols.[31] Efforts have also been under way to share
information related to piracy and build a cooperation
arrangement in accordance with ReCAAP.

See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 6-4 (Trends concerning Sovereignty and
Other Issues over the South China Sea)


30 See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 6-4, Footnote 52.

31 The Malacca Strait Patrols are comprised of: the Malacca Strait Sea Patrols which commenced in 2004 by the navies of Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore to monitor piracy and other activities in the Malacca

-----

**Section 4** **Outer Space and Security**


**1 Outer Space and Security**


Nearly 60 years have passed since a satellite was launched
into outer space for the fi rst time in the history of mankind.
In recent years, technology leveraging outer space has
been applied to various areas. No state is allowed to own
outer space, and it is freely available to all nations. Major
countries thus make proactive efforts to use outer space.[1]
For example, meteorological and observation satellites
are used to observe weather as well as land and waters;
communication and broadcasting satellites are used for
the Internet and broadcasting; and positioning satellites
are used to navigate aircrafts and ships. These satellites
have widely prevailed in social, economic, scientifi c, and
other areas as essential infrastructure for the public and
private sectors.
In major countries, military forces are actively
involved in outer space activities and utilize a variety of
satellites. There is no concept of national borders in outer
space, meaning that the utilization of satellites enables
the observation of, communication at, and positioning
on any area on Earth. Thus, major countries make efforts
to enhance the capabilities of a variety of satellites
and launch them for the purpose of enhancing C[4]ISR
functions.[2] Such satellites include imagery reconnaissance
satellites reconnoitering military facilities and targets,
satellites gathering radio wave information for military
communications, communication satellites for military
communication, and positioning satellites for navigating
naval vessels and aircraft and enhancing the precision of
weapons systems.
On the other hand, in January 2007, China conducted
a test to destroy its aging satellite with a ground-launched
missile. The resulting space debris[3] spread across the
satellite’s orbit, and came to be seen as a threat against


space assets such as satellites owned by countries.
Furthermore, countries including China and Russia are
thought to also be developing anti-satellite weapons
(ASAT) that do not directly hit and destroy a satellite by
a missile, creating less space debris. For example, it has
been noted that ASATs under development include an
ASAT that approaches the target satellite using a “killer
satellite” and utilizes a robot arm to capture the target
satellite to disable its functions, as well as an ASAT that
disables the functions of the target satellite by using a
jammer to interfere with communications between the
target satellite and the ground station.
Against this backdrop, since existing frameworks,
including the Outer Space Treaty that prescribes the
exploration and use of outer space, do not have provisions
on avoiding the destruction of space objects and actions
triggering space debris, international efforts have been
under way recently for the creation of the International
Code of Conduct for Outer Space Activities[4] proposed by
the EU and the guidelines for “Long-term Sustainability
of Outer Space Activities”[5] of the Scientifi c and Technical
Subcommittee of the United Nations Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS) which address
such matters. Moreover, countries are working on the
Space Situational Awareness (SSA)[6] by monitoring
the impact of accelerated solar activity on satellites,
electronic equipment on Earth and threats caused by
meteors reaching Earth, in addition to threats posed by
anti-satellite weapons and space debris to space assets.
As the above illustrates, the risk to the stable use
of outer space has become one of the critical security
challenges countries face.

See>> Part III, Chapter 1, Section 2-6 (Responses in Space)


The Outer Space Treaty (The Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, Including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies) that came into force in October
1967 defi nes such matters as the use of the Moon and other celestial bodies for peaceful purposes, the freedom in principle of exploration and use of outer space, and the prohibition of ownership. However,
no clear international agreement has been reached on the defi nition of outer space, though according to one of the concepts, outer space is considered space located 100 km or further away from the Earth’s
surface.

The term “C[4]ISR” stands for command, control, communication, computer, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance. The 1991 Gulf War is considered “the fi rst high-tech war conducted in outer space in
the history of mankind.”

Unnecessary artifacts orbiting around the Earth, including satellites no longer in use, upper stages of launch vehicles, parts, and fragments.

In 2008, the EU formulated a draft and started bilateral discussions with major countries. Discussions have been made multilateral since 2012 and have been ongoing with a view towards its adoption.

In 2007, the chairperson of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (U.N. COPUOS) proposed to discuss “the long-term sustainability of outer space activities” in relation to civil space
activities, for the purpose of defi ning risk reduction for long-term sustainable activities and equal access to outer space. Based on this proposal, the Scientifi c and Technical Subcommittee of U.N. COPUOS
set up a working group, which carries out discussions every year for establishing the guidelines. However, a fi nal agreement has not been reached due to political disputes and a divergence of views over the
adoption method of the guidelines.

In August 2015, Gen. John E. Hyten, Commander of the U.S. Air Force Space Command, stated, “Total number that we track is about 23,000 objects...we expect to be tracking 250,000 to 500,000 objects ii


-----

**2 Trends in the Use of Space by Countries for Security Objectives**



- 1  United States

The United States launched its fi rst satellite, Explorer
1, in January 1958, following the satellite launches by
the former Soviet Union. The country has since then
proceeded with a variety of space activities in fi elds
including military, science, and resource exploration,
such as launching the world’s fi rst reconnaissance satellite
and landing on the Moon. Today, the United States is the
world’s leading space power. The U.S. Forces clearly
recognize the importance of outer space for their actions,
and in this regard, actively utilize outer space for security
purposes. In June 2010, the United States released the
National Space Policy that presents the country’s basic
guidelines for space policy, including its objectives and
principles. It specifi ed guidelines on security space, civil
space, commercial space, and international cooperation,
among other sectors. In February 2011, the country also
released the National Security Space Strategy (NSSS) as
the security guideline regarding outer space, presenting the
view that the current and future outer space environment is
driven by three trends: (1) congestion caused by artifi cial
objects including satellites; (2) contestation by potential
adversaries; and (3) increasing competition with other
countries.[7] Based on these strategic guidelines, the U.S.
Department of Defense (DoD) is presently undertaking
efforts to identify threatening activities in outer space
and increase the survivability of U.S. space systems to
achieve the goal of maintaining and strengthening U.S.
space superiority for security purposes, recognizing that
the United States needs to prepare for the possibility of
confl ict extending into outer space.[8]
From an organizational perspective, the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) is
responsible for non-military space development in the
United States, while the U.S. DoD works on space
development from a national security perspective. Recently,
NASA and the U.S. Air Force announced cooperation in
areas such as aircraft design and materials development.
Major satellites used for military purposes include
satellites for imagery reconnaissance, early warning,


electronic / signals intelligence, communication, and
global positioning, and their operations are wide-ranging.

- 2  Russia


Russia’s space activities have been continuing since
the former Soviet Union era. The former Soviet Union
successively launched multiple satellites after it launched
the fi rst satellite in the history of mankind, Sputnik 1, in
October 1957, and had the largest number of launched
satellites in the world until the end of the collapse of
the former Soviet Union. The satellites included many
military satellites, which enabled the country to compete
against the United States for military expansion in outer
space. Russia’s space activities have declined since the
former Soviet Union collapsed in 1991. However, the
country has recently started to expand its activities once
again against the backdrop of its economic recovery.
Regarding the country’s trends in security, the
National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation,
approved in December 2015, states that the U.S.
deployment of weapons into outer space constitutes one of
the factors undermining global and regional stability. The
Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation, a document
created in February 2010 to specifi cally defi ne the
principles of the National Security Strategy in the military
fi eld,[9] mentions that securing supremacy in outer space is
one of the decisive factors in achieving the objectives of
its armed forces. It also states that the tasks of the armed
forces include providing timely warning to the Supreme
Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Russian
Federation of an air or space attack and deploying and
maintaining space systems supporting the activities of the
Russian Armed Forces. In addition, it refers to the need to
establish air-space defense organizations.
From an organizational perspective, the Roscosmos
State Corporation for Space Activities is in charge of
space activities related to Russia’s scientifi c and economic
areas, while the Russian Ministry of Defence is involved
in space activities for security purposes. The Russian


Based on this understanding, the NSSS identifi es that the U.S. strategic objectives for outer space are to: (1) strengthen safety, stability, and security in outer space; (2) maintain and enhance the strategic
national security advantages afforded to the United States by outer space; and (3) energize the space industrial base that supports U.S. national security. To meet these objectives, the NSSS states that the
country will pursue the strategic approaches of (1) promoting responsible, peaceful, and safe use of outer space, (2) providing improved U.S. outer space capabilities, (3) partnering with responsible nations,
international organizations, and commercial fi rms, (4) preventing and deterring aggression against space infrastructure that supports U.S. national security, and (5) preparing to defeat attacks and to operate in
a degraded environment.

For these efforts, the DoD’s FY2017 budget request related to space appropriated approximately US$7.1 billion, 1.4% more than the FY2016 approved budget. It is considered that, for example, next-generation
GPS systems and next-generation Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) communication satellites that were newly included in the development budget are not easily impacted by adversaries’ sabotage
activities.


-----

Aerospace Forces[10] conducts actual space activities
for military purposes, manages facilities for launching
satellites, among other activities.
Major satellites launched by Russia are satellites
for imagery reconnaissance, early warning, radio wave
information gathering, communication, positioning, and
others, all of which are presumed to be used for security
purposes. Currently, Russia is developing a new Angara
carrier launch vehicle,[11] along with building a new launch
site in Vostochny in the Far East.[12]

- 3  Europe


It is thought that in the future, “Galileo,” a satellite
positioning system planned by the EU and the ESA;[15]
“Copernicus,” a global environment and security
monitoring program;[16] and the Multinational Space-based
Imaging System (MUSIS),[17] a reconnaissance satellite
project implemented by the European Defence Agency
(EDA),[18] will be utilized for security in Europe.

- 4  China


China began work on space development in the 1950s. In
April 1970, the county launched its first satellite “Dong
Fang Hong I,” mounted on the transportation launch
vehicle “Long March 1,” using technology enhanced
through its missile development.
China has thus far conducted activities such as
manned spaceflight and lunar rover launches. It is
speculated that China’s space development is intended to
enhance national prestige and develop space resources.
The National Medium- and Long-Term Program for
Science and Technology Development published by the


Regarding European outer space activities, France
succeeded in launching its own satellite for the first
time in 1965, following the former Soviet Union and
the United States, and the United Kingdom succeeded
in launching its own satellite for the first time in 1971.
Italy and Germany used launch vehicles developed by
the United States to own satellites in December 1964 and
July 1965, respectively. On the other hand, the European
Space Agency (ESA)[13] Convention signed in May 1975
established the ESA, which launched a satellite in 1979.
In Europe, the EU, the ESA, and European countries
are promoting their own unique space activities and are
helping each other to implement space activities.[14]
The ESA signed a “framework agreement” with the
EU in May 2004 to specify that they will collaborate
to proceed with space development and hold regular
minister-level council meetings. The joint council meeting
held by the ESA and the EU in May 2007 approved
the “European Space Policy.” The “European Space
Policy” mentions improving synergy effects between
space activities for civil and defense purposes, and the
importance of implementing space activities based on
coordinated efforts among member states and ensuring
an internationally competitive space industry. The Policy
identifies security as one of its areas of priority.


10 According to the Russian Ministry of Defence, the Aerospace Forces were created by merging the Air Force and the Aerospace Defence Forces, and started performing its tasks in August 2015. The tasks of
the Aerospace Forces include: (1) providing focused combat command to the air force; (2) conducting aerial and missile defense; (3) launching and controlling satellites; (4) warning about missile attack; and
(5) monitoring of outer space.

11 In July 2014, the first launch of “Angara-1.2PP” was conducted successfully. In December 2014, “Angara-A5” successfully put a dummy satellite into orbit for the first time. The Angara launch vehicle is
considered as the first large launch vehicle that Russia developed after the collapse of the Soviet Union. It is expected that the vehicle will be launching commercial as well as military satellites.

12 The new launch site is being built to replace the Russian-leased Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, and Russia aims to have the site fully operational by 2020. The first launch vehicle was launched in April 2016.

13 The ESA was established in May 1975 based on the ESA Convention targeting to establish a single European space organization focusing on the peaceful use of space research, technology, and application
areas. The organization was formally established in October 1980.

14 In September 2000, the European Commission (EC) and the ESA created the European Strategy for Space that committed to pursuing Europe’s coherent and effective space activities. The strategy envisioned
that the EC would make political and strategic decisions on space policies and that ESA would function as the implementing organization. For the satellite positioning system “Galileo” currently in operation and
the environmental and security monitoring program “Copernicus,” the EU and ESA are complementing each other in carrying these projects forward, with the former mainly taking charge of the policy dimension
and the latter the technical dimension.

15 The launch of fully capable operational satellites began in 2014. This system consisting of 30 satellites in total is expected to start service by 2020. Galileo reportedly has 12 satellites in orbit as of January 2016.

16 New observation satellites called “Sentinels” are being launched to collect imagery necessary for conducting Earth observations. Sentinels are classified according to their purpose into 1 (all-weather satellite
that takes images of land and ocean), 2 (all-weather satellite capable of high-resolution land monitoring to provide imagery of vegetation, inland waterways, and coastal areas), and 3 (satellite measuring landand sea-surface temperature and topography). Two Sentinels are said to be in orbit as of January 2016.

17 The MUSIS was started by Belgium, Germany, Greece, France, Italy, and Spain. The organization was joined later by Poland in December 2010. This is a joint project succeeding such projects as “Helios 2” (a
French military reconnaissance satellite), “Pleiades” (a French Earth imaging satellite used for military and civilian purposes), “SAR-Lupe” (a German group of military radar satellites), and “COSMO-SkyMed”
(an Italian constellation of Earth observation satellites).


-----

State Council of China positions manned spaceflight,[19]
lunar exploration,[20] and high-resolution Earth observation
systems as specific critical projects in the aerospace area.
Along with these medium- and long-term plans, “China’s
Space Activities in 2011,” a space white paper published
by China in December 2011, clarifies the country’s
major challenges, policies, and international cooperation
projects for the coming five years and emphasizes the
peaceful use of space.
With regard to the organizational setup, the State
Administration for Science, Technology and Industry
for National Defense, under the Ministry of Industry
and Information Technology of the State Council,
oversees industries related to space, nuclear technology,
aviation, ships, and weapons. The China National Space
Administration enforces the administrative control of
the space area for civil and commercial purposes and
represents the Chinese government externally.
In the meantime, it is regarded that China is also
using space for information collection, communications,
and positioning for military purposes.[21] Recently, the Air
Force indicated its intention to make proactive use of
space.[22] Since September 2015, China has publicized a
series of its decisions on military reforms, and in January
2016, the establishment of the Strategic Support Force
was announced. While the details of the Force’s tasks and
organization have not been revealed, it is suggested that it
is in charge of outer space, cyber, and electronic warfare.
China’s defense white paper “China’s Military Strategy”
(May 2015) states that outer space is a commanding
height in strategic competition among all parties.
Meanwhile, China asserts that its activities in outer space
constitute “peaceful use of outer space,” and underscores
that China is “opposed [to] the weaponization of and
arms race in outer space, and [will take] an active part in
international space cooperation.” China also commits to


“[keeping] abreast of the dynamics of outer space, deal
with security threats and challenges in that domain, and
secure its space assets.”
In addition, China is developing new models of
its “Long March” carrier launch vehicle series,[23] and
completed a new launch site in Wenchang, Hainan
Province which became China’s fourth launch center.[24]
This launch center faces the ocean unlike China’s other
launch sites and is located furthest south. In this regard,
some observers note that the launch site allows launches
to be conducted with a high degree of freedom.[25] Carrier
launch vehicles are developed and manufactured by
Chinese state-owned enterprises, which are thought to
be also developing and manufacturing ballistic missiles.
It is expected that China will pursue space development
through close collaboration between the public sector,
military, and private sector.
Additionally, China is considered to have become
one of the space powers through investments, research and
development, and introduction of technologies from the
United States and other countries. It has been suggested
that China could threaten U.S. information superiority in
outer space in the future.[26] Moreover, China continues
to develop ASATs. In January 2007, China conducted a
test using a ground-launched missile that destroyed its
own satellite. In July 2014, China tested an anti-satellite
missile not involving the destruction of a satellite.[27] It is
also suggested that China is developing directed-energy
weapons,[28] including “killer satellites,” jammers, and
laser beams.

- 5  India


India’s space development promotes space programs
aimed at social and economic development in line with
the 5-year national plan. The country’s latest 12th Five

19 China launched “Tiangong-1,” a space laboratory, in September 2011 and succeeded in docking it with an unmanned spacecraft, “Shenzhou 8,” in November 2011 and with the manned spacecraft “Shenzhou
9” and “Shenzhou 10” in June 2012 and June 2013, respectively. In this regard, China is considered to have acquired the technologies needed for its space station construction project.

20 The State Administration for Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense landed the lunar explorer “Chang’e-3” on the moon in December 2013.

21 By December 2012, the BeiDou Navigation Satellite System officially started its services covering most of the Asia-Pacific region. It is reported that the BeiDou system has already started to be mounted on
navy vessels, government vessels belonging to maritime law enforcement agencies, fishing boats, among other vessels. BeiDou offers not only positioning services but also interactive short message features.
It is suggested that these features make it possible to centrally capture and share, in real time, the position and other data related to vessels of other countries that Chinese navy vessels have detected, and
improve information gathering capabilities on the ocean and other areas.

22 In April 2014, Xi Jinping, Chairman of the Central Military Commission, inspected an Air Force agency and made reference to building an air force that “integrates air and space capabilities and balances
offensive and defensive operations.”

23 In September 2015, China succeeded in its first launch of Long March-6 (for launching small satellites) and Long March-11 (for launching solid-fuel small satellites). Furthermore, China is developing Long
March-5 (for launching large satellites) and Long March-7 (for launching “Shenzhou”). It is deemed that China has plans to develop Long March-9 (for launching ultra-large satellites).

24 In September 2014, China announced that the launch center was already ready for launching vehicles. In June 2016, the first launch of Long March-7 was conducted successfully. China plans to conduct the
first launch of Long March-5 from this launch center in September or October 2016.

25 The launch center enables discarded stages of the launch vehicle, such as the first stage launch vehicle, to fall into sea rather than into Chinese or other countries’ territories. It is thus suggested that the launch
center eliminates the restrictions on launches. In addition, latitudes close to the equator at which a launch vehicle can take advantage of the force of the Earth’s rotation are generally considered favorable for
launches into a geostationary orbit and other launches.

26 According to the annual report of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission of November 2015.

27 The February 2016 “Worldwide Threat Assessment” of the U.S. Director of National Intelligence notes that in July 2014, China tested an anti-satellite missile not involving the destruction of a satellite. In addition,
it states that China has satellite jamming capabilities and is making progress on an anti-satellite system.

28 According to the U.S. DoD’s “Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China” of May 2015, China continues to develop a variety of capabilities, including l


-----

Year Plan[29] focuses on non-military projects including
communication, positioning, Earth observation (e.g.,
disaster monitoring, resource exploration, and weather
observation), transportation systems, space science, and
spinoff promotions.
The Indian Space Commission (ISC) determines
the country’s space policy under the leadership of
the Prime Minister and assumes responsibility for
preparing space development budgets and implementing
space development programs. The Department of
Space, managed by the ISC, oversees the Indian Space
Research Organisation (ISRO), which implements space
development policy, develops and launches launch
vehicles, and develops and manufactures satellites.
In the area of space development cooperation with
other countries, India and the United States, for example,
reached agreement on future space development
cooperation at the bilateral summit meeting in January
2015. The two countries are expected to cooperate on
SSA and other dimensions.
India reportedly launches remote sensing[30] satellites
also for security purposes. Additionally, the country plans
to launch positioning satellites,[31] implement planetary
explorations, and conduct manned spaceflight.[32]

- 6  Republic of Korea


promoted space development projects in accordance
with the Space Development Promotion Act (enacted
in May 2005).[33] The ROK carries out space activities
based on the three key plans it established in November
2013, namely: the “Mid- and Long-Term Plan for Space
Development (2014-2040),”[34] which plans to move up the
first launch of launch vehicles manufactured by the ROK[35]
to June 2020;[36] the “Space Technology Industrialization
Strategy,” which prompts the private sector to lead space
development; and the “Revision of the Korean Rocket
Development Plan,” which outlines the use of ROKmade launch vehicles and the ROK’s own development
of planetary and space exploration satellites and high
orbit satellites.
On the security front, the ROK’s Defense White Paper
published in December 2012 states that the ROK would
secure a space surveillance system and other mechanisms
for developing the Air Force into an aerospace force, and
establish a Satellite Surveillance Control Group in order
to secure air and space operational capabilities.
On the organizational front, the ROK has the
National Space Committee, which deliberates major
issues related to space development under the leadership
of the President; and the Korea Aerospace Research
Institute, which leads research and development as an
implementation agency. Furthermore, the Korea Agency
for Defense Development is engaged in the development
and use of various satellites.
Major satellites launched by the country include
imagery reconnaissance and communication satellites
launched using foreign launch vehicles.


The Republic of Korea (ROK) is considered to have
started full-scale space development by creating the first
“Mid- and Long-Term Basic Plan for Space Development
(1996-2015)” in 1996. In recent years, the country has


29 The 12th Five-Year Plan covers the period between April 2012 and March 2017.

30 Technology enabling the observation of the size, shape, and nature of an object from a distance without making physical contact with the object.

31 In April 2016, India succeeded in launching the seventh satellite constituting the Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS), which completed the deployment of the constellation.

32 In December 2014, the ISRO succeeded in the test launch of a large launch vehicle carrying an unmanned capsule.

33 The Act stipulates that the country create a mid- and long-term basic plan every five years and an execution plan for each fiscal year, and establishes the National Space Committee. Based on this Act, the
country established the “1st Basic Space Development Promotion Plan” and the “2nd Basic Space Development Promotion Plan” in June 2007 and December 2011, respectively.

34 This is a modified version of the “2nd Basic Space Development Promotion Plan.”

35 In January 2013, for the first time on its third attempt, the ROK successfully launched the “Naro” launch vehicle (KSLV-1) that was developed under a technical cooperation agreement with Russia.


-----

**Section 5** **Trends in Cyberspace**


**1 Cyberspace and Security**


Owing to the advancement of information and
communications technology (ICT) in recent years,
information and communications networks such as the
Internet have become essential components across all
facets of life. Meanwhile, cyber attacks[1] against critical
infrastructures, namely, information and communications
networks, have the potential to seriously impact the lives
of individuals.
Types of cyber attacks include functional interference,
data falsifi cation, and data theft caused by unauthorized
access to information and communications networks
or through the transmission of viruses via e-mail, as
well as functional impairment of the networks through
simultaneous transmission of large quantities of data.
Internet-related technologies are constantly evolving,
with cyber attacks[2] becoming more sophisticated and
skillful by the day.
For military forces, information and communications
form the foundation of command and control, which
extend from central command to ground-level forces. In
this regard, ICT advancements are further enhancing the

**2 Threats in Cyberspace**


Under such circumstances, cyber attacks have
frequently been carried out against the information and
communications networks of government organizations
and military forces of various countries.[4]


dependence of units on information and communications
networks. Furthermore, military forces rely on various
social infrastructures, including electricity, to execute
their missions. Accordingly, cyber attacks against such
social infrastructures could become a major impediment to
their missions. For this reason, cyber attacks are regarded
as an asymmetrical strategy capable of mitigating the
strengths of adversaries by exploiting the weaknesses
of an adversary’s forces. It is believed that many foreign
military forces are developing offensive capabilities in
cyberspace. In addition, actors attempting to cause harm
to nations, etc. have all realized that attacking through
cyberspace is often easier than attacking directly using
physical means.[3] Moreover, it is said that the information
and communications networks of countries are being
compromised for the purpose of gathering intelligence.
As more confi dential information begins to be stored in
cyberspace, cyber espionage through cyber attacks is
causing more serious damage.
As such, cybersecurity has become one of the most
important security issues for countries.

Some of these cyber attacks are said to involve
a range of organizations including China’s PLA,
intelligence agencies, security agencies, private hacker
groups, and companies.[5, 6] According to the defense white


The targets of cyber attacks are wide-ranging. Beginning with large targets, they range from global-level targets, including interstate targets, as well as nations and government institutions, local communities,
business communities and infrastructures, companies, and individuals. As such, it is said that measures to counter cyber attacks need to be optimal relative to the size of the target.

In the Japanese MOD’s “Toward Stable and Effective Use of Cyberspace” of September 2012, cyber attacks are characterized as follows: (1) diversity: cyber attacks involve diverse actors, methods, objectives,
and context; (2) anonymity: actors can easily conceal and disguise their identity; (3) stealth: some cyber attacks are diffi cult to identify and can take place without causing any realization of damage; (4) offensive
dominance: attack tools are easy to acquire depending on the tool, and it is diffi cult to completely eliminate software vulnerabilities; and (5) the diffi culties of deterrence: retaliatory strikes and defensive
measures have minimal deterrence effect.

According to the “Cybersecurity National Action Plan” unveiled by U.S. President Obama in February 2016.

According to the U.S. Offi ce of Management and Budget’s “Annual Report to Congress: Federal Information Security Management Act” (February 27, 2015), the United States Computer Emergency Readiness
Team (US-CERT) recorded that in FY2014 there were 69,851 incidents of cyber attacks against the U.S. government, and that a total of 640,222 incidents of cyber attacks were reported to US-CERT, including
attacks against government agencies and companies. The U.S. Director of National Intelligence’s “Worldwide Threat Assessment” of February 2016 names Russia, China, Iran, North Korea, and non-state actors
as threat actors to cyberspace, expressing the opinion that, for example: (1) Russia is assuming a more assertive cyber posture based on its willingness to target critical infrastructure systems and conduct
espionage operations; (2) China continues to conduct cyber espionage against the U.S. government, its allies, and U.S. companies, and uses cyber attacks against targets it believes threaten Chinese domestic
stability or regime legitimacy; (3) North Korea is likely capable and willing to launch disruptive or destructive cyber attacks to support the achievement of its political objectives; (4) Iran conducts information
theft, propaganda, and cyber attacks to support its security priorities, infl uence the situation, and counter threats; and (5) ISIL targeted and released sensitive information about U.S. Forces personnel as a new
tactic to spur “lone-wolf” attacks. See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 1 “Situation in Syria and Iraq” regarding the ISIL’s use of cyberspace.

“APT 1: Exposing One of China’s Cyber Espionage Units,” released in February 2013 by Mandiant, a U.S. information security company, concludes that the most active cyber attack group targeting the United
States and other countries is Unit 61398 under then Third Department of the PLA General Staff Department. The report also states that then Third Department of the General Staff Department, which constituted
the cyber unit, had 130,000 personnel.

The Annual Report of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission (November 2015) notes that the Chinese government supports large-scale cyber espionage and has stolen information from
private companies and the U.S. government. The report states that China seeks to acquire offensive capabilities, identifying space and cyberspace as strategically vital realms, and is capable of standing up to


-----

paper “China’s Military Strategy” (May 2015),[7] China
will accelerate efforts to build up its cyber capacity.
Furthermore, it has been suggested that cyber warfare
units have been formed under the Strategic Support Force
that was created as part of China’s military reforms[8] in late
December 2015. In May 2014, the U.S. Department of
Justice announced that officers in “Unit 61398,” the cyber
attack unit of the Chinese PLA, and others were indicted,
alleging that they conducted cyber attacks against U.S.
companies.[9] In June 2015, the U.S. Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) became a target of a cyber attack
in which, as it later came to light, personal information
of about 22 million people including U.S. federal
employees and U.S. Forces personnel were stolen. While
Chinese involvement in this attack is also suggested,[10]
China denies government involvement and explains that
it was a “crime” involving Chinese hackers. Additionally,
in July 2014, the Canadian government alleged that it
was a target of a Chinese cyber attack, mentioning China
by name for the first time.[11] As regards China’s intention
behind these cyber attacks, it is suggested that the Chinese
PLA and espionage services steal information from U.S.
companies and feed that back into Chinese companies as
part of the national strategy to win economically.[12]
In October 2014, the White House’s unclassified
information system was hacked.[13] In December 2015, a
large-scale power outage occurred in Ukraine.[14] It is said
that Russia was involved in these attacks. It has been
pointed out that the Russian military, intelligence and
security agencies, and other organizations engage in cyber
attacks.[15] Furthermore, the Russian military is considered
to be establishing its own cyber command, which will


be responsible for conducting offensive cyber activities,
including inserting malware into enemy command and
control systems.[16] It has been indicated that such Russian
activities reflect objectives including: (1) intelligence
gathering to support Russian decision-making on the
issues of Ukraine and Syria; (2) operations to support
military and political objectives; and (3) continuing
preparation of the cyberspace environment for future
contingencies.[17]
In March 2013, cyber attacks hit broadcasting
stations and financial institutions in the ROK. In June
and July 2013, cyber attacks hit the ROK President’s
Office, government agencies, broadcasting stations,
and newspaper companies. In addition, a cyber attack
against the Seoul subway system has been reported.
The ROK government has stated that the tactics used in
these incidents were the same as those used in past cyber
attacks by North Korea.[18] Furthermore, from November
to December 2014, a U.S. film company was hit with
cyber attacks. In December 2014, the U.S. Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) announced that there was


7 The defense white paper notes that, “Cyberspace has become a new pillar of economic and social development, and a new domain of national security,” “As international strategic competition in cyberspace
has been turning increasingly fiercer, quite a few countries are developing their cyber military forces,” and China is “one of the major victims of hacker attacks.”

8 Since September 2015, China has publicized a series of its decisions on military reforms, and in January 2016, announced the establishment of the Strategic Support Force and other units. While the details
of the Force’s tasks and organization have not been revealed, it is suggested that it is in charge of outer space, cyber, and electronic warfare.

9 On May 19, 2014, James Comey, FBI Director, stated that, “For too long, the Chinese government has blatantly sought to use cyber-espionage to obtain economic advantage for its state-owned industries.”
On the same day, the Spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China asserted that the United States “fabricated facts” and announced that China has decided to suspend the activities of the Cyber
Working Group established under the framework of the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue.

10 See the Annual Report of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission (November 2015). In addition to this attack, the report states that a U.S. airline company was attacked by the same method
used in the attack against the U.S. OPM.

11 According to a Canadian government release dated July 2014.

12 According to Dennis F. Poindexter’s testimony at the hearing of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission in June 2015. The Commission’s Annual Report (November 2015) notes that the
technology sectors of China’s strategic emerging industries, such as high-end manifacturing equipment, next-generation IT, new materials, and biotechnology, have become a target of interest for Chinese
hackers’ activities.

13 In October 2014, the Washington Post reported that hackers with alleged Russian government involvement conducted the cyber attack.

14 In February 2016, the New York Times reported that there were doubts about the involvement of the Russian military with which Ukraine is in a standoff over the annexation of Crimea and other matters.

15 “Cyberwarfare: An Analysis of the Means and Motivations of Selected Nation States,” released in November 2004 by Dartmouth College’s Institute for Security, Technology, and Society (currently the Institute for
Security, Technology, and Society), pointed out the possible involvement of the Russian military, intelligence, and security agencies in cyber attacks.

16 According to U.S. Director of National Intelligence Clapper’s written testimony on “Worldwide Cyber Threats” at the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence in September 2015.

17 According to the U.S. Director of National Intelligence’s “Worldwide Threat Assessment” (February 2016).

18 The ROK Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (MSIP) announced in its press releases in April and July 2013 the result of an investigation made by the joint response team of public-private-military
collaboration (composed of 18 organizations including the MSIP, the Ministry of National Defense, the National Intelligence Service, and domestic security companies). MSIP is a central government agency
overseeing administration related to science and technology policies and ICT. This agency was established in March 2013 by transferring science and technology tasks handled by the Ministry of Education,


-----

suffi cient evidence to conclude that the North Korean
government was responsible for these cyber attacks.[19]
It has been suggested that North Korean government
organizations are involved in such cyber attacks[20] and that
North Korea is training personnel on a national scale.[21] It
is considered that these cyber attacks are conducted for
political purposes.[22]
Stuxnet, a malware designed to attack industrial control
systems (ICS) was discovered in June 2010, followed by
discoveries of advanced malware on multiple occasions.[23]
Cyber attacks on the information and communications
networks of governments and militaries,[24] as well as
on critical infrastructure signifi cantly affect national
security. As there have been allegations of involvement
of government organizations, Japan must continue to
pay close attention to developments related to threats
in cyberspace.

**3 Initiatives against Cyber Attacks**


Given these growing threats in cyberspace, various
initiatives are under way at the overall government level
and the ministry level, including defense ministries.[27]
A number of issues have been raised that need to
be dealt with to allow for an effective response to cyber
attacks, which have become a new security challenge
in recent years. For instance, it is regarded that the
international community has diverging views concerning
the fundamental matters of cyberspace, including how


Meanwhile, in Japan, the Japan Pension Service was
a target of a cyber attack in May 2015, which led to the
leak of the personal information of pension recipients
and policyholders. Hacker groups and others have also
carried out cyber attacks against Japanese government
agencies and companies.
In addition, supply chain risks, such as companies
supplying products embedded with deliberately and
illegally altered programs, have been also pointed out.[25]
Furthermore, it has been suggested that the rise in
devices that connect to the Internet, including “smart”
devices incorporated into household appliances,
can increase network complexity, and that private
infrastructures and government systems could become
more vulnerable, including to malicious attacks aimed
at causing malfunctions to systems equipped with
artifi cial intelligence.[26]

international law applies. It is suggested that countries
have clashing claims, with the United States, Europe, and
Japan calling for maintaining a free cyberspace, while
many countries including Russia, China, and emerging
countries call for strengthening national control of
cyberspace. Against this backdrop, there has been a
movement to promote the rule of law in cyberspace in
the international community. In August 2015, a UN
Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) released a


19 The FBI presented the following three items as evidence. (1) The malware used in this cyber attack was similar to malware that North Korean actors previously used. (2) North Korean Internet protocol (IP)
addresses were hardcoded into the data deletion malware. (3) The tools used in the attack had similarities to a cyber attack in March 2013 against ROK broadcasting stations and fi nancial institutions, which
was carried out by North Korea.

20 In November 2013, ROK media outlets reported that the ROK National Intelligence Service made revelations about North Korean cyber warfare capabilities in the national audit of the Information Committee of
the National Assembly, and that Kim Jong-un, First Secretary of the Korea Workers’ Party of North Korea, stated that, “Cyber attacks are omnipotent swords with their power paralleled with nuclear power and
missiles.” In the U.S. Department of Defense’s “2015 Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea” published in February 2016, it is
stated that North Korea has an offensive cyber operations capability. The 2014 Defense White Paper published by the ROK in January 2015 notes that North Korea has concentrated on boosting its cyber unit
to nearly 6,000 personnel.

21 For example, a North Korean defector association in the ROK, “NK Intellectual Solidarity,” held a seminar entitled “Emergency seminar on cyber terrorism by North Korea 2011” in June 2011, and presented
material entitled “North Korea’s cyber terrorism capabilities,” explaining that North Korean organizations conducting cyber attacks were supported by government agencies employing superior human resources
from all over the country, giving them special training to develop their cyber attack capabilities.

22 According to U.S. Director of National Intelligence Clapper’s written testimony on “Worldwide Cyber Threats” to the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence in September 2015.

23 Stuxnet was the fi rst virus program confi rmed to target control systems with specifi c software and hardware incorporated. It is also pointed out that it has abilities to access targeted systems without being
detected and to steal information or alter systems. The discovery of various malware has also been reported: “Duqu,” discovered in October 2011; “Flame” in May 2012; “Gauss” in June 2012; and “Shamoon”
in August 2012.

24 CyberBerkut, a Ukrainian pro-Russian group, carried out cyber attacks against multiple websites of NATO in March 2014 and against the websites of the German government and the German parliament, the
Bundestag, in January 2015. In June 2015, the “Syrian Electronic Army” attacked and hacked the U.S. Department of Defense’s Army website. Furthermore, in November 2015, the international hacker group
“Anonymous” announced that it attacked accounts linked to ISIL over the terror attacks in Paris. As these examples demonstrate, there are also frequent cyber attacks by hacker groups.

25 In October 2012, the U.S. House Information Special Committee published an investigation report, entitled “Investigative Report on the U.S. National Security Issues Posed by Chinese Telecommunications
Companies Huawei and ZTE.” The report advised that products manufactured by Huawei Technologies and Zhong Xing Telecommunication Equipment (ZTE) (major Chinese communications equipment
manufacturers) should not be used, due to their threats to national security based on strong concerns over China’s cyber attack capabilities and intentions targeting critical U.S. infrastructure, as well as opaque
relations between Chinese major IT companies and the central government, the Chinese Communist Party, and the PLA augmenting supply chain risks. A similar move has been taken by other countries,
including France, Australia, Canada, India, and Taiwan. Some countries, including the United Kingdom and the ROK, have issued warnings.

26 According to the U.S. Director of National Intelligence’s “Worldwide Threat Assessment” of February 2016.

27 Generally, the trends at the governmental level are thought to include the following: (1) organizations related to cybersecurity that are spread over multiple departments and agencies are being integrated, and
their operational units are being centralized; (2) policy and research units are being enhanced by establishing specialized posts, creating new research divisions and enhancing such functions; (3) the roles of
intelligence agencies in responding to cyber attacks are being expanded; and (4) more emphasis is being given to international cooperation. At the level of the defense ministry, various measures have been


-----

report containing recommendations on how to apply the
principles of international law to acts using cyberspace
and on voluntary, non-binding norms of state behavior.[28]

See>> Part III, Chapter 1, Section 2-7 (Response to Cyber Attacks)

- 1  The United States


States faces serious cyber threats, noting that state[29] and
non-state actors intend to carry out destructive cyber
attacks against U.S. networks, as well as steal U.S. military
technology information. In this light, the DoD has set out the
following three primary missions in cyberspace: (1) defend
the DoD networks, systems, and information; (2) defend
the United States and its interests against cyber attacks of
significant consequence; and (3) provide integrated cyber
capabilities to support military operations.[30] Additionally,
the DoD states that the aforementioned cyber capabilities
include cyber operations to disrupt an adversary’s militaryrelated systems.
From an organizational perspective, U.S. Cyber
Command, a sub-unified command of U.S. Strategic
Command, oversees the cyber forces of the U.S. Army,
Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps, and manages
operations in cyberspace. U.S. Cyber Command has
expanded along with the expansion of its missions, and
has already established the Cyber Protection Force that
operates and defends the information infrastructure of the
DoD. In addition, U.S. Cyber Command has created the
Cyber National Mission Forces to support U.S. defense
against national-level threats, and the Cyber Combat
Mission Force that supports the operations conducted by
unified combatant commands on the cyber front. These
three forces are collectively referred to as the Cyber
Mission Force.[31]
In February 2016, President Obama unveiled the
Cybersecurity National Action Plan. In his FY2017 budget
request, the President announced that the budget for
cybersecurity investments would be increased significantly,
identifying cybersecurity as one of the top national security
issues.[32] According to the Cybersecurity National Action
Plan, the federal government as a whole will take actions,
including establishing the Commission on Enhancing
National Cybersecurity and making additional investments
in the federal government’s cyber-related technologies,
education, and personnel recruitment.
The DoD, too, appropriated US$6.7 billion for cyber


The International Strategy for Cyberspace released
in May 2011 outlines the U.S. vision for the future of
cyberspace, and sets an agenda for partnership with other
nations and people to realize this vision. The Strategy
also points out seven policy priorities. These priorities
are the economy, protection of national networks, law
enforcement, military, Internet governance, international
capacity development, and Internet freedom.
In the United States, the Department of Homeland
Security is responsible for protecting Federal government
networks and critical infrastructure against cyber attacks,
and the Department’s Office of Cybersecurity and
Communications (CS&C) works to protect the networks
of government agencies.
In the National Security Strategy (NSS) which was
released in February 2015, the United States identifies
cyber attacks as one of today’s major threats. As regards
the Department of Defense’s (DoD) efforts, the QDR
published in March 2014 describes that cyber threats,
which pose risks to U.S. national interests, are composed
of the activities of a variety of actors, including
individuals, organizations, and countries, and that
unauthorized access to the DoD and industry networks
and infrastructure threatens the critical infrastructure of
the United States, its allies, and partners. Based on this
understanding, the report designated the cyber warfare
capabilities of the U.S. Forces as a critical element to be
maintained for the defense of the homeland, and spells
out that the United States continues to retain and develop
the required human resources and enhance cyber forces.
With regard to cyber threats, The DoD Cyber Strategy
released in April 2015 expresses the view that the United


28 The U.N. GGE on Cyber Issues has continued to hold consultations since 2004, with the participation of experts from a total of 15 countries (a total of 20 countries since the July 2014 meeting), including Japan,
the United States, Russia, and China. In its report released in August 2015, the GGE expresses the following views regarding the application of international law to states’ use of ICT, namely, that: (1) states must
observe state sovereignty and other principles in their use of ICT; (2) the GGE must note the “inherent right” of states to take measures consistent with international law and as recognized in the U.N. Charter;
(3) states must not use proxies to commit internationally wrongful acts using ICT; and (4) states should ensure that their territory is not used by non-state actors to commit such acts. Furthermore, with regard
to voluntary norms of state behavior, the report recommends, for example, that a state should not conduct or support ICT activity that intentionally damages critical infrastructure.

29 The DoD Cyber Strategy states that Russia and China have acquired advanced cyber capabilities and strategies. It goes on to say that Russian activities are carried out stealthily and their intentions are difficult
to discern. The Strategy notes that China steals intellectual property to benefit Chinese companies. Furthermore, it states that while Iran and North Korea do not have developed cyber capabilities, they have
displayed an overt level of hostile intent towards the United States and U.S. interests.

30 In order to execute these missions in cyberspace, the DoD presents the following five strategic concepts: (1) build and maintain ready forces and capabilities to conduct cyberspace operations; (2) defend
the DoD information network and data, and mitigate risks to DoD missions; (3) establish arrangements to defend the United States and its interests from cyber attacks of significant consequence through
collaboration with relevant departments and companies; (4) use cyber options to control conflict; and (5) build close cooperative relations with allies and partners.

31 According to a statement made in April 2015 by the commanding officers of U.S. Cyber Command to the U.S. Senate Committee on Armed Services, among other sources, the three forces are made up of several
teams, and dozens of them are currently operating. Employing the National Guard and reserve units, the Cyber Mission Force is set to have 133 teams (National Mission Teams [13 teams], Cyber Protection
Teams [68 teams], Combat Mission Teams [27 teams], Support Teams [25 teams]) and 6,200 personnel by September 2018.


-----

operations in its FY2017 budget request, up 15.5% from
the FY2016 budget. It includes the budget for developing
the readiness of the U.S. Cyber Command, including
continuing to organize the Cyber Mission Force, and
the budget for improving defensive cyber operation
capabilities[33] and offensive cyber operation capabilities.[34]
The United States deems that China continues to
conduct cyber-enabled theft targeting a broad set of U.S.
interests ranging from information related to national
security, to sensitive economic information and U.S.
intellectual property.
In September 2015, U.S. President Obama and
Chinese President Xi Jinping agreed at their summit
meeting that the two countries would not conduct cyberenabled theft of intellectual property.[35] In December
2015, the U.S. and Chinese governments held their first
ministerial dialogue on cyber issues and reached an
agreement regarding the establishment of guidelines for
combatting cybercrime, implementation of a tabletop
exercise, and establishment of a hotline.

- 2  NATO


Defence Centre of Excellence (CCD COE) was authorized
to serve as NATO’s cyber defense-related research and
training institution.[36]
Since 2008, NATO has been conducting cyber
defense exercises on an annual basis to boost cyber
defense capabilities.

- 3  The United Kingdom


In November 2011, the United Kingdom announced a
new “Cyber Security Strategy,” which set goals for the
period until 2015 and specified action plans for capability
enhancement, establishment of norms, cooperation with
other countries, and personnel training. In November
2015, the United Kingdom released the NSS-SDSR2015.
It commits to investing £1.9 billion over the next five years
in increasing its cyber defense capabilities to strengthen
the functions for identifying and analyzing cyberspace
threats. It also commits to publishing the second National
Cyber Security Strategy in 2016.
In terms of organization, the Office of Cyber Security
and Information Assurance (OCSIA) was established
within the Cabinet Office to form and coordinate
cybersecurity strategy for the overall government, as well
as the Cyber Security Operations Centre (CSOC) under
the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ)
to monitor cyberspace. In addition, the Defence Cyber
Operations Group (DCOG), which unifies cyber activities
within the Ministry of Defence, was established.[37] The
“NSS-SDSR2015” released in November 2015 states that
the National Cyber Centre would be established under
GCHQ, the unit that first responds to cyber attacks, in
order to respond swiftly and effectively to cyber attacks.
In January 2015, Prime Minister Cameron and
President Obama agreed to strengthen cooperation in
the area of cyber defense.[38] Furthermore, the United
Kingdom and China agreed that they would not conduct
or support cyber-enabled theft of intellectual property and
other information.[39] In such ways, the United Kingdom is
working to deepen its collaboration with other countries.


The new NATO Policy on Cyber Defence, and its action
plan, which were adopted in June 2011: (1) clarify
the political and operational mechanisms of NATO’s
response to cyber attacks; (2) clarify that NATO would
provide assistance to member states to develop their
cyber defense, and provide assistance to member states if
they are subject to cyber attacks; and (3) set out principles
on cooperation with partners. Furthermore, at the NATO
Summit in September 2014, agreement was reached
that NATO’s collective defense applies to cyber attacks
against member states.
As for its organization, the North Atlantic Council
(NAC) provides political oversight on policies and
operations concerned with NATO’s cyber defense. In
addition, the Emerging Security Challenges Division
formulates policy and action plans concerning cyber
defense. Furthermore, the NATO Cooperative Cyber


33 In March 2016, U.S. Secretary of Defense Carter announced that a pilot program would be launched in April 2016 that would invite private hackers to hack the DoD website in order to study the security
weaknesses. Furthermore, the DoD is making innovative efforts to strengthen its defensive cyber capabilities.

34 The U.S. Forces have disclosed that their offensive cyber capabilities are already operational. For example, they place excessive burden on the networks of ISIL aimed at disrupting its chain of command.

35 During the summit meeting, President Obama allegedly expressed deep concerns over China’s cyber attacks and stated that the United States would exercise all possible tools, hinting at the application of
economic sanctions. Meanwhile, the two sides agreed that they would hold U.S.-China ministerial dialogues on fighting cybercrime.

36 In June 2013, the NATO Defense Ministers’ Meeting placed cyber attacks at the top of the agenda for the first time. They agreed to establish an emergency response team and to implement a cyber defense
mechanism on a full scale by October 2013.

37 In addition, the U.K. Ministry of Defence announced in September 2013 that it would recruit hundreds of computer experts as reserves working on the front line of British cyber defense, and approved the
establishment of the Joint Cyber Reserves.

38 According to a White House release, the U.K. GCHQ and Security Service (SS) and the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) will work together closely on cybersecurity
and cyber defense. In addition, in November 2015, the U.K. and U.S. governments conducted a joint exercise to strengthen their bilateral cyber cooperation as well as their effective response capabilities to
cyber incidents in the financial industry, with the participation of their cyber, financial, and intelligence agencies, among other participants.


-----

given its reliance on information networks, and commits
to strengthening the Department of Defence’s cyber
capabilities and systems.

- 5  Republic of Korea



- 4  Australia

In January 2013, Australia published its first “National
Security Strategy,” which positions integrated cyber
policies and operations as one of the top national
security priorities. In April 2016, a new “Cyber Security
Strategy” through 2020 was released, which provides
that Australia will ensure the safety of the people, that
private companies will participate in cybersecurity, and
that threat information will be shared.
In terms of organization, the Australian Cyber
Security Centre (ACSC) that brings cybersecurity
capabilities from across the government into a single
location was established in November 2014 to respond
to major cybersecurity issues related to government
agencies and critical infrastructures.[40] In July 2015, the
ACSC issued its first report on cybersecurity,[41] which
contended that the number, type, and sophistication of
cyber threats to Australia are all increasing.
In addition, the Defence White Paper released in
February 2016 notes that cyber attacks are a direct threat
to the Australian Defence Force’s warfighting ability


The ROK formulated the “National Cyber Security Master
Plan” in August 2011, which clarifies the supervisory
functions of the National Intelligence Service[42] in
responding to cyber attacks. It places particular emphasis
on strengthening the following five areas: prevention,
detection, response,[43] systems, and security base. In
the national defense sector, the Cyberspace Command
was established in January 2010 to carry out planning,
implementation, training, and research and development
for its cyberspace operations, and currently operates
under the direct control of the Ministry of National
Defense.[44] In April 2015, to strengthen its measures
against cyber attacks, the ROK government established
the cybersecurity advisor post at the National Security
Office of the President’s Office.


40 The ACSC, comprised of staff from the Australian Crime Commission, the Australian Federal Police, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, the Australian Signals Directorate, the Australian Computer
Emergency Response Team, and the Defence Intelligence Organisation, analyzes threats in cyberspace and responds to both public and private sector incidents. The ACSC is set to have approximately 300
personnel by 2017.

41 According to the report, adversaries in cyberspace targeting Australia are: (1) foreign government-sponsored adversaries; (2) serious and organized criminals; and (3) groups motivated by certain issues and
individuals with personal grievances.

42 Under the Director of the National Intelligence Service, the National Cybersecurity Strategy Council has been established to deliberate on important issues, including establishing and improving a national
cybersecurity structure, coordinating related policies and roles among institutions, and deliberating measures and policies related to presidential orders.

43 In February 2014, the ROK Ministry of National Defense reportedly briefed the National Assembly that it planned to develop cyber weapons for attacking other countries.

44 The basic plan for national defense reform (2012-2030) that was submitted to the President in August 2012 by the Ministry of National Defense proposed significant enhancement of cyber warfare capability


-----

**Trends Concerning Military Science and Technology as well as**
**Section 6**
**Defense Production and Technological Bases**


**1 Military Science and Technological Trends**


Recent developments in science and technology, as
represented by the dramatic advancement of information and
communications technology (ICT), has impacted a variety
of areas, triggering signifi cant and revolutionary changes in
many areas such as economy, society, and lifestyle.
The military is no exception. Developed countries,
including the United States, consider that transformations
driven by advances in ICT can dramatically improve
combat and other capabilities, and therefore, continue to
pursue a variety of ICT research and policies.
For example, if information on enemy forces
collected using information-gathering systems, including
reconnaissance satellites and unmanned aircraft, is
shared on a network, command and control can be
exercised immediately, even from remote headquarters.
By extension, offensive power can be directed swiftly,
precisely, and fl exibly against targets.
Major countries with sophisticated and modernized
military forces, including the United States, engage
in research and development related to improving
the destructive capabilities of weapons, precision
guidance technology, information-related technology
including C[4]ISR, unmanned technology (e.g. drones[1]),
and hypersonic technology[2] to be able to carry out
more precise and effective attacks. These countries


also place emphasis on R&D activities related to
stealth technology[3] for increasing preemptive attacks
by improving stealth capacity and reducing the risk of
attrition of military power by improved survivability.
Recently, reports have been published of successful
tests of railguns[4] and high energy laser weapons[5] that
are expected to provide effective fi repower compared
to existing weapons, such as artillery, in terms of their
cost per fi ring, range, precision, promptness, and other
aspects. Furthermore, there have been reports about the
development of high speed strike weapons (HSSW) that
can strike even long-range targets with conventional
weapons, quickly and with pinpoint accuracy.[6]
As regards the United States, the QDR of the U.S.
DoD states that the proliferation of state-of-the-art
technologies[7] will transform the mode of warfare. In
this vein, the country is conducting R&D of advanced
technologies which could become game-changers.
Recognizing that the military superiority of the U.S.
Forces is gradually eroding in light of recent enhancements
in “A2/AD” capabilities of China and other countries,
the United States promotes the Third Offset Strategy
designed to fi nd new, innovative measures to maintain
and increase U.S. superiority.

See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 1-1-4 (Third Offset Strategy)


Drones for military use which have been developed include unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), unmanned ground vehicle (UGV), and unmanned maritime vehicle (UMV) (UMVs may be classifi ed into unmanned
surface vehicle (USV) and unmanned undersea vehicle (UUV)). It is suggested that these drones could shift from human-operated types to fully autonomous types, as known as Lethal Autonomous Weapons
Systems (LAWS). In May 2014, an informal meeting of the United Nations Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW) discussed for the fi rst time the humanitarian, legal, and other issues related to the
operation of LAWS that automatically kill an enemy without human judgment. These issues were again discussed at a meeting of the high contracting parties to the Convention in November 2014. In January
2016, Gen. Paul Selva, Vice Chairmen of the Joint Chiefs of Staff of the United States, reportedly made the following comment: “that brings us [military] to the cusp of questions about whether we are willing to
have unmanned, autonomous systems that can launch on an enemy.”

For example, in the United States, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and the Air Force are engaged in joint research and development of the Hypersonic Air-breathing Weapon Concept
(HAWC), aiming to apply the technology to hypersonic missiles, etc. in the future. HAWC uses the technology of scramjet engine, which enables hypersonic fl ight by taking in air at hypersonic speed and burning
it without reducing the speed to below the speed of sound.

For example, China and Russia promote the development of weapons using the latest technologies, including the development of next-generation fi ghters deemed to have stealth capabilities as well as new
ballistic missiles. It is believed that China is also promoting the development of hypersonic glide weapons in order to attain strike capabilities that would enable China to bypass missile defense networks.
(See Part I, Chapter 2, Section 3-2-5, Part I, Chapter 2, Section 4-3-2, and Part I, Chapter 2, Section 3-2-2)

A railgun is a weapon that fi res bullets by using the magnetic fi eld generated from electric energy instead of gunpowder. The U.S. Forces have developed a railgun with a range of about 370 km, or about ten
times that of the existing 5-inch (127 mm) ammunition. A single railgun shot reportedly costs 1/20th to 1/60th the price of a missile.

The U.S. Forces are developing laser weapons to defend against small ships and strengthen low-altitude air defense capabilities, including defense against drones. From September to November 2014, a laser
weapon was test fi red onboard the USS Ponce. It is suggested that high energy laser weapons systems would be miniaturized, with a view to placing the weapons also on light mobility vehicles. The cost of a
laser shot is reported to be less than US$1. In addition, since July 2015, DARPA and the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory have been jointly fi nancing and conducting tests integrating the high energy liquid
laser area defense system (HELLADS) and a ground-based laser weapons system demonstrator. Their goal is to continue to carry out tests to make operational improvements and to transition to the testing and
military use phase.

The goal of the HSSW is to considerably shorten the time required for attack with a conventional weapon. The HSSW is deemed to travel at a low trajectory that is clearly different from the trajectory of ballistic
missiles. It is suggested that the United States and China are developing HSSWs.

The QDR describes that such technologies include “counter-stealth technology” that used to require large budgets, “automated and autonomous systems as well as robotics” that already have a wide range of
commercial and military applications, “low-cost three-dimensional printers” that could revolutionize weapons manufacturing and logistics related to warfare, and “biotechnology breakthroughs” that could make i


-----

Recent advances in military science and technology
are also largely attributed to the advancement of civil
technology. In recent years, as the capabilities of
existing equipment are improved and new equipment
is developed, dual-use technology has been leveraged
frequently. For example, in order to integrate innovative
civil technologies into the military sector, the U.S. DoD
established the Defense Innovation Unit Experimental
(DIUx) in 2015 to serve as a bridge between the DoD and
the civilian sector.
On the other hand, it is expected that countries having
diffi culty possessing high-tech forces for technological
and economic reasons as well as non-state actors
including terrorist organizations will carry out research
and development on weapons and other equipment
that will enable them to gain superiority in fi ghting
against countries with state-of-the-art technology, and
illegitimately obtain technology through ICT or other
means. In short, these countries and organizations
tend to focus on asymmetrical means of attack that
can be developed or obtained with relatively low cost,
enabling them to attack their opponents’ vulnerability
without using conventional military capabilities. These
asymmetrical means of attack include: WMDs, such
as nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons; ballistic
missiles; terrorist attacks; and cyber attacks.
As asymmetrical means of attack may spread
throughout the world, the research and development of
technology[9] that responds to these asymmetrical threats
is also recognized as an important challenge.

**2 Trends Concerning Defense Production and Technological Bases**


and technological bases.
Western countries have set a target to increase
competitiveness through realignment of their defense
industry, based on the aforementioned situation related
to national defense budgets. The United States has seen
repeated mergers and integrations among domestic
corporations, while Europe has experienced crossborder mergers and integrations of the defense industry,
especially in Germany, France, the United Kingdom,
and Italy.[10]


The “Gremlin” unmanned aircraft system under development

[U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) website]

In this regard, the United States attaches importance
not only to alleviating the burden on humans but also to
synergistically enhancing equipment capability through
human-machine collaboration. For instance, the United
States has given the example of deep learning machine
technology that uses artifi cial intelligence, which could
analyze big data to detect signs of cyber attack and issue
alerts, among serving other functions. Furthermore,
recent research of the DoD’s Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) have included:
research to develop an implantable neural interface that
directly connects the human brain and the digital world,
enabling quick transfer of vast data; research to develop
a small unmanned aircraft capable of launch, recovery,
and reuse while airborne called “Gremlin”; and research
to develop an unmanned vessel called “Sea Hunter” to
detect submarines.[8]


Recently, Western countries in particular have continued
to face diffi culties in signifi cantly increasing defense
budgets. On the other hand, the sophistication of military
science and technology and the greater complexity of
equipment, as explained in 1 above, have escalated
development and production costs and raised unit
prices for procurement, resulting in a reduced number
of procured units. Under these circumstances, many
countries are working on a variety of initiatives in order
to maintain and enhance their national defense production


8 As known as the Anti-Submarine Warfare Continuous Trail Unmanned Vessel (ACTUV) (“Sea Hunter”), this pilot vessel christened in April 2016 is a trimaran approximately 40 meters long, capable of navigating
several thousand kilometers for months without crewmembers on board through constant remote supervision by humans. This vessel is drawing attention as a technology manifesting autonomous navigation
and human-machine collaboration—the priorities of the Third Offset Strategy (see Part I, Chapter 2, Section 1-4). In addition, in November 2015, the Unmanned Warfare Systems Directorate was established
at the Offi ce of the Chief of Naval Operations to conduct personnel training, procurement, and system design. Such organizational improvements are also under way in parallel with the research.

9 They include BMD or technologies for countering ballistic missiles, terrorist attacks, cyber attacks, etc. as well as ICT.

10 Large corporations involved with the defense industry of Western countries have high defense business ratios in their total revenues. In particular, the United States and the United Kingdom have large


-----

In response to escalating development and
production costs, Western countries are also promoting
joint development and production and technological
cooperation related to defense equipment among their
allies and partners. This move can be attributed to such
factors as (1) splitting development and production costs,
(2) expanding demands in all countries participating
in joint development and production, (3) mutual
complementarity of technologies, and (4) raising domestic
technology levels by obtaining the latest technology.
Furthermore, an international logistic support
system called “Autonomic Logistics Global Sustainment”
(ALGS) was adopted for the maintenance of the F-35
fighter aircraft, with the aircraft having been developed
through international collaboration. This system enables
all F-35 user countries to share its parts and components
globally. The establishment of such international
frameworks for logistic support and the progress of
international joint development and production need to
be observed closely.

See>> Part III, Chapter 3, Section 3 (Defense Equipment and Technology
Cooperation)

At the U.S. DoD, the Office of the Secretary of
Defense, DARPA, and other agencies provide funds
including large-scale funding of over US$3.3 billion
in FY2016 for research undertaken by entities such as
companies and universities. In the United Kingdom, in
March 2015, the Ministry of Defence announced that it
would invest a total of 10 million pounds to contribute
to promoting the development of innovative defense
products, and is requesting proposals on research themes.
Countries have been exporting defense equipment
overseas since the Cold War era, and even in recent
years, many countries have been promoting a policy of
overseas exporting. As defense equipment has faced a
dramatic increase in its development and production
costs, countries aim to maintain and strengthen their
domestic defense industry by expanding demands in
foreign markets through overseas exports. Furthermore,

|Country|Col2|Global shares in defense equipment export (%), 2011–2015|Comparison with 2006–2010 export values (%)|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|United States|33%|+27%|
|2|Russia|25%|+28%|
|3|China|6%|+88%|
|4|France|6%|-10%|
|5|Germany|5%|-51%|
|6|United Kingdom|5%|+26%|
|7|Spain|4%|+55%|
|8|Italy|3%|+48%|
|9|Ukraine|3%|+54%|
|10|The Netherlands|2%|-25%|
|11|Israel|2%|-6%|
|12|Sweden|1%|-7%|
|13|Canada|1%|+20%|
|14|Switzerland|1%|-5%|
|15|Republic of Korea|1%|-3%|
|16|Turkey|1%|+130%|


Top Ranking Countries in Major Conventional
Fig. I-3-6-1
Arms Export (2011–2015)

**Global shares in** **Comparison with**
**Country** **defense equipment** **2006–2010 export**
**export (%), 2011–2015** **values (%)**

1 United States 33% +27%

2 Russia 25% +28%

3 China 6% +88%

4 France 6% -10%

5 Germany 5% -51%

6 United Kingdom 5% +26%

7 Spain 4% +55%

8 Italy 3% +48%

9 Ukraine 3% +54%

10 The Netherlands 2% -25%

11 Israel 2% -6%

12 Sweden 1% -7%

13 Canada 1% +20%

14 Switzerland 1% -5%

15 Republic of Korea 1% -3%

16 Turkey 1% +130%

Note: Created based on “SIPRI Arms Transfer Database.” Countries with 1% or more share
are listed (decimals are rounded).


it is considered that countries leverage exports as a
diplomatic tool for expanding their influence in the export
destination countries. In addition, countries such as China
and the ROK have established the infrastructure required
to manufacture weapons through their past imports of
defense equipment and their improved capabilities in
science and technology, enabling them to attain the status
of an export country of affordable defense equipment and
to increase their export volumes.
In recent years, defense equipment exports to the
Asia-Pacific region have increased. The underlying
factors suggested include the economic growth of the
Asia-Pacific region, the greater influence of China,
disputes over territorial sovereignty, and addressing the
enhanced military capabilities of neighboring countries.

See>> Fig. I-3-6-1 (Top Ranking Countries in Major Conventional Arms
Export (2011–2015))


-----

**Part**
###### II

Japan’s Security and Defense Policy
and the Japan-U.S. Alliance

**Chapter 1**
**Basic Concepts of Japan’s**
**Security and Defense**

**Chapter 2**
**Building a Dynamic Joint**
**Defense Force**

**Chapter 3**
**Development of Legislation**
**for Peace and Security**

**Chapter 4**
**Strengthening of**
**the Japan-U.S. Alliance**


-----

**Chapter 1** **[Basic Concepts of Japan s ]**
**Security and Defense**


**Section 1** **Measures to Ensure Japan’s Security**


The independent state of a nation must be protected in
order for it to determine its own direction in politics,
economy, and society, as well as maintaining its culture,
tradition, and sense of values. However, peace, safety,
and independence cannot be secured by simply wishing
for them. The essence of national security can be found
in creating an international environment that is stable and
predictable, while preventing the emergence of threats
before they occur, through diplomacy. The reality of
the current international community suggests that it is
not necessarily possible to prevent invasions from the
outside by employing only nonmilitary means such as
diplomatic efforts, and in the event that the nation were
to be invaded it would not be able to remove such a threat.
Defense capabilities are the nation’s ultimate guarantee
of security, expressing its will and capacity to eliminate
foreign invasions, and they cannot be replaced by any
other means.
For this reason, Japan is striving to develop
appropriate defense capabilities to protect the life and
properties of its nationals and to
defend the territorial land, sea,
and airspace of Japan. At the
same time, it is strengthening the
Japan–U.S. Alliance[1] with the
United States, which shares basic
values and interests with Japan.
The peace and security of Japan
is ensured through developing
seamless defense measures by
coupling Japan’s own defense


capabilities with the Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements.
In addition, Japan also works domestically to enrich
the backbone of the people, which is characterized
by ensuring stable lives of the people and protecting
the country, while also working to establish a security
foundation by implementing various measures in such
sectors as the economy and education so as not to allow
the chance of an invasion.
Moreover, from the perspective of improving the
security environment surrounding Japan and preventing
the emergence of threats to Japan, the importance of
the role played by defense capabilities is increasing in
cooperative efforts as a member of the Asia-Pacifi c region
and the international community.
Upon recognizing the role of defense capabilities,
Japan aims to ensure national security as well as bringing
peace and safety to the Asia-Pacifi c region, and eventually
to the entire world through making its utmost efforts in a
variety of fi elds.


Prime Minister Abe and Minister of Defense Nakatani inspecting the Special Guard of Honor

In general, this refers to the relationship, based on the Japan-U.S. Security System, whereby both nations, as countries sharing fundamental values and interests, coordinate and cooperate closely in a range


-----

**Section 2** **Constitution and the Basis of Defense Policy**


**1 Constitution and the Right of Self-Defense**


Since the end of World War II, Japan made a decision not
to repeat the ravages of war and has worked hard to build
a peace-loving nation. The Japanese people desire lasting
peace, and the principle of pacifi sm is enshrined in the
Constitution, Article 9 of which prescribes the renunciation
of war, the prohibition of war potential, and the denial
of the right of belligerency of the state. Of course, since
Japan is an independent nation, these provisions do not

**2 The Government’s View on Article 9 of the Constitution**


- 1  Permitted Self-Defense Capability


deny Japan’s inherent right of self-defense as a sovereign
state. Thus, the Japanese Government interprets this as a
constitutional right to possess the minimum armed forces
needed to exercise that right. Therefore, Japan, under the
Constitution, maintains the Self-Defense Forces (SDF) as
an armed organization, holding its exclusively defenseoriented policy as its basic strategy of defense, and
continues to keep it equipped and ready for operations.

to prohibit “use of force” in international relations in all
forms. However, when considered in light of “the right
(of the people) to live in peace” as recognized in the
Preamble of the Constitution and the purpose of Article
13 of the Constitution which stipulates, “their (all the
people’s) right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness”
shall be the supreme consideration in governmental
affairs, Article 9 of the Constitution cannot possibly be
interpreted to prohibit Japan from taking measures of selfdefense necessary to maintain its peace and security and
to ensure its survival. Such measures for self-defense are
permitted only when they are inevitable for dealing with
imminent unlawful situations where the people’s right to
life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness is fundamentally
overturned due to an armed attack by a foreign country,
and for safeguarding these rights of the people. Hence,
“use of force” to the minimum extent necessary to that end
is permitted. This is the basis, or the so-called basic logic,
of the view consistently expressed by the Government to
date with regard to “use of force” exceptionally permitted
under Article 9 of the Constitution, and clearly shown
in the document “Relationship between the Right of
Collective Self-Defense and the Constitution” submitted
by the Government to the Committee on Audit of the
House of Councilors on October 14, 1972.
This basic logic must be maintained under Article 9
of the Constitution.
To date, the Government has considered that “use
of force” under this basic logic is permitted only when
an “armed attack” against Japan occurs. However, in


Under the Constitution, Japan is permitted to possess the
required minimum self-defense capability. The specifi c
limit is subject to change according to the prevailing
international situation, the level of military technologies,
and various other factors, and it is discussed and decided
through annual budget and other deliberations by the
Diet on behalf of the people. Whether such capability
constitutes a “war potential” that is prohibited by Article
9, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution must be considered
within the context of Japan’s overall military strength.
Therefore, whether the SDF should be allowed to possess
certain armaments depends on whether such possession
would cause its total military strength to exceed the
constitutional limit.
The possession of armaments deemed to be offensive
weapons designed to be used only for the mass destruction of
another country is not permissible under any circumstance
as it would, by defi nition, exceed the minimum necessary
level. For example, the SDF is not allowed to possess
intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM), long-range
strategic bombers, or attack aircraft carriers.

- 2  Measures for Self-Defense Permitted under
**Article 9 of the Constitution**


In the cabinet decision[1] made on July 1, 2014, measures for
self-defense permitted under Article 9 of the Constitution
were defi ned as follows;
The language of Article 9 of the Constitution appears


-----

light of the situation in which the security environment
surrounding Japan has been fundamentally transformed
and continuously evolving by shifts in the global power
balance, the rapid progress of technological innovation,
and threats such as weapons of mass destruction, etc.,
in the future, even an armed attack occurring against a
foreign country could actually threaten Japan’s survival,
depending on its purpose, scale and manner, etc.
Japan, as a matter of course, will make the utmost
diplomatic efforts, should a dispute occur, for its peaceful
settlement and take all necessary responses in accordance
with the existing domestic laws and regulations developed
based upon the constitutional interpretation to date. It is
still required, however, to make all necessary preparations
in order to ensure Japan’s survival and protect its people.
Under such recognition and as a result of careful
examination in light of the current security environment,
it has been concluded that not only when an armed attack
against Japan occurs but also when an armed attack against
a foreign country that is in a close relationship with Japan
occurs and as a result threatens Japan’s survival and
poses a clear danger to fundamentally overturn people’s
right to life, liberty and pursuit of happiness, and when
there is no other appropriate means available to repel the
attack and ensure Japan’s survival and protect its people,
use of force to the minimum extent necessary should
be interpreted to be permitted under the Constitution as
measures for self-defense in accordance with the basic
logic of the Government’s view to date.
As a matter of course, Japan’s “use of force” must be
carried out while observing international law. At the same
time, a legal basis in international law and constitutional
interpretation need to be understood separately. In
certain situations, the aforementioned “use of force”
permitted under the Constitution is, under international
law, based on the right of collective self-defense. The
Government has reached a conclusion that although this
“use of force” includes those which are triggered by an
armed attack occurring against a foreign country, they
are permitted under the Constitution only when they are


taken as measures for self-defense which are inevitable
for ensuring Japan’s survival and protecting its people, in
other words, for defending Japan.

See>> Fig. II-1-2-1 (“Three New Conditions” for the “Use of Force” as
Measures for Self-Defense Permitted under Article 9 of the Constitution)

- 3  Geographic Boundaries within which the Right of
**Self-Defense may be Exercised**


The use of the minimum necessary force to defend Japan
under the right of self-defense is not necessarily confined
to the geographic boundaries of Japanese territory,
territorial waters, and airspace. However, it is difficult to
give a general definition of the actual extent to which it
may be used, as this would vary with the situation.
Nevertheless, the Government interprets that, as
a general rule, the Constitution does not permit armed
troops to be dispatched to the land, sea, or airspace of
other countries with the aim of using force; such overseas
deployment of troops would exceed the definition of the
minimum necessary level of self-defense.

- 4  Right of Belligerency


Article 9, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution prescribes
that “the right of belligerency of the state will not be
recognized.” However, the “right of belligerency” does
not mean the right to engage in battle; rather, it is a
general term for various rights that a belligerent nation has
under international law, including the authority to inflict
casualties and damage upon the enemy’s military force
and to occupy enemy territory. On the other hand, Japan
may of course use the minimum level of force necessary
to defend itself. For example, if Japan inflicts casualties
and damage upon the enemy’s military force in exercising
its right of self-defense, this is conceptually distinguished
from the exercise of the right of belligerency, even though
those actions do not appear to be different. Occupation
of enemy territory, however, would exceed the minimum
necessary level of self-defense and is not permissible.


|Fig. II-1-2-1|“Three New Conditions” for the “Use of Force” as Measures for Self-Defense Permitted under A|
|---|---|
|❍ When an armed attack against Japan has occurred, or when an armed attack against a foreign country that is in a close relations threatens Japan’s survival and poses a clear danger to fundamentally overturn people’s right to life, liberty and pursuit of happine ❍ When there is no other appropriate means available to repel the attack and ensure Japan’s survival and protect its people. ❍ Use of force to the minimum extent necessary.||


-----

**3 Basic Policy**


Under the Constitution, Japan has effi ciently built a
highly effective and joint defense force in line with the
basic principles of maintaining an exclusively defenseoriented policy and not becoming a military power that
poses a threat to other countries, while fi rmly maintaining
the Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements and adhering to
the principle of civilian control of the military, observing
the Three Non-Nuclear Principles.

- 1  Exclusively Defense-Oriented Policy



- 4  Securing Civilian Control

Civilian control refers to the priority of politics to the
military in a democratic state or democratic political
control of military strength. Japan has, by giving serious
refl ection to the regrettable state of affairs that happened
until the end of World War II, adopted the following strict
civilian control system that is entirely different from the
one under the former Constitution.[3] Civilian control aims
to ensure that the SDF is maintained and operated in
accordance with the will of the people.
The Diet, which represents Japanese nationals,
makes legislative and budgetary decisions on such
matters as the allotted number of the SDF personnel and
main organizations of the Ministry of Defense (MOD) /
the SDF. It also issues approval for defense operations of
the SDF. The function of national defense, as a general
administrative function, entirely falls under the executive
power of the Cabinet. The Constitution requires that the
Prime Minister and other Ministers of State who constitute
the Cabinet be civilians. The Prime Minister, on behalf
of the whole Cabinet, holds the authority of supreme
command and supervision of the SDF. The Minister of
Defense, who is exclusively in charge of national defense,
exercises general control and supervision over the SDF
duties. In addition, the National Security Council of
Japan under the Cabinet deliberates important matters on
national security.
At the MOD, the Minister of Defense is responsible
for issues concerning national defense, and as the head


The exclusively defense-oriented policy means that
defensive force is used only in the event of an attack,
that the extent of the use of defensive force is kept to the
minimum necessary for self-defense, and that the defense
capabilities to be possessed and maintained by Japan are
limited to the minimum necessary for self-defense. The
policy including these matters refers to the posture of a
passive defense strategy in accordance with the spirit of
the Constitution.

- 2  Not Becoming a Military Power


There is no established defi nition for the concept of a
military power. For Japan, however, not becoming a
military power that could threaten other countries means
that Japan will not possess and maintain a military
capability strong enough to pose a threat to other countries,
beyond the minimum necessary for self-defense.

- 3  Three Non-Nuclear Principles


The Three Non-Nuclear Principles refers to those of not
possessing nuclear weapons, not producing them, and not
allowing them to be brought into Japan. Japan adheres
to the Three Non-Nuclear Principles as a fi xed line of
national policy.
Japan is also prohibited from manufacturing and
possessing nuclear weapons under the Atomic Energy
Basic Law.[1] In addition, Japan ratifi ed the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and
as a nonnuclear weapons state, has an obligation not to
manufacture and acquire nuclear weapons.[2]


Prime Minister Abe receiving honors by men and women stationed along the rail
of a ship – “manning the rails” – during the SDF Fleet Review

Article 2 of the Atomic Energy Basic Law states that “The research, development and utilization of atomic energy shall be limited to peaceful purposes, aimed at ensuring safety and performed independently
under democratic management.”

Article 2 of the NPT states that “Each non-nuclear weapon State Party to the Treaty undertakes....not to manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices...”


-----

of the MOD also controls and manages the SDF. The
Minister of Defense is assisted in policy planning and
political affairs by the State Minister of Defense, the
Parliamentary Vice-Ministers of Defense (two) and the
Senior Adviser to the Minister of Defense.[4]

In addition, the Special Advisers to the Minister of
Defense provide the Minister of Defense with advice on
important issues under the jurisdiction of the MOD based
on their expertise and experience. The Defense Council
consisting of political appointees, civilian offi cials
and uniformed SDF personnel of the MOD deliberates


on basic principles concerning administrative affairs
under the Ministry’s jurisdiction. Through these ways,
the MOD aims to further enhance the operation of the
civilian control system.
As mentioned above, the civilian control system
is well established. However, in order to ensure that
the system achieves good results, it is necessary to
continue making practical efforts in both political and
administrative aspects, along with a deep interest in
national defense taken by the people.


**Commentary**

**The Special Guard of Honor –**

**Column**

**Receiving the Prime Minister’s Special Award**

The Special Guard of Honor, comprised of the 302nd Military Police Company and Central Band of the GSDF, received a Special Award from
Prime Minister Abe at a commendation ceremony held at the Prime Minister’s Offi ce on October 21 2015.
Since their fi rst performance in October of 1957 for Mr. Nehru, then Prime Minister of the Republic of India, who visited Japan as a state
guest, the Special Guard of Honor has performed ceremonies for over 1,000 guests from 100 nations over the past 60 years. The Special Award
was a recognition of their achievements in representing the dignity and fortitude of the SDF to the world.
During his address at the ceremony, Prime Minister Abe congratulated the members of the Special Guard of Honor on their performance
and encouraged them by saying “I can say with certainty that Japan’s Special Guard of Honor is the best in the world. You are clearly showing
to the world just how elite and highly skilled the Japan SDF is. As the Commander-in-Chief of the SDF, you are a great source of trust and pride
to me. I have high hopes that today’s award will fi ll you with confi dence and pride, and encourage you to aim ever higher.”

The Special Guard of Honor receiving a certifi cate of the Special Award The Special Guard of Honor in absolute unison
from Prime Minister Abe

[Photo courtesy of the Cabinet’s Public Affairs Offi ce]


-----

**Section 3** **Outline of the National Security Strategy**


**1 National Security Council**


The National Security Council that deliberates important
matters with regard to national security such as the
National Security Strategy (NSS) is established within the
Cabinet, and the MOD and other related administrative
organs provide the National Security Council with data
and information pertaining to national security in a timely
manner. The National Security Secretariat established
within the Cabinet Secretary provides constant support to
the National Security Council as its secretariat, and some
MOD members, including uniformed SDF personnel,
are working at additional posts at the National Security
Secretariat.

See>> Fig. II-1-3-1 (Organization of National Security Council)


A scene from a National Security Council meeting held upon North Korea’s ballistic
missile launch [photo courtesy of the Cabinet Secretariat Public Relations Offi ce]

|National Security Cou|ncil|
|---|---|

|ncil Prime Minister Chief Cabinet Secretary 4-Minister Meeting 9-Minister Meeting Emergency Situations Minister Meeting Serves as the control tower Maintains the civilian Strengthens the response for foreign and defense control function to serious emergencies. policies concerning of the former Security Deputy Chief national security Council. Cabinet Secretary|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||
|Chief Cabin Deputy Cabinet S||et Secretary Chief ecretary||||
||Deputy Cabinet S|Chief ecretary||||
|||||||

|Col1|Col2|Secretary General of National Security|
|---|---|---|
|Close C|oordination||
|||Secretariat|

|Col1|Col2|Col3|ion Secretary General of National Security|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||Secretariat|||||
||||retary Assistant Chie al of (Deputy Sec riat) National Se National Security Secretariat|||||
||Assistant Chief Cabinet Sec (Deputy Secretary Gener National Security Secreta||retary al of riat)|Assistant Chie (Deputy Sec National Se|f Cabinet Secretary retary General of curity Secretariat)|||
|||||||||
|||||||Foreign affairs||

|Fig. II-1-3-1|Organization of National Security Council|
|---|---|
|National Security Council Prime Minister Chief Cabinet Secretary 4-Minister Meeting 9-Minister Meeting Emergency Situations Minister Meeting Cabinet Secretariat Serves as the control tower Maintains the civilian Strengthens the response for foreign and defense control function to serious emergencies. policies concerning of the former Security Deputy Chief national security Council. Cabinet Secretary Special Adviser to the Prime Minister Deputy Chief Cabinet Secretary General of on National Security Secretary for Crisis Close Coordination National Security Management Secretariat Assistant Chief Cabinet Secretary Assistant Chief Cabinet Secretary Director of Cabinet (Deputy Secretary General of (Deputy Secretary General of Intelligence National Center of National Security Secretariat) National Security Secretariat) Cabinet Intelligence Incident Readiness and Research Office and Strategy for Situation response National Security Foreign Cybersecurity crisis management Secretariat affairs||


National Security Council Prime Minister

Emergency Situations

Chief Cabinet Secretary 4-Minister Meeting 9-Minister Meeting Minister Meeting

Cabinet
Secretariat Serves as the control tower for foreign and defense Maintains the civilian control function Strengthens the response to serious emergencies.

policies concerning of the former Security

Deputy Chief national security Council.
Cabinet Secretary

Special Adviser to the Prime Minister

Deputy Chief Cabinet Secretary General of on National Security
Secretary for Crisis Close Coordination National Security
Management Secretariat

Assistant Chief Cabinet Secretary Assistant Chief Cabinet Secretary Director of Cabinet
(Deputy Secretary General of (Deputy Secretary General of Intelligence
National Center of National Security Secretariat) National Security Secretariat) Cabinet Intelligence
Incident Readiness and Research Office
and Strategy for Situation response National Security Foreign
Cybersecurity crisis management Secretariat affairs


-----

**2 National Security Strategy**



- 1  Japan’s National Security Policy Framework

The NSS approved by the National Security Council
and the Cabinet in December of 2013 represents Japan’s
fi rst-ever basic policy on national security with a focus
on diplomatic affairs and defense policy. The NSS
defi nes approaches that Japan should follow based on a
long-term view of its national interests. It replaces the
Basic Policy on National Defense, which had served
as the basis for Japan’s defense policies theretofore.
The National Defense Program Guidelines (NDPG),
which was established based on the NSS, defi nes basic
policies for Japan’s future defense, the role of its defense
capabilities, and objectives for specifi c SDF equipment.
The NDPG was formulated with a medium-to long-term
outlook because the acquisition of defense equipment and
the establishment of troop operational systems cannot
be accomplished overnight and requires many years
of planning. The NSS and NDPG are mainly designed
for the next decade or so. The Medium Term Defense
Program (MTDP) specifi es a maximum budget and the
amount of mainstay defense equipment to be acquired
over the subsequent fi ve-year period in order to achieve
the defense capability targets defi ned in the NDPG. The
fi scal year budget is drawn on the MTDP substantiated as
projects, and the necessary expenses for each fi scal year
will be appropriated based on relevant situations.
To date, the NDPG has contained mention of
nationwide basic security policies focusing on defense
policy to a certain extent. The NSS carries with it great
meaning as the defi nitive statement of the Government’s
basic policy on national security, with a focus on
diplomatic affairs and defense policy.

See>> Fig. II-1-3-2 (Relations among NSS, NDPG, MTDP and Annual Budget)



- 2  Outline of the National Security Strategy

**(1) Fundamental Principle of National Security**
a. Principles Japan Upholds – Proactive Contribution to
Peace based on the Principle of International Cooperation
Japan is committed to continuing the path it has
followed to date as a peace-loving nation and, as a
major player in international politics and business,
it also seeks its own security as well as peace and
security in the Asia-Pacific region from its stance as a
proactive contributor to peace based on the principle of
international cooperation. Japan will contribute more
proactively than ever before to the peace, security and
prosperity of the international community.
b. Japan’s National Interests and National Security Objectives
In achieving the aforementioned fundamental principle of
national security by implementation of concrete policies,
the following national interests need to be clearly defi ned.
❍ To maintain its sovereignty and independence; to
defend its territorial integrity, to ensure the safety
of life, person and properties of its nationals, and to
ensure its survival while maintaining its own peace
and security grounded in freedom and democracy and
preserving its rich culture and tradition;
❍ To achieve the prosperity of Japan and its nationals
through economic development, thereby consolidating
its peace and security; and
❍ To maintain and protect international order based on
rules and universal values, such as freedom, democracy,
respect for human rights, and the rule of law.
In order to safeguard these national interests and
to fulfi ll Japan’s responsibilities in the international
community, Japan will work to achieve the following
national security objectives.
❍ Strengthen the deterrence necessary for maintaining
Japan’s peace and security and for ensuring its survival,
thus deterring threats from directly reaching Japan,
and defeating such threats and minimizing damage if
by chance such threats should reach Japan.
❍ Improve the security environment of the Asia-Pacifi c
region and prevent the emergence of and reduce direct
threats to Japan, through strengthening the JapanU.S. Alliance, enhancing the trust and cooperative
relationships between Japan and its partners within
and outside the Asia Pacifi c region, and promoting
practical security cooperation.
❍ Improve the global security environment and build
a peaceful, stable and prosperous international
community by strengthening the international order


Relations among NSS, NDPG, MTDP, and
Fig. II-1-3-2
Annual Budget

Basic policy for national security centered

NSS

around diplomatic and defense policies
(approx. 10-year time frame)

based on NSS

Prescribe future defense force and target levels

NDPG

of defense force that Japan should achieve
(approx. 10-year time frame)

achieve target levels
of defense force

Indicate (limits of) five-year total expenditures

MTDP

and quantity of major equipment

appropriate budget,
develop specific projects

Examine based on the current situations,

Annual budget

appropriate annual budget as necessary


-----

based on universal values and rules, and by playing a
leading role in the settlement of disputes.

**(2) Security Environment Surrounding Japan and**
**National Security Challenges**

a. Global Security Environment and Challenges
While China, India, and other developing nations rise,
the United States has clarified its policy to shift its
policy emphasis towards the Asia-Pacific region, and
as such the balance between countries is changing.
Rapid advancements in globalization and technological
innovation have increased the relative influence of
non-state-actors, and at the same time, they have led
to an increase in terrorism and criminal threats from
non-state actors.
Issues including the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) by North Korea, Iran,[1] and
other countries and regions are major threats to Japan and
the international community.
In addition, acts of terrorism have injured Japanese
nationals and damaged Japan’s national interests. This
means that Japan and its people are directly exposed to
the threat of international terrorism at home and abroad.
With regard to global commons, the risks of free
access to and utilization of global commons such as seas,
outer space, and cyberspace being hindered are becoming
more and more serious. These risks include unilateral
attempts to change the current status quo of the maritime
aspect of the global commons by force, the threat of the
development of anti-satellite weapons, and cyber attacks.
Global issues that cannot be dealt with by a single
country, including poverty and humanitarian crises
are emerging as critical and urgent issues of human
security. Additionally, there is a growing risk that one
country’s economic crisis can expand to involve the
entire global economy.


b. National Security Environment and Challenges in the
Asia-Pacific Region
Against the backdrop of the existence of various
political systems, the concentration of nation states that
possess large-scale military force, including nuclear
weapons, and the insufficiently legislated regional
cooperation frameworks on national security, so-called
“gray-zone” situations, that is, neither pure peacetime
nor contingencies over sovereignty of the territory or
vested interests, are likely to arise, and this risks further
aggravation of the situation.
North Korea has enhanced the capability of its
WMDs including nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles
as well as repeatedly carried out provocative military
actions, increasing tension in the region.
While there is an expectation for China to share and
comply with international norms, and play a more active
and cooperative role for regional and global issues, it has
been rapidly strengthening and expanding its military
capabilities without sufficient transparency, taken actions
that can be regarded as attempts to change the current
status quo in the seas including the East China Sea and
South China Sea, and rapidly expanded and intensified
its activities in the seas and airspace around Japan. In
addition, there is a mutual existence of stability and
potential instability in the relationship between the sides
of the Taiwan Strait.

**(3) Japan’s Strategic Approach to National Security**
Japan should take a strategic approach centering on
diplomatic policy and defense policy as shown in the
reference.

See>> Fig. II-1-3-3 (Outline of Japan’s Strategic Approach to National Security)


-----

Fig. II-1-3-3 Outline of Japan’s Strategic Approach to National Security

**1. Strengthening and Expanding Japan’s Capabilities and Roles**

❍ Advance vibrant diplomacy in order for Japan to play a more proactive role in achieving peace, stability and prosperity for the international community and to
realize an international order and security environment desirable for Japan.
❍ Efficiently develop a highly effective and joint defense force, and operate with flexibility and readiness based on joint operations; build in peacetime
a comprehensive architecture for responding seamlessly to an array of situations; reinforce structure prioritizing important functions from a joint and
comprehensive perspective of the SDF, which plays a central role in the above initiatives; closely cooperate with the U.S. with regard to extended deterrence in
response to the threat of nuclear weapons, and Japan’s own initiatives, including ballistic missile defense (BMD) and the protection of its people.
❍ Enhance capabilities of law enforcement agencies responsible for territorial patrols and reinforce maritime surveillance capabilities; strengthen coordination among
relevant ministries and agencies; carry out constant review on issues that are relevant to ensuring the security of Japan’s territories, and take effective measures.
❍ As a maritime state, play a leading role in maintaining and developing “Open and Stable Seas” (*1); strengthen Japan’s maritime surveillance capabilities,
including the use of outer space; provide assistance to coastal states along sea lanes from the Middle East to the surrounding waters of Japan that are critical
to Japan due to its dependence on maritime transport, in order to enhance their maritime security capabilities; strengthen cooperation with partners that share
the same strategic interests.
❍ Reinforce Japan’s national capabilities for protection of cyber space and response to cyber attacks; in peacetime, strengthen public-private partnerships;
consider expansion of the pool of human resources in the security field; strengthen international cooperation and promote cyber defense cooperation.
❍ Strengthen Japan’s domestic measures against international terrorism, and reinforce measures against international terrorism, including information gathering
and analysis of intelligence relating to the state of international terrorism.
❍ Fundamentally strengthen Japan’s capability to gather information from a diverse range of sources; utilize geospatial intelligence which combines various
types of intelligence; promote comprehensive analysis of intelligence by developing highly-skilled intelligence experts.
❍ While giving due consideration to the roles that the Three Principles of Arms Exports have played thus far, define clear principles on the overseas transfer of
arms suited to the new security environment (*2).
❍ Enhance and reinforce the functions of information-gathering satellites; make effective use of satellites in areas such as SDF unit operation and collection, and
analysis of information; enhance a system for space situational awareness; promote utilization of outer space in a manner that contributes to national security.
❍ Strengthen Japan’s technological capabilities including dual use technologies; grasp science and technology trends in peacetime, and make effective use of
technology in the area of national security by combining the efforts of industry, academia, and the government.

**2. Strengthening the Japan-U.S. Alliance**

❍ Revise the Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation (*3); work closely with the United States on operational cooperation and policy coordination;
enhance the deterrence and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance by strengthening cooperation in a wide range of areas, including BMD, maritime
affairs, outer space, cyber space, and large-scale disaster response operations.
❍ Implement measures to reduce the cost burden of the U.S. Forces in Japan; steadily implement measures on the realignment of the U.S. Forces in Japan in order to
reduce impacts placed on local communities, including in Okinawa, while continually maintaining and enhancing the deterrence of the Japan-U.S. Alliance.

**3. Strengthening Diplomacy and Security Cooperation with Japan’s Partners for Peace and Stability in the International Community**

❍ The ROK, Australia, ASEAN menber states, and India: Strengthen cooperative relations with these countries with which Japan shares universal values and
strategic interests.
❍ China: Construct and strengthen a Mutually Beneficial Relationship Based on Common Strategic Interests; encourage China to play a responsible and
constructive role for the sake of regional peace, security and prosperity; firmly but in a calm manner respond to China’s attempts to change the current status
quo by coercion.
❍ North Korea: achieve a comprehensive resolution to outstanding issues of concern, such as the abduction of Japanese nationals as well as nuclear and
missile issues.
❍ Russia: advance cooperation in all areas, including security and energy.
❍ In promoting the initiatives mentioned above, actively utilize multilateral and trilateral frameworks for cooperation.
❍ Other partners of the Asia-Pacific region: cooperate toward ensuring stability in the region.
❍ Strengthen cooperative relations with European countries, emerging countries, Middle Eastern countries, as well as African countries.

**4. Proactive Contribution to International Efforts for Peace and Stability of the International Community**

❍ Strengthen Japan’s U.N. diplomacy by proactively contributing to efforts aimed at maintaining and recovering international peace and security at the U.N.
❍ Proactively involve Japan in realizing and strengthening the rule of law relating to the sea, outer space, and cyberspace.
❍ Lead international initiatives on disarmament and non-proliferation.
❍ Further step up cooperation with U.N. PKO and other activities; engage in training for peace-building experts and PKO personnel in various countries.
❍ Promote consultations, etc., with other countries on the situation of international terrorism and international counter-terrorism cooperation.

**5. Strengthening Cooperation Based on Universal Values to Resolve Global Issues**

❍ Share universal values; respond to global development and global issues; realize human security; cooperate with human resource development initiatives in
developing countries; maintain and strengthen the free trade system; respond to energy and environmental issues; enhance people-to-people exchanges.

**6. Strengthening the Domestic Foundation that Supports National Security and Promoting Domestic and Global Understanding**

❍ Maintain and enhance defense production and technological bases.
❍ Take a government-wide approach to uniformly and strategically disseminate information; strengthen information dissemination in foreign languages; reinforce
the social base and intellectual base.

Notes: 1. The NSS defines that these are upheld by maritime order based upon such fundamental principles as the rule of law and ensuring the freedom and safety of navigation and overflight.
2. Three Principles on Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology were adopted by the Cabinet on April 1, 2014.

3. Japan and the United States approved the new Guidelines in April 27, 2015.


-----

**Building a Dynamic Joint**

**Chapter**
**2**

**Defense Force**


**Section 1** **Outline of the National Defense Program Guidelines**


**1 Basic Approach – Building a Dynamic Joint Defense Force**


The National Defense Program Guidelines for FY2014
and beyond (NDPG)[1] is the fi rst of its kind to be
developed in light of the National Security Strategy
(NSS), and it calls for the building of a Dynamic Joint
Defense Force as the cornerstone for the protection of
Japan’s peace and security.
Amid the increasingly severe security environment
surrounding Japan, the number and the duration of
situations, including so-called “gray-zone” situations,
that is, neither pure peacetime nor contingencies over
sovereignty of the territory or vested interests, which
require the SDF’s commitment are both increasing.
Therefore, it is essential to regularly conduct persistent
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR)
activities and swiftly build a response posture in
accordance with the development of the situation to
prevent further escalation. In dealing with such situations,
it is also essential to minimize the damage by dealing
with situations by effective response through achieving
necessary maritime supremacy[2] and air superiority.[3]
Among these situations, the qualitative and quantitative
capabilities of the defense force underpinning the SDF
activities were not necessarily suffi cient.
The NDPG, being fully mindful of these needs,
calls for the enhancement of deterrence and response
capability by pursuing further joint operations,

1 Approved by the National Security Council and the Cabinet in December 2013

2 See Part III, Chapter 1, Section 2 (Effective Deterrence and Response)


improving the mission-capable rate of equipment
and its employment to conduct activities, as well as
developing defense capabilities adequate both in quality
and quantity that underpin various activities. To this end,
Japan has conducted capability assessments based on
joint operations in relation to the SDF’s total functions
and capabilities, in order to identify the functions and
capabilities that should be comprehensively prioritized.
The NDPG carries great signifi cance as it has made it
possible to adapt to an ever-changing security environment
surrounding Japan, and realize a more prioritized and
effi cient defense capability build-up, based on the results
of these capability assessments.
Additionally, it requires the build-up of the most
effective operational posture, by further strengthening a
wide-ranging logistical support foundation. Specifi cally,
the new NDPG calls for the strengthening of various fi elds
as the basic foundations for the SDF such as training
and exercise, operational infrastructure, personnel and
education, medical, defense production and technological
bases, effi cient acquisition of equipment, research and
development, collaboration with local communities,
boosting of communication capabilities, enhancement
of the intellectual base, and promotion of reform of the
Ministry of Defense.

See>> Fig. II-2-1-1 (Changes of the Views regarding Defense Capability)


-----

Fig. II-2-1-1 Changes of the Views regarding Defense Capability

[Background]

Basic ideas in 1976 NDPG
1976 NDPG Détente and Cold War coexisting in global community

Balanced relationship among the United States, China, and -  The concept of Basic Defense Capability

(October 29, 1976 the Soviet Union in the vicinity of Japan -  Maintain a minimum-necessary defense force as an independent nation
the National DefenseCouncil/Cabinet Meeting) Need to show the target of defense force buildup preventing a power vacuum that destabilizes the region, rather than coping

with a direct military threat to Japan

19 years

[Background]

Basic ideas in 1995 NDPG

1995 NDPG The end of Cold War

International situation with unpredictability and uncertainty -  Basically follow the concept of Basic Defense Capability

(November 28, 1995 National expectations to international contribution -  “Dealing with various contingencies such as major disasters” and “contributing
the Security Council/
Cabinet Meeting) to building a more stable security environment” added to the roles of defense

capability, joining the existing role of “defense of the nation”

9 years

[Background]

Basic ideas in 2004 NDPG

2004 NDPG New threats such as international terrorism and ballistic

missile attacks -  Capability to work independently and proactively on implementing international

(December 10, 2004the Security Council/ Direct connection between world peace and Japan’s peace peace cooperation activities, as well as dealing effectively with new threats and
Cabinet Meeting) Necessity to convert the policy from putting weight on diverse contingencies

deterrence to handling the situation -  Succeeding the effective parts of the concept of basic defense capability

6 years

[Background]

Basic ideas in 2010 NDPG

2010 NDPG Change in global power balance

Complex military situation surrounding Japan -  Build up of a Dynamic Defense Force (Not bound by the concept of Basic

(December 17, 2010 Diversification of the military role in global society Defense Capability)
the Security Council/
Cabinet Meeting) -  Facilitating effective deterrence of and responses to various contingencies, and

making it possible to proactively conduct activities to further stabilize the
security environment in the Asia-Pacific region and improve the global security

3 years

environment in a dynamic manner

[Background]

Basic ideas in 2013 NDPG

2013 NDPG Security situation surrounding Japan has become

increasingly severe -  Build up of a Dynamic Joint Defense Force

(December 17, 2013the National Security U.S. rebalance to the Asia-Pacific region -  Defense force to be more thorough with the concept of joint operation, which
Council/Cabinet Meeting) Lessons learned from the Self-Defense Forces experience enables the SDF to respond swiftly to the increasingly severe security

of the Great East Japan Earthquake environment and carry out various activities, such as achieving maritime

supremacy and air superiority, seamlessly and flexibly


**2 A New Security Environment**



- 1  The Global Security Environment


North Korea has deployed a massive military
force and continues to maintain and strengthen its
asymmetrical military capabilities.[4] Furthermore, North
Korea has also repeatedly taken actions that heightened
tension in the region. In particular, with regard to nuclear
and missile development, North Korea is planning to
make technological improvements to extend the range
and increase the accuracy of its ballistic missiles. The
possibility cannot be ruled out that it has successfully
miniaturized nuclear weapons for warheads and
equipped them on ballistic missiles. As such, this issue
poses a serious and imminent threat to Japan’s security,
coupled with its provocative rhetoric and behavior such
as suggesting a missile attack on Japan.
As for China, while it is greatly expected to
play an active role in a more cooperative manner, its
military trends have caused security concerns for the
Asia-Pacifi c region and the international community.
The trends include continuous increases in its defense
expenditures at a high level, efforts to deny access and
deployment as well as prevention of military activities to


As interdependence among countries expands and
deepens, there is a growing risk that unrest in the global
security environment or a security problem in a single
country or region could immediately expand among the
entire international community. Moreover, there are shifts
in the balance of power due to the further development of
countries such as China and India and the relative change
of infl uence of the United States, along with an increase
in the number of so-called “gray-zone” situations, that
is, neither pure peacetime nor contingencies, and cases
of undue infringement upon freedom of the high seas.
In addition, securing the stable use of outer space and
cyberspace is becoming a signifi cant challenge.

- 2  The Security Environment in the Asia-Pacifi c Region


While countries are enhancing and strengthening their
cooperative relationships, gray-zone situations tend to
linger, raising concerns that they may develop into more
serious situations.


Asymmetrical military capabilities, in this context, refer to means of attack different from those of an opponent with superior conventional military capabilities. Such measures are exploited to compensate for


-----

its surrounding areas by foreign militaries, insuffi cient
transparency concerning its military, rapid expansion
and intensifi cation of activities in the maritime and aerial
domains, and attempts to change the status quo by force
in maritime areas.
As for Russia, it is observed that the country is
proceeding to reform and modernize its military forces.
The activities of Russian armed forces have been active.
The United States has clearly manifested its
decision on the rebalance to the Asia-Pacifi c region, and
is maintaining and strengthening its engagement and
presence in the region despite fi scal and various other
constraints while enhancing its relationships with its
allies, among other efforts.

- 3  Japan’s Geographical Characteristics


prosperity. Japan also faces security vulnerabilities such
as frequent natural disasters, concentration of population,
and a large number of nuclear power plants in coastal
areas. In the event of another massive earthquake like the
Great East Japan Earthquake, its impact may spread to
the international community. It is increasingly necessary
to take every possible measure to prepare for future huge
earthquakes such as a Nankai Trough earthquake.

- 4  Issues to be Tackled by Japan


As various security challenges and destabilizing factors
are emerging and becoming more tangible and acute,
the security environment surrounding Japan has become
increasingly severe, and it is diffi cult for a single country
to deal with them on its own. Therefore, it is increasingly
necessary that countries which share interests in
responding to shared security and other challenges
cooperate and actively respond to maintain regional and
global stability.

**3 Japan’s Basic Defense Policy**


fl exibility and readiness based on joint operations. In
the event of various situations, Japan will appropriately
and promptly make decisions and seamlessly respond to
situations as they unfold, in a whole-of-the-government
approach, in coordination with local governments, private
sectors, and others.
Furthermore, Japan will continue to develop various
systems to respond to a variety of disasters and protect
its people, and will enhance the capability to ensure the
safety of Japanese nationals in foreign countries in an
emergency situation.
In order to take such approaches appropriately, Japan
will increase the effectiveness of its situation and disaster
response posture by systemizing various related plans
and expanding the use of simulations, comprehensive
training, and exercises.
Furthermore, Japan will make efforts to build up
a Dynamic Joint Defense Force as mentioned above,
in addition to the establishment of a comprehensive
defense architecture.


As Japan is a maritime state, securing the safety of
maritime and air traffi c through strengthening an “Open
and Stable Seas” order constitutes the basis of peace and

**3 Japan’s Basic Defense Policy**

- 1  Basic policy


In light of the NSS, Japan will build a comprehensive
defense architecture, and actively promote bilateral and
multilateral security cooperation with other countries
while strengthening the Japan-U.S. Alliance, thereby
seeking to establish an infrastructure necessary for fully
exercising its defense capabilities.
Under the Constitution, Japan will effi ciently build
a highly effective and joint defense force in line with the
basic principles of maintaining an exclusively defenseoriented policy, not becoming a military power that poses
a threat to other countries, while adhering to the principle
of civilian control of the military and observing the Three
Non-Nuclear Principles.
Additionally, with regard to the threat of nuclear
weapons, the deterrence of expansion provided by
the United States is indispensable. Japan will closely
cooperate with the United States, and take appropriate
responses through its own efforts. In addition, Japan will
play a constructive and active role in international nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation efforts.

- 2  Japan’s Own Efforts



- 3  Strengthening of the Japan-U.S. Alliance

The Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements, together with
Japan’s own efforts, constitute the cornerstone for Japan’s
national security. Also, the Japan-U.S. Alliance functions
as public goods that contribute to the stability and


Given the increasingly severe security environment, Japan
will effi ciently develop a highly effective joint defense
force and make efforts to employ it with a high level of


-----

prosperity not only of Japan, but also of the Asia-Pacifi c
region and the world at large. From this perspective,
Japan will place emphasis on the following efforts:

**(1) Strengthening Deterrence and Response Capabilities**
**of the Japan-U.S. Alliance**

Japan will continue revising the Guidelines for JapanU.S. Defense Cooperation.[5] In addition, Japan will
promote joint training and exercises, joint ISR activities
and the joint/shared use of facilities and areas. Japan will
also tighten the Japan-U.S. operational cooperation and
policy coordination.



- 4  Active Promotion of Security Cooperation

**(1) Cooperation in the Asia-Pacifi c Region**
Japan will promote a variety of cooperative initiatives
in a multi-layered manner to ease the atmosphere of
confrontation and the sense of curiosity towards one
another in the Asia-Pacifi c region. In particular, with
regard to the Republic of Korea (ROK), Australia and
India, Japan will make efforts to improve cooperation
and interoperability. Japan will also endeavor to promote
dialogue and exchanges with China and Russia.
Additionally, with regard to capacity building assistance,
Japan will promote and carry it out in full coordination
with diplomatic policy initiatives, including Offi cial
Development Assistance (ODA), and Japan will expand
the range of countries receiving support as well as its scope.
Furthermore, in multilateral security cooperation and
dialogue, Japan, in cooperation with the U.S. and Australia,
will proactively contribute to building cooperative
relationships in the region, and Japan will actively
participate in multilateral joint training and exercises.


**(2) Strengthening and Expanding Cooperation in a Broad**
**Range of Fields**

The Japan-U.S. Alliance will strengthen cooperation
not only in the fi elds of anti-piracy efforts, capacity
building assistance, humanitarian assistance/disaster
relief, peacekeeping and counter terrorism, but also
in maritime affairs, outer space and cyberspace. As
for disaster response, Japan will further strengthen its
cooperation between the SDF and the U.S. Forces. In
addition, Japan will constantly strengthen and expand the
Japan-U.S. cooperative relationship over a broad range
of fi elds, including intelligence, and defense equipment
and technology.

**(3) Steady Implementation of Measures Relating to the**
**Stationing of the U.S. Forces in Japan**

Japan will provide stable support for the smooth and
effective stationing of the U.S. Forces in Japan. At the
same time, efforts will be made to steadily implement the
realignment of the U.S. Forces in Japan and mitigate the
impact on Okinawa and other local communities while
maintaining the deterrence provided by the U.S. Forces.


**(2) Cooperation with the International Community**
It is very diffi cult for a single country to respond to
global security challenges on its own. Moreover, as
the roles of military forces have diversifi ed, such forces
play an important role in building peace and promoting
confi dence-building. Therefore, Japan will continue and
strengthen various initiatives concerning arms control,
disarmament, nonproliferation and capacity building
assistance on a regular basis in cooperation with the
international community. Specifi cally Japan will strengthen
its cooperation with the European Union (EU), North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Organization
for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), along
with the United Kingdom, France and other European
countries. Furthermore, Japan will actively promote
various international peace cooperation activities in a
multi-layered manner, and in particular, will continue to
actively conduct activities utilizing the SDF’s capabilities.

**4 Future Defense Forces**


detect any signs of development at an early stage. Through
such activities, Japan will clearly express its resolve not
to tolerate any change of the status quo by force, thereby
preventing various situations from occurring.



- 1  Role of the Defense Forces


**(1) Effective Deterrent of and Response to Various Situations**
Japan will achieve intelligence superiority[6] through
persistent ISR activities in an extensive surrounding area to

5 On April 27, 2015, new Guidelines were approved between Japan and the United States.i


-----

At the same time, Japan will swiftly and seamlessly
respond to situations from an early stage, including gray
zone situations, and establish the necessary posture to
continuously address a protracted situation. Moreover,
Japan will implement an effective response tailored to
each situation, even in cases when multiple events occur
in a consecutive or concurrent manner.
In particular, the following points will be emphasized:
(1) ensuring security of the sea and airspace surrounding
Japan; (2) response to an attack on remote islands; (3) response
to ballistic missile attacks; (4) responses in outer space
and cyberspace; and (5) responses to major disasters.

**(2) Stabilization of the Asia-Pacific Region and**
**Improvement of the Global Security Environment**

Through persistent ISR in the area surrounding Japan, and
the timely and appropriate implementation of training,
exercises, and various other activities, Japan will ensure
the stability of the security environment in the region.
Moreover, by working in partnership with its allies and
partners, Japan will promote multi-tiered initiatives,
including bilateral and multilateral defense cooperation
and exchange, joint training and exercises, and capacity
building assistance.
In order to respond appropriately to global security
issues, Japan will strengthen various initiatives focused
on arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation, as
well as actively promote international peace cooperation
activities, anti-piracy initiatives and capacity building
assistance. Japan will attach importance to the following
in particular: (1) holding training and exercises;
(2) promoting defense cooperation and exchange;
(3) promoting capacity building assistance; (4) ensuring
maritime security; (5) implementing international peace
cooperation activities; and (6) cooperating with efforts to
promote arms control, disarmament, and non-proliferation.


the SDF will possess the minimum necessary level of
expertise and skills, and thereby further promote efforts
to achieve even greater efficiency and rationalization.

**(2) Functions and Capabilities to be Emphasized**
The SDF will selectively strengthen the following
functions and capabilities in particular, paying attention
to enhance joint functions with interoperability with the
U.S. Forces.
❍ ISR capabilities
Japan will implement extensive persistent ISR in the
surrounding seas and airspace, and adopt a flexible
approach for boosting its ISR posture according to the
developments of situations.
❍ Intelligence capabilities
Japan will strengthen its system for collecting intelligence,
processing information, and analyzing and sharing the
collected information, so that the SDF can promptly
detect signs of various situations and take other actions.
In doing so, the SDF will seek to enhance its various
information collection capabilities, including HUMINT,
OSINT, SIGINT, and IMINT, as well as persistent ISR
capabilities using unmanned aerial vehicles. Also, the
SDF will strengthen its geospatial intelligence capabilities
to establish a framework for the securing and nurturing of
personnel in information gathering and analysis.
❍ Transport capability
In order to swiftly deploy and move necessary units, the
SDF will strengthen its integrated transport capacity,
while seeking collaboration with the civilian transport
sector on a regular basis.
❍ Command and control, and information and
communication capabilities
In order to establish a command and control system
that can manage units nationwide in a mobile, joint and
integrated manner, a new central headquarters to control
all regional armies will be established within the Ground
Self-Defense Force (GSDF), among other measures.
The SDF will also strive to enhance and strengthen its
capabilities for supporting communications infrastructure
on remote islands and data link functions among the three
services, along with other capabilities.
❍ Response to an attack on remote islands
The SDF will strengthen its engagement capability for the
ensuring of maritime supremacy and air superiority, which
is the prerequisite for an effective response. The SDF will
strengthen the integrated capabilities to seek to interdict
any attack on Japan’s remote islands, and newly develop
sufficient amphibious operations capability, which enables
the SDF to land, recapture, and secure without delay in the
case of an invasion of any remote islands. Furthermore, the
SDF will enhance its logistical support capabilities so that



- 2  Priorities in Strengthening Architecture of the SDF

**(1) Basic Approach**
Based on the results of the capability assessments conducted
based on the standpoint of joint operations in relation to
various potential contingencies, the SDF will prioritize the
development of capacities to ensure maritime supremacy
and air superiority, which is the prerequisite for effective
deterrence and response in various situations, including
defense posture buildup in the southwestern region.
Furthermore, the SDF will emphasize the establishment
of rapid deployment capabilities with a consideration to
establishing a wide-ranging logistical support foundation.
At the same time, in terms of preparation for an
invasion such as the landing of large scale ground forces


-----

its units can swiftly and continuously respond in the event
of a situation in the southwestern region. In addition, the
SDF will also examine the desirable air defense posture in
remote islands in the Pacific.
❍ Response to ballistic missile attacks
To counter North Korea’s improved ballistic missile
capability, Japan will pursue comprehensive improvement
of its response capability against ballistic missiles. With
regard to the BMD system, Japan will enhance readiness,
simultaneous engagement capability, and sustainable
response capability to strengthen the capability to protect
the entire territory. Based on appropriate role and mission
sharing between Japan and the United States, in order to
strengthen the deterrence of the Japan-U.S. Alliance as a
whole through enhancement of Japan’s own deterrent and
response capability, Japan will study a potential form of
response capability to address the means of ballistic missile
launches and related facilities, and take necessary means.
❍ Response in outer space and cyberspace
While strengthening information collection capability
using satellites, and reinforcing command, control and
telecommunications capabilities, the SDF will enhance
the survivability[7] of satellites through such initiatives as
space situational awareness.
As for cyberspace, Japan will enhance integrated
persistent surveillance and response capabilities as well
as continuously strengthen and secure personnel with
expertise and the latest equipment.
❍ Responses to major disasters, etc.
The SDF will develop a response posture sustainable for
long-term operation, through swift transportation and
deployment of appropriately sized units.
❍ Responses focused on international peace cooperation
activities and other similar activities
The SDF will strengthen protective capabilities to
ensure the safety of personnel and units. The SDF will
also work on enhancing transport and deployment
capability, information communication capability, and
on strengthening logistics and medical service structure.
Furthermore, the SDF will enhance intelligence gathering
capability as well as its education, training and personnel
management systems.

- 3 **Architecture of Each Service of the Self-Defense Forces**


maintain rapidly deployable basic operational units
(rapid deployment divisions, rapid deployment
brigades, and an armored division) furnished with
advanced mobility and ISR capabilities. In addition, the
GSDF will maintain mobile operating units capable of
effectively performing amphibious and other operations.
The GSDF will maintain half of these rapidly deployable
basic operational units in Hokkaido, given its excellent
training environment.
The GSDF will implement rationalization and
streamlining with a particular focus on tanks/howitzers and
rockets, and review the organization and equipment of units.
The number of GSDF personnel will be maintained at
around 159,000, which was the same level as at the end of
FY2013, in order to ensure sufficient personnel availability
to respond to major disasters or other situations.

**(2) Maritime Self-Defense Forces (MSDF)**
The MSDF will increase the number of destroyers to 54
(14 escort divisions) by using new destroyers that offer
improved response capabilities for various missions and
have more compact designs, and will maintain ship-based
patrol helicopter units in order to secure the defense of
surrounding waters and ensure the safety of maritime
traffic. Furthermore, two Aegis-equipped destroyers[8] will
be added, bringing the fleet to eight.
Furthermore, in order to effectively carry out regular
information gathering and warning and surveillance
activities, as well as patrolling of surrounding waters[9]
and defense operations, the MSDF will maintain an
augmented submarine fleet and patrol aircraft units.


**(3) Air Self-Defense Forces (ASDF)**
The ASDF will maintain air warning and control units
in order to provide persistent ISR in most air space
over Japan and the surrounding areas. By consolidating
warning and control operations at air defense command
centers, the ASDF will gradually change warning groups
into warning squadrons as well as establish one new
squadron in the air warning unit.
As for Fighter Aircraft Units, the 13th squadron will
be newly established, and Air Reconnaissance Unit will
be abolished. In addition, one squadron will be added to
the Aerial Refueling/Transport Unit, making it a twosquadron architecture.
Furthermore, the ASDF will maintain surface-toair guided missile units providing multi-layered defense
for Japan against ballistic missile attacks, together with


**(1) Ground Self-Defense Force (GSDF)**
In order to respond swiftly to an attack on offshore
islands and various other situations, the GSDF will


The capability to prevent or minimize the disconnection of or decline in the function of satellites as well as to secure alternative measures so that the satellites can be utilized continuously even in situations
where risks such as space debris and anti-satellite attack are apparent.

Destroyers equipped with the Aegis Weapon System that uses high performance computers to automatically process series of operations such as target search, detection, identification and attack.i


-----

the Aegis destroyers, as well as protecting key areas in
tandem with the surface-to-air guided missile units of
the GSDF.


See>> Fig. II-2-1-2 (NDPG Comparison Tables)
See>> Fig. II-2-1-3 (Structure of the Major Units of the MSDF (Changes))

|Col1|Category|Col3|1976 NDPG|1995 NDPG|2004 NDPG|2010 NDPG|2013 NDPG|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|GSDF|Authorized Number of personnel Active-Duty Personnel Reserve-Ready Personnel||180,000|160,000 145,000 15,000|155,000 148,000 7,000|154,000 147,000 7,000|159,000 151,000 8,000|
||Major units|Regionally deployed units in peacetime1|12 divisions 2 combined brigades|8 divisions 6 brigades|8 divisions 6 brigades|8 divisions 6 brigades|5 divisions 2 brigades|
|||Rapid Deployment Units|1 armored division 1 artillery brigade 1 airborne brigade 1 training group 1 helicopter brigade|1 armored division 1 airborne brigade 1 helicopter brigade|1 armored division Central Readiness Force|Central Readiness Force 1 armored division|3 rapid deployment divisions 4 rapid deployment brigades 1 armored division 1 airborne brigade 1 amphibious rapid deployment brigade 1 helicopter brigade|
|||Surface-to-Ship Guided Missile units|||||5 surface-to-ship guided missile regiments|
|||Surface-to-Air Guided Missile Units|8 anti-aircraft artillery groups|8 anti-aircraft artillery groups|8 anti-aircraft artillery groups|7 anti-aircraft artillery groups/regiments|7 anti-aircraft artillery groups/regiments|
||Major Equipment|Tanks2 Artillery (Main artillery)2|(approx. 1,200) (approx. 1,000/vehicle)|approx. 900 (approx. 900/vehicle)|approx. 600 (approx. 600/vehicle)|approx. 400 (approx. 400/vehicle)|(approx. 300) (approx. 300/vehicle)|
|MSDF|Major units|Destroyer units for mobile operations regional deployment Submarine units Minesweeper Units Patrol aircraft units|4 flotillas (Regional units) 10 units 6 divisions 2 flotillas (Land-based) 16 squadrons|4 flotillas (Regional units) 7 units 6 divisions 1 flotilla (Land-based) 13 squadrons|4 flotillas (8 divisions) 5 divisions 4 divisions 1 flotilla 9 squadrons|4 flotillas (8 divisions) 4 divisions 6 divisions 1 flotilla 9 squadrons|4 flotillas (8 divisions) 6 divisions 6 divisions 1 flotilla 9 squadrons|
||Major Equipment|Destroyers Submarines Combat aircraft|approx. 60 16 approx. 220|approx. 50 16 approx. 170|47 16 approx. 150|48 22 approx. 150|54 22 approx. 170|
|ASDF|Major units|Air Warning & Control Units|28 warning groups 1 squadron|8 warning groups 20 warning squadrons 1 squadron|8 warning groups 20 warning squadrons 1 AEW group (2 squadrons)|4 warning groups 24 warning squadrons 1 AEW group (2 squadrons)|28 warning squadrons 1 AEW group (3 squadrons)|
|||Fighter Aircraft Units Fighter-interceptor units Support fighter units|10 squadrons 3 squadrons|9 squadrons 3 squadrons|12 squadrons|12 squadrons|13 squadrons|
|||Air Reconnaissance Units|1 squadron|1 squadron|1 squadron|1 squadron||
|||Aerial refueling/ transport units Air transport units|3 squadrons|3 squadrons|1 squadron 3 squadrons|1 squadron 3 squadrons|2 squadrons 3 squadrons|
|||Surface-to-Air Guided Missile Units|6 groups|6 groups|6 groups|6 groups|6 groups|
||Major Equipment|Combat aircraft (Fighters)|approx. 430 (approx. 350)2|approx. 400 approx. 300|approx. 350 approx. 260|approx. 340 approx. 260|approx. 360 approx. 280|
|Major equipment/units that may also serve for BMD missions3||Aegis-equipped destroyers|||4 ships|6 ships4|8 ships|
|||Air Warning & Control Units Surface-to-Air Guided Missile Units|||7 warning groups 4 warning squadrons 3 groups|11 warning groups/ units 6 groups||

|Fig. II-2-1-2|NDPG Comparison Tables|
|---|---|
|Category 1976 NDPG 1995 NDPG 2004 NDPG 2010 NDPG 2013 NDPG Authorized Number of personnel 180,000 160,000 155,000 154,000 159,000 Active-Duty Personnel 145,000 148,000 147,000 151,000 Reserve-Ready Personnel 15,000 7,000 7,000 8,000 Regionally deployed units in 12 divisions 8 divisions 8 divisions 8 divisions 5 divisions peacetime1 2 combined brigades 6 brigades 6 brigades 6 brigades 2 brigades Rapid Deployment Units 1 armored division 1 armored division 1 armored division Central Readiness Force 3 rapid deployment divisions 1 artillery brigade 4 rapid deployment brigades 1 airborne brigade 1 airborne brigade Central Readiness Force 1 armored division 1 armored division GSDF 1 training group 1 airborne brigade Major units 1 helicopter brigade 1 helicopter brigade 1 amphibious rapid deployment brigade 1 helicopter brigade 5 surface-to-ship Surface-to-Ship Guided guided missile Missile units regiments Surface-to-Air Guided 8 anti-aircraft artillery 8 anti-aircraft artillery 8 anti-aircraft artillery 7 anti-aircraft artillery 7 anti-aircraft artillery Missile Units groups groups groups groups/regiments groups/regiments Major Tanks2 (approx. 1,200) approx. 900 approx. 600 approx. 400 (approx. 300) Equipment Artillery (Main artillery)2 (approx. 1,000/vehicle) (approx. 900/vehicle) (approx. 600/vehicle) (approx. 400/vehicle) (approx. 300/vehicle) Destroyer units 4 flotillas (8 divisions) 4 flotillas (8 divisions) 4 divisions 6 divisions for mobile operations 4 flotillas 4 flotillas 4 flotillas (8 divisions) regional deployment (Regional units) 10 units (Regional units) 7 units 5 divisions Major units Submarine units 6 divisions 6 divisions 4 divisions 6 divisions 6 divisions MSDF Minesweeper Units 2 flotillas 1 flotilla 1 flotilla 1 flotilla 1 flotilla Patrol aircraft units (Land-based) 16 (Land-based) 13 9 squadrons 9 squadrons 9 squadrons squadrons squadrons Destroyers approx. 60 approx. 50 47 48 54 Major Submarines 16 16 16 22 22 Equipment Combat aircraft approx. 220 approx. 170 approx. 150 approx. 150 approx. 170 Air Warning & Control Units 28 warning groups 8 warning groups 8 warning groups 4 warning groups 28 warning squadrons 20 warning squadrons 20 warning squadrons 24 warning squadrons 1 squadron 1 squadron 1 AEW group 1 AEW group 1 AEW group (2 squadrons) (2 squadrons) (3 squadrons) Fighter Aircraft Units 12 squadrons 12 squadrons 13 squadrons Fighter-interceptor units 10 squadrons 9 squadrons Major units Support fighter units 3 squadrons 3 squadrons ASDF Air Reconnaissance Units 1 squadron 1 squadron 1 squadron 1 squadron Aerial refueling/ 1 squadron 1 squadron 2 squadrons transport units Air transport units 3 squadrons 3 squadrons 3 squadrons 3 squadrons 3 squadrons Surface-to-Air Guided 6 groups 6 groups 6 groups 6 groups 6 groups Missile Units Major Combat aircraft approx. 430 approx. 400 approx. 350 approx. 340 approx. 360 Equipment (Fighters) (approx. 350)2 approx. 300 approx. 260 approx. 260 approx. 280 Aegis-equipped destroyers 4 ships 6 ships4 8 ships Major equipment/units that 7 warning groups 11 warning groups/ Air Warning & Control Units may also serve for BMD 4 warning squadrons units missions3 Surface-to-Air Guided 3 groups 6 groups Missile Units Notes: 1. Units referred to as Regional Deployment Units in the 2013 NDPG. 2. Although not stated in the Attached Tables of 1976 NDPG and the 2013 NDPG, it is listed here for comparison with the NDPG Attached Table from 1995 to 2010. 3. “Major equipment/units that may also serve for BMD missions” are included in the number of main equipment in the MSDF or number of major units in the ASDF in the 2004 NDPG and the 2010 NDPG, but their acquisition/formation will be allowed within the number of destroyers (Aegis-equipped destroyers), air warning & control units, and surface-to-air guided missile units in the 2013 NDPG. 4. Additional deployment of Aegis destroyers equipped with ballistic missile defense functions may be carried out within the number of destroyers set above, depending on factors such as the development of ballistic missile defense technology and financial matters.||


-----

Fig. II-2-1-3 Structure of the Major Units of the MSDF (Changes)

Structure of the Major Units of the MSDF (Changes)

New Structure

In order to defend the seas surrounding Japan and ensure the security of maritime traffic through effectively conducting various operations such as
persistent ISR and anti-submarine operations, etc., the MSDF promotes various programs, to steadily obtain and secure maritime supremacy.

Location of Headquarters, etc., of Destroyer/ Destroyer Unit
Submarine/Aircraft Units, etc. Escort Division 3

Units planned to be established are shown in red. Escort Division 15

Helicopter Unit
Air ASW Helicopter Squadron 25

Ominato Fixed-wing Patrol Aircraft Unit

Destroyer Unit

Air Patrol Squadron 2

Escort Division 7

Hachinohe

Escort Division 14

Destroyer Unit Helicopter Unit
Escort Division 2 Air ASW Helicopter Squadron 23 Fixed-wing Patrol Aircraft Unit
Escort Division 5 Air Patrol Squadron 3
Escort Division 8

Destroyer Unit

Escort Division 13 Maizuru Atsugi

Yokosuka Escort Division 1

Escort Division 16

Escort Division 6

Kure Tateyama

Escort Division 11

Komatsushima

Helicopter Unit

Submarine Unit

Air ASW Helicopter Squadron 22 Omura Sasebo Helicopter Unit Submarine Division 2

Kanoya Air ASW Helicopter Squadron 24 Submarine Division 4

Destroyer Unit Submarine Division 6

Fixed-wing Patrol Aircraft Unit

Escort Division 4

Air Patrol Squadron 1

Escort Division 12

Helicopter Unit

Landing Ship Unit

Air ASW Helicopter Squadron 21

Landing Ship Division 1

Fixed-wing Patrol Aircraft Unit

Submarine Unit

Air Patrol Squadron 5 Naha

Submarine Division 1

Submarine Division 3

Submarine Division 5

Structure of Destroyer Units Current situation (at the end of (approx. Future Structure of Patrol Aircraft Units

FY 2013) 10 years later)

Destroyers  *47 destroyers as of the end of 2013 Patrol Aircraft
(48 destroyers (12 divisions) in the 2010 NDPG H Maintenance of current structure (65 aircraft) of fixed-wing
54 destroyers (14 divisions) in the 2013 NDPG). patrol aircraft (P-1/3C) through continued procurement of P-1.
H Increased number of destroyers by introduction of the new H Increased number of patrol helicopters (SH-60K/J)
destroyers with additional multifunctional capability and **47** **54** (72 helicopters in the 2010 NDPG
with a compact-type hull. **destroyers** **destroyers** 80 helicopters in the 2013 NDPG).
Destroyers with detachable equipment for minesweeping
and anti-submarine operations.
H Establishment of an 8-destroyer structure with
2 additional Aegis-equipped destroyers. **Introduction of**

**the new destroyer**

H Continued procurement of **25**
destroyers (DD). **mine-** **18**

**sweeping** **mine-**

New Destroyer **vessels** **sweeping vessels**

Structure of Submarine Units Others

Submarines *16 submarines as of the end of 2013. **Capabilities of New Destroyer** Other main programs
(22 submarines in the 2010 NDPG Minesweeping by unmanned underwater vehicle H Refit tank landing ships (operation of
22 submarines in the 2013 NDPG). and other equipment amphibious vehicles and tilt-rotor aircraft).
H Continued increase in the number of H Consider what the role should be of a
submarines through construction and life multipurpose vessel with capabilities for
extension. command and control, large-scale transportation, and aircraft operations,

which can be utilized in various operations such as amphibious operations.
H Provide new destroyers with capabilities for anti-mine operations.

Anti-submarine operations H Extend the life of existing vessels (destroyers) and aircraft (P-3C, SH-60J).
by towed array sonar system
(TASS) and other equipment


-----

**y**

**Structural Transformation of Fighter Aircraft and Other Units** **Column**

In order to achieve a structure under which we can steadily maintain air superiority in Japan’s territorial airspace, the Air Self-Defense Force
(ASDF) is relocating units including fi ghter aircraft units around the country based on the National Defense Program Guidelines and Mid-term
Defense Program.
For enhanced ASDF operational posture in the southwestern region, the F-15 unit at Naha Air Base came to have two fi ghter squadrons
in FY2015 after the F-15 unit at Tsuiki Air Base was relocated to Naha, leading to the establishment of the 9th Air Wing. The Tactical Fighter
Training Group, which simulates the role of an adversary unit, at Nyutabaru Air Base is scheduled to be relocated to Komatsu Air Base in FY
2016 in order to develop the necessary training environment required to improve the tactical skills of fi ghter aircraft units around the country.
In addition, the defense posture in the southwestern region is to be further bolstered by moving the F-2 unit at Misawa Air Base to Tsuiki Air
Base, making the F-2 unit at Tsuiki comprised of two squadrons, and swapping the F-4 unit at Nyutabaru Air Base with the F-15 unit at Hyakuri
Air Base.
With the deployment of F-35A at Misawa Air Base, the abolishment of the Air Reconnaissance Unit, and the establishment of the 13th
fi ghter aircraft unit scheduled in the future, the ASDF aims to establish a posture of fi ghter aircraft units that can properly respond to changes
in the security environment surrounding Japan while continuously and steadily carrying out air defense missions including scrambles against
aircraft intruding into Japan’s territorial airspace.

2nd Air Wing

(Chitose) Deployment planned

in FY 2017

Planned in FY 2016

3rd Air Wing

(Misawa)

Planned in
FY 2020

6th Air Wing

Planned in (Komatsu)
FY 2016

Planned in FY 2016

8th Air Wing 7th Air Wing

(Tsuiki) (Hyakuri)

FY 2015 Planned in FY 2016

5th Air Wing
(Nyutabaru)

9th Air Wing

(Naha)


-----

**5 Basic Foundation for SDF**


To ensure that the defense force can function as the foundations underpinning the defense force.
effectively as possible, it is also imperative to strengthen See>> Fig. II-2-1-4 (Basic Structure to Maximize Defense Capability)

|Category|Main measures|
|---|---|
|Training and Exercises|❍ Expand the use of the good training environment in Hokkaido; enhance and strengthen training and exercises that also involve relevant agencies and the civilian sector. ❍ Promote the joint/shared use of U.S. Forces facilities in the southwestern region with the SDF for the purpose of securing a good training environment while paying close attention to the relationship with local communities.|
|Operations Infrastructure|❍ Enhance resiliency, including the ability of camps and bases to recover so as to respond effectively to various situations, as well as to ensure the expeditious deployment of units etc.; improve facilities and dormitories of each branch of the service to ensure readiness. ❍ Discuss ways to enable the immediate use of civilian airports and ports by the SDF as the foundation of its operations in response to situations that arise. ❍ Implement various family support measures for personnel engaged in duties and for their families. ❍ Secure and store necessary ammunition; maintain equipment.|
|Personnel Education|❍ Take measures to ensure an appropriate rank and age distribution given the duties and characteristics of respective branches of the service. ❍ Make use of female uniformed SDF personnel more effectively; facilitate measures to make good use of human resources including reemployment and measures related to honors and privileges; expand training and exercise opportunities, and secure personnel who can instantly cope with various situations with f lexibility based on a broad view and experience gained through working in other relevant ministries and agencies in order to enhance the joint operations structure. ❍ Facilitate various recruitment programs; promote support for the reemployment of SDF personnel through measures such as enhancing coordination with local governments and relevant agencies. ❍ Promote the use of Reserve SDF personnel in a wide range of areas and implement measures to boost the staff ing rate of Reserve SDF personnel etc. in order to support the continued operation of troops.|
|Medicine|❍ Establish an eff ciient and high-quality medical system, including the upgrading of SDF hospitals into hubs with enhanced functions, and improvements in the management of the National Defense Medical College Hospital. ❍ Secure and train such medical staff as medical off icers, nurses, and emergency medical technicians. Improve f irst aid capabilities on the frontline, and put in place a posture for rapid medical evacuation.|
|Defense Production and Technological Bases|❍ Formulate a strategy that sets forth the MOD’s future vision for Japan’s defense production and technical basis as a whole; promote the adaptation of equipment to civilian use. ❍ Formulate clear principles that comply with the new security environment about the overseas transfer of weapons, etc.|
|Eff icient Acquisition of Equipment|❍ In order to carry out effective and eff icient acquisition of equipment, introduce a project manager system; enhance project management throughout the life-cycle of equipment; study the possibility of employing more long-term contracts. ❍ Improve readiness and response capabilities by reforming the supply system through the effective utilization of civilian capabilities; make the acquisition process transparent and optimize to the contract system.|
|Research and Development (R&D)|❍ Under the constrained budget, ensure there is consistency between research and development and priority of defense buildup, while considering needs that arise in operations of the SDF. ❍ In order to respond to new threats and ensure technological advantage in strategically important areas, promote research and development based on a mid-to-long-term perspective. ❍ Actively utilize civilian technologies (dual-use technologies) by enhancing coordination with universities and research institutions, and transfer military technologies into civilian activities.|
|Collaboration with Local Communities|❍ Advance measures aimed at the areas around defense facilities; continuously engage in proactive public relations activities aimed at local governments and residents. ❍ Give consideration to the attributes of each area when reorganizing units; give consideration to the impact that the operation of camps and so on have on local economies.|
|Boosting Communication Capabilities|❍ Enhance strategic publicity; utilize a wide range of media networks.|
|Enhancing the Intellectual Base|❍ Promote education on security-related matters at educational institutions. ❍ Strengthen the research environment of the MOD and the SDF including the National Institute of Defense Studies; promote various forms of coordination with other national research institutes as well as universities and think tanks at home and abroad.|
|Promoting Reform of the MOD|❍ Foster a sense of unity among civilian off icials and uniformed personnel; optimize the build-up of defense as a whole; enhance SDF joint operation functions; enhance policy-making and communication functions.|

|Fig. II-2-1-4|Basic Structure to Maximize Defense Capability|
|---|---|
|Category Main measures ❍ Expand the use of the good training environment in Hokkaido; enhance and strengthen training and exercises that also involve relevant agencies and the civilian sector. Training and Exercises ❍ Promote the joint/shared use of U.S. Forces facilities in the southwestern region with the SDF for the purpose of securing a good training environment while paying close attention to the relationship with local communities. ❍ Enhance resiliency, including the ability of camps and bases to recover so as to respond effectively to various situations, as well as to ensure the expeditious deployment of units etc.; improve facilities and dormitories of each branch of the service to ensure readiness. Operations Infrastructure ❍ Discuss ways to enable the immediate use of civilian airports and ports by the SDF as the foundation of its operations in response to situations that arise. ❍ Implement various family support measures for personnel engaged in duties and for their families. ❍ Secure and store necessary ammunition; maintain equipment. ❍ Take measures to ensure an appropriate rank and age distribution given the duties and characteristics of respective branches of the service. ❍ Make use of female uniformed SDF personnel more effectively; facilitate measures to make good use of human resources including reemployment and measures related to honors and privileges; expand training and exercise opportunities, and secure personnel who can instantly cope with various situations with f lexibility based on a broad view and experience gained Personnel Education through working in other relevant ministries and agencies in order to enhance the joint operations structure. ❍ Facilitate various recruitment programs; promote support for the reemployment of SDF personnel through measures such as enhancing coordination with local governments and relevant agencies. ❍ Promote the use of Reserve SDF personnel in a wide range of areas and implement measures to boost the staff ing rate of Reserve SDF personnel etc. in order to support the continued operation of troops. ❍ Establish an eff ciient and high-quality medical system, including the upgrading of SDF hospitals into hubs with enhanced functions, and improvements in the management of the National Defense Medical College Hospital. Medicine ❍ Secure and train such medical staff as medical off icers, nurses, and emergency medical technicians. Improve f irst aid capabilities on the frontline, and put in place a posture for rapid medical evacuation. ❍ Formulate a strategy that sets forth the MOD’s future vision for Japan’s defense production and technical basis as a whole; Defense Production and promote the adaptation of equipment to civilian use. Technological Bases ❍ Formulate clear principles that comply with the new security environment about the overseas transfer of weapons, etc. ❍ In order to carry out effective and eff icient acquisition of equipment, introduce a project manager system; enhance project management throughout the life-cycle of equipment; study the possibility of employing more long-term contracts. Eff icient Acquisition of Equipment ❍ Improve readiness and response capabilities by reforming the supply system through the effective utilization of civilian capabilities; make the acquisition process transparent and optimize to the contract system. ❍ Under the constrained budget, ensure there is consistency between research and development and priority of defense buildup, while considering needs that arise in operations of the SDF. ❍ In order to respond to new threats and ensure technological advantage in strategically important areas, promote research and Research and Development (R&D) development based on a mid-to-long-term perspective. ❍ Actively utilize civilian technologies (dual-use technologies) by enhancing coordination with universities and research institutions, and transfer military technologies into civilian activities. ❍ Advance measures aimed at the areas around defense facilities; continuously engage in proactive public relations activities Collaboration with Local aimed at local governments and residents. Communities ❍ Give consideration to the attributes of each area when reorganizing units; give consideration to the impact that the operation of camps and so on have on local economies. Boosting Communication Capabilities ❍ Enhance strategic publicity; utilize a wide range of media networks. ❍ Promote education on security-related matters at educational institutions. Enhancing the Intellectual Base ❍ Strengthen the research environment of the MOD and the SDF including the National Institute of Defense Studies; promote various forms of coordination with other national research institutes as well as universities and think tanks at home and abroad. ❍ Foster a sense of unity among civilian off icials and uniformed personnel; optimize the build-up of defense as a whole; Promoting Reform of the MOD enhance SDF joint operation functions; enhance policy-making and communication functions.||


**6 Additional Points**


The NDPG sets out the form of Japan’s defense capabilities
over the next decade or so. The National Security Council
will conduct regular, systematic review over the course of
implementation of the various measures and programs.
Smooth, swift and accurate transition to the future
defense capabilities will be facilitated through validations
based on joint operational capability assessment. When
major changes in the situation are anticipated during the


review and verifi cation process, necessary examination
considering the security environment at that time will
be implemented and these guidelines will be revised
adequately. In light of the increasingly severe fi scal
conditions, Japan will strive to achieve greater effi ciency
and streamlining in the defense capability buildup while
ensuring harmony with other national initiatives.


-----

**Section 2** **Outline of the Medium Term Defense Program**


**1 Program Guidelines**


Based on the NDPG, the Mid-Term Defense Program
(FY2014-FY2018) (MTDP) states that an appropriate
defense buildup is to be achieved under the following six
basic program guidelines.
❍ Emphasis will be placed on the following functions
and capabilities in particular: (1) ISR capabilities;
(2) intelligence capabilities; (3) transport capabilities;
(4) C3I capabilities; (5) response to an attack on
remote islands; (6) response to ballistic missile
attacks; (7) response to outer space and cyberspace
threats; (8) response to large-scale disasters; and
(9) international peace cooperation efforts

**2 Reorganization of the Major SDF Units**


- 1  Ground Self-Defense Force (GSDF)


❍ Prioritize development of capacities to ensure maritime
supremacy and air superiority, development of rapid
deployment capabilities, and achievement of greater
effi ciency and rationalization of preparations for
invasions such as landing invasions
❍ Effi ciently secure defense capabilities adequate both in
quality and quantity
❍ Promote measures to reform the personnel management
system
❍ Strengthen the deterrence and response capabilities of
the Japan-U.S. Alliance
❍ Achieve greater effi ciencies and streamline the buildup
of the defense forces

fi eld artillery units to be newly organized under the direct
command of the respective regional armies.

See>> Fig. II-2-2-1 (Structure of Major GSDF Units)


For the purpose of carrying out swift and fl exible
nationwide operations of basic GSDF units under the joint
operations, the GSDF will establish the Ground Central
Command. As part of such efforts the Central Readiness
Force will be disbanded and its subsidiary units will be
integrated into the Ground Central Command.
In order to respond swiftly to an attack on remote
islands and various other situations, the GSDF will
transform two divisions and two brigades into two rapid
deployment divisions and two rapid deployment brigades.
In addition, by establishing a coast observation unit[1] and
area security units, the defense posture of the remote
islands in the southwest region will be strengthened. In
order to enable the SDF to land, recapture and secure
without delay any remote islands that might be invaded, an
amphibious rapid deployment brigade will be established.
From the perspective of thoroughly facilitating
effi ciencies and rationalization of preparations for fullscale invasions, and swift and fl exible operations, the
GSDF will deploy mobile combat vehicles and remove
tanks deployed in basic operational units stationed in
locations other than Hokkaido and Kyushu. In addition,
howitzers deployed in basic operational units stationed in
locations other than Hokkaido will be concentrated into



- 2  Maritime Self-Defense Force (MSDF)


For the purpose of defending the seas surrounding Japan
and ensuring the security of maritime traffi c in the region,
through the effective conduct of various operations
such as persistent ISR operations and anti-submarine
operations, as well as for agile response in international
peace cooperation activities, the MSDF will retain

Christening / launching ceremony of JS Sekiryu


-----

Fig. II-2-2-1 Structure of Major GSDF Units

Reorganization into Rapid Deployment Divisions and Brigades

2

Example of rapid Rapid Deployment DivisionRapid Deployment Division
deployment regiments

Rapid deployment regiments(1st deployment) 11 5

Deployment mainly by aircraft Rapid Deployment 7 Rapid DeploymentRapid Deployment

Brigade

Deployment mainly Armored BrigadeBrigade
by helicopter Advance deployment(rapid deployment) Legend Division

: Rapid Deployment unit 9
: Regionally deployed unit Division

Introduce “rapid deployment
regiments” to rapid deployment
divisions & brigades that will swiftly 6
respond to various situations.To enhance readiness and mobility, 12 Rapid Deployment DivisionRapid Deployment Division
introduce mobile combat vehicles Rapid Deployment BrigadeRapid Deployment Brigade
(MCV) suitable for air transportation. 1

13 3 10 DivisionDivision

Division

Brigade DivisionDivision

4 14

DivisionDivision

Rapid Deployment BrigadeRapid Deployment Brigade

8

Rapid Deployment DivisionRapid Deployment Division

Minister of Defense

Chief of Joint Staff

Overall

Amamioshima Island coordination

Air Defense Self-Defense Ground CentralCommand Direct U.S. Forces

15th Brigade Command Fleet (nationwide GSDF operations across Nationwide operations of GSDF units commandH Airborne brigadeCRF (abolished)

Security unit all areas, logistics operations, etc.) H Amphibious rapid

Overall coordination deployment brigade

H Helicopter brigade

Coast observation unit

Yonaguni Coast Observation Unit

Okinawa Logistics facilities Eastern ArmyGSDF North Northern ArmyGSDF

Division

Miyako Island Brigade Middle ArmyGSDF Eastern ArmyGSDF

YonaguniIsland Ishigaki Western ArmyGSDF

Island

Deployment of Units in the Southwestern Region Command Structure of the Ground Central Command


four escort fl otillas mainly consisting of one helicopter
destroyer (DDH) and two Aegis-equipped destroyers
(DDG), and fi ve escort divisions consisting of other
destroyers. Necessary measures to increase the number
of submarines will also be taken continuously.

- 3  Air Self-Defense Force (ASDF)


early warning squadron at Naha Air Base. To prevent the
relative decline of Japan’s air defense capabilities and
ensure sustained air superiority, ASDF units equipped with
training support functions will be integrated for further
effective enhancement of advanced tactical skills.

- 4  Authorized Number of SDF Personnel


To enhance the air defense posture in the southwestern
region, the ASDF will relocate one fi ghter squadron to Naha
Air Base,[2] and newly organize and deploy one airborne


The total number of authorized GSDF personnel at the
end of FY2018 will be approximately 159,000, with
approximately 151,000 being SDF Regular personnel,


-----

**y**

**Defense Equipment for Responding to Attacks on Remote Islands** **Column**

Given Japan’s unique geographical features and the severe security environment, the Ground Self-Defense Force (GSDF) is working on achieving
a ground defense force that can respond to contingencies seamlessly and dynamically in order to build a Dynamic Joint Defense Force based
on the National Defense Program Guidelines.
Specifi cally, the efforts are comprised of the following three levels, and defense equipment deemed optimal for each level are being
systematically furnished: regular “deployment of units”; “rapid deployment” of units necessary to interdict any invasion; and “recapturing” in
case any remote islands are invaded.
Tilt-rotor aircraft (V-22 Osprey) and Amphibious Assault Vehicles (AAV7) are examples of this important equipment.
The tilt-rotor aircraft is an extremely effective form of equipment that possesses the cruising speed and long range of a fi xed-wing aircraft
and the ability to perform takeoff and landing like a helicopter. The aircraft can quickly mobilize units necessary to interdict an invasion even
on remote islands.
In the case that a remote island is invaded, the Amphibious Assault Vehicle can land the necessary units from the sea to recapture and
secure the invaded island while having enough protection for itself to withstand a certain degree of threat.

Picture: Osprey (MV-22) of the U.S. Marine Corps Amphibious Assault Vehicle (reference example)


and approximately 8,000 being Reserve Ready personnel. MSDF and ASDF through FY2018 will be approximately
The authorized number of SDF Regular personnel of the at the same levels as at the end of FY2013.


**3 Major Programs Regarding SDF’s Capabilities**



- 1  Effective Deterrence and Response to
**Various Situations**


and exercises in a timely and appropriate manner, as well as
actively engage in international peace cooperation activities.

See>> Fig. II-2-2-3 (Programs for the Stabilization of the Asia-Pacifi c Region
and Improvement of the Global Security Environments)

- 3  Basic Structure to Maximize Defense Capability


The SDF will carry out various programs, including the
buildup of defense equipment, in order to respond to each
of the important situations described in “The Role of the
Defense Force” addressed in the NDPG.

See>> Fig. II-2-2-2 (Programs Related to Effective Deterrent of and
Response to Various Situations)

- 2  Stabilization of the Asia-Pacifi c Region and
**Improvement of the Global Security Environments**


In order to maximize the effectiveness of functions and
capabilities which are to be emphasized in seamlessly
and dynamically fulfi lling the role of the defense force,
the SDF will steadily develop various basic structures.

See>> Fig. II-2-2-4 (Measures Related to the Basic Structure to Maximize
Defense Capability)


Japan will enhance bilateral and multilateral cooperative
relations and conduct various activities including training


**4** **Measures for the Strengthening of the Japan-U.S. Alliance**


In order to maintain and strengthen the U.S. commitment national security, Japan will continue the revision of
to Japan and the Asia-Pacifi c region and to ensure Japan’s the Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation.[3]


-----

|Category|Col2|Main Programs|
|---|---|---|
|Ensuring security of the sea and airspace surrounding Japan||❍ Procure new airborne early warning (and control) aircraft (*1) and fixed air defense radar; introduce unmanned aerial vehicles (*2); improve airborne warning and control systems (AWACS) (E-767). ❍ Steadily procure fixed-wing patrol aircraft (P-1), Aegis-equipped destroyers (DDG), submarines, and patrol helicopters (SH-60K). ❍ Introduce the new destroyers, with additional multifunctional capability and with a compact-type hull.|
|Response to attacks on remote islands|Development of a persistent ISR structure|❍ Deploy a coast observation unit to Yonaguni Island; introduce new airborne early warning aircraft; establish one squadron in the air warning unit and its deployment at Naha Air Base. ❍ Prepare a deployment structure for mobile air defense radar on remote islands in the southwestern region.|
||Obtaining and securing air superiority|❍ Increase the number of fgihter aircraft units at Naha Air Base from one squadron to two; steadily procure fgihter aircraft (F-35A); modernize fgihter aircraft (F-15). ❍ Procure new aerial refueling/transport aircraft (*3); equip transport aircraft (C-130H) with aerial refueling capabilities, and procure rescue helicopters (UH-60J).|
||Obtaining and securing maritime supremacy|❍ Increase the number of Aegis-equipped destroyers. ❍ Steadily procure patrol helicopters (SH-60K) and surface-to-ship guided missiles. ❍ Introduce ship-based multipurpose helicopters.|
||Improvement of capabilities for rapid deployment and response|❍ Introduce tilt-rotor aircraft (*1); steadily procure transport aircraft (C-2). ❍ Acquire amphibious vehicles; refit Tank Landing Ships (LST). ❍ Consider active utilization of civilian transport capabilities, and implement necessary measures. ❍ Newly establish rapid deployment regiments with a focus on improvement of mobility; newly establish area security units in charge of initial responses on remote islands in the southwestern region; newly establish an amphibious rapid deployment brigade. ❍ Improve guidance capability of precision-guided bombs; increase friing range of ship-to-ship guided missiles.|
||Development of C3I|❍ Station GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF personnel in the main headquarters of each of the other services. ❍ Extend the secured exclusive communication link for the SDF to Yonaguni Island; deploy mobile multiplex communication equipment at Naha Air Base.|
|Response to ballistic missile attacks||❍ Increase the number of Aegis-equipped destroyers; introduce advanced PAC-3 missiles (PAC-3 MSE); improve automated warning and control systems; procure and improve fxied air defense radar (FPS-7) systems. ❍ Promote Japan-U.S. cooperative development of advanced interceptor missiles (SM-3 Block II-A). ❍ Conduct studies on the best mix of the overall posture of the future BMD system, including the new BMD equipment. ❍ In preparation for an attack by guerrilla or special operations forces concurrently, continue procurement of a variety of surveillance equipment, light armored vehicles, NBC reconnaissance vehicles, etc.|
|Response in outer space and cyberspace||❍ Continue enhancement of information gathering capabilities through the use of various space satellites; steadily develop a sophisticated X-Band satellite communications system; enhance the resiliency of satellites through space situational awareness efforts and research on satellite protection methods. ❍ Enhance survivability of the various SDF systems; strengthen information gathering functions, etc.; develop a practical training environment.|
|Response to large-scale disasters||❍ Develop capabilities to respond immediately by transporting and deploying sufficient numbers of SDF units, as well as establish a rotating staff posture in the event of various disasters.|
|Strengthening intelligence capabilities||❍ Drastically reinforce capabilities to gather intelligence from diverse sources, including SIGINT, GEOINT, and HUMINT. ❍ Recruit and train personnel who would engage in information gathering and analysis.|

|Category|Main Programs|
|---|---|
|Implementing training and exercises|❍ Proactively promote bilateral and multilateral combined training and exercises in the Asia-Pacific region.|
|Promoting defense cooperation and exchanges|❍ Promote multilayered bilateral and multilateral defense cooperation and exchanges on various levels, including high level exchanges and unit exchanges.|
|Promoting capacity building assistance|❍ Help the militaries of countries eligible for support strengthen their capacities in various fields, including humanitarian assistance, disaster relief, landmine/unexploded ordinance disposal and military medicine. ❍ Work with the U.S. and Australia to carry out effective and efficient assistance while coordinating diplomatic policy.|
|Ensuring maritime security|❍ Support anti-piracy operations off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden and provide capacity building assistance to coastal countries in the region. ❍ Carry out joint training and exercises with other countries in waters outside the vicinity of Japan as well.|
|Implementing international peace cooperation activities|❍ Strengthen information gathering capabilities in the deployed area and improve the armor performance of defense equipment. ❍ Enhance posture of engineering units and enhance posture related to telecommunications, supplies, medical services, family assistance, etc. ❍ Dispatch SDF personnel to local mission headquarters and UN DPKO develop human resources from a long-term perspective. ❍ Expand educational content at the Japan Peacekeeping Training and Research Center and enhance cooperation in education with related ministries and agencies.|
|Cooperating with efforts to promote arms control, disarmament, and non-proliferation|❍ Actively engage in the efforts to cooperate with international initiatives on arms control and arms reductions, including human contributions. ❍ Promote initiatives for non-proliferation, through participating in Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) exercises.|

|Fig. II-2-2-3|Programs for the Stabilization of the Asia-Pacific Region and Improvement of the Global Security Environments|
|---|---|
|Category Main Programs Implementing training and exercises ❍ Proactively promote bilateral and multilateral combined training and exercises in the Asia-Pacific region. Promoting defense cooperation and ❍ Promote multilayered bilateral and multilateral defense cooperation and exchanges on various levels, including high level exchanges exchanges and unit exchanges. ❍ Help the militaries of countries eligible for support strengthen their capacities in various fields, including humanitarian Promoting capacity building assistance assistance, disaster relief, landmine/unexploded ordinance disposal and military medicine. ❍ Work with the U.S. and Australia to carry out effective and efficient assistance while coordinating diplomatic policy. ❍ Support anti-piracy operations off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden and provide capacity building assistance Ensuring maritime security to coastal countries in the region. ❍ Carry out joint training and exercises with other countries in waters outside the vicinity of Japan as well. ❍ Strengthen information gathering capabilities in the deployed area and improve the armor performance of defense equipment. ❍ Enhance posture of engineering units and enhance posture related to telecommunications, supplies, medical services, Implementing international peace family assistance, etc. cooperation activities ❍ Dispatch SDF personnel to local mission headquarters and UN DPKO develop human resources from a long-term perspective. ❍ Expand educational content at the Japan Peacekeeping Training and Research Center and enhance cooperation in education with related ministries and agencies. ❍ Actively engage in the efforts to cooperate with international initiatives on arms control and arms reductions, including Cooperating with efforts to promote arms human contributions. control, disarmament, and non-proliferation ❍ Promote initiatives for non-proliferation, through participating in Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) exercises.||


Fig. II-2-2-2 Programs Related to Effective Deterrent of and Response to Various Situations

**Category** **Main Programs**

❍ Procure new airborne early warning (and control) aircraft (*1) and fixed air defense radar; introduce unmanned
aerial vehicles (*2); improve airborne warning and control systems (AWACS) (E-767).

Ensuring security of the sea and airspace

❍ Steadily procure fixed-wing patrol aircraft (P-1), Aegis-equipped destroyers (DDG), submarines, and patrol

surrounding Japan

helicopters (SH-60K).
❍ Introduce the new destroyers, with additional multifunctional capability and with a compact-type hull.

❍ Deploy a coast observation unit to Yonaguni Island; introduce new airborne early warning aircraft; establish one

Development of a persistent

squadron in the air warning unit and its deployment at Naha Air Base.

ISR structure

❍ Prepare a deployment structure for mobile air defense radar on remote islands in the southwestern region.

❍ Increase the number of fighter aircraft units at Naha Air Base from one squadron to two; steadily procure fighter

Obtaining and securing air aircraft (F-35A); modernize fighter aircraft (F-15).
superiority ❍ Procure new aerial refueling/transport aircraft (*3); equip transport aircraft (C-130H) with aerial refueling

capabilities, and procure rescue helicopters (UH-60J).

❍ Increase the number of Aegis-equipped destroyers.

Obtaining and securing

❍ Steadily procure patrol helicopters (SH-60K) and surface-to-ship guided missiles.

Response to maritime supremacy

❍ Introduce ship-based multipurpose helicopters.

attacks on remote

❍ Introduce tilt-rotor aircraft (*1); steadily procure transport aircraft (C-2).

islands

❍ Acquire amphibious vehicles; refit Tank Landing Ships (LST).

Improvement of capabilities ❍ Consider active utilization of civilian transport capabilities, and implement necessary measures.
for rapid deployment and ❍ Newly establish rapid deployment regiments with a focus on improvement of mobility; newly establish area
response security units in charge of initial responses on remote islands in the southwestern region; newly establish an

amphibious rapid deployment brigade.
❍ Improve guidance capability of precision-guided bombs; increase firing range of ship-to-ship guided missiles.

❍ Station GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF personnel in the main headquarters of each of the other services.
Development of C3I ❍ Extend the secured exclusive communication link for the SDF to Yonaguni Island; deploy mobile multiplex
communication equipment at Naha Air Base.

❍ Increase the number of Aegis-equipped destroyers; introduce advanced PAC-3 missiles (PAC-3 MSE); improve
automated warning and control systems; procure and improve fixed air defense radar (FPS-7) systems.
❍ Promote Japan-U.S. cooperative development of advanced interceptor missiles (SM-3 Block II-A).

Response to ballistic missile attacks

❍ Conduct studies on the best mix of the overall posture of the future BMD system, including the new BMD equipment.
❍ In preparation for an attack by guerrilla or special operations forces concurrently, continue procurement of a
variety of surveillance equipment, light armored vehicles, NBC reconnaissance vehicles, etc.

❍ Continue enhancement of information gathering capabilities through the use of various space satellites; steadily
develop a sophisticated X-Band satellite communications system; enhance the resiliency of satellites through

Response in outer space and cyberspace space situational awareness efforts and research on satellite protection methods.

❍ Enhance survivability of the various SDF systems; strengthen information gathering functions, etc.; develop a
practical training environment.

❍ Develop capabilities to respond immediately by transporting and deploying sufficient numbers of SDF units, as
Response to large-scale disasters
well as establish a rotating staff posture in the event of various disasters.

❍ Drastically reinforce capabilities to gather intelligence from diverse sources, including SIGINT, GEOINT, and
Strengthening intelligence capabilities HUMINT.
❍ Recruit and train personnel who would engage in information gathering and analysis.

Notes: 1. E-2D airborne early warning aircraft and tilt-rotor aircraft have been acquired since FY2015.
2. Acquisition of Global Hawk unmanned aircraft vehicle began in FY2015.

3. Aerial refueling / transport aircraft (KC-46A) are to be acquired in FY2016.


Meanwhile, Japan will expand bilateral training and
exercises, joint ISR activities and the joint/shared use of
facilities and areas between the SDF and the U.S. Forces.
In addition, Japan will further deepen various Japan-U.S.
operational cooperation and policy coordination in areas


such as BMD, bilateral planning, and bilateral Extended
Deterrence Dialogue.
Japan will also strengthen cooperation in the fields
of counter-piracy, capacity building assistance, HA/DR,
peacekeeping counter terrorism maritime affairs outer


-----

|Category|Main measures|
|---|---|
|Training and Exercises|❍ Expand the use of the good training environment in Hokkaido by SDF units across the country; facilitate active use of LSTs and transport capabilities of the civilian sector, and improve unit mobility; expand the joint/shared use of U.S. Forces facilities with the SDF; actively engage in bilateral trainings with U.S. Forces. ❍ Reinforce coordination with relevant agencies including police and firefighters, and the Japan Coast Guard; conduct various simulation exercises and training exercises regarding various situations in a tailored manner.|
|Operations Infrastructure|❍ Strengthen the SDF’s capabilities to immediately rebuild various support functions; take measures for the SDF to immediately utilize civilian airports and ports in contingency situations; store necessary ammunition and spare parts in locations most appropriate for operations; promote measures supporting families of military personnel to enable a sustained response posture over the long term. ❍ Utilize a new contract system under which the price is to be determined according to realized performance regarding sustainment and procurement.|
|Personnel Education|❍ Achieve a composition of ranks given the characteristics of respective units; ensure an appropriate age distribution. • Secure and nurture appropriate numbers of officers, warrant officers and sergeants/petty officers; review the retirement age of 60; research on new systems for early retirement; take measures to encourage airplane pilots to be re-employed in the private sector as pilots. ❍ Make use of SDF personnel more effectively; promote measures related to honors and privileges. • Make use of female personnel more effectively; actively reappoint retiring personnel possessing advanced knowledge, skills, and experience; expand the Defense Meritorious Badge program. ❍ Continue to secure competent personnel in the coming years; improve the re-employment environment for SDF personnel. • Effectively engage in public relations to adjust to the changing times: enhance coordination and cooperation with relevant ministries and agencies and local governments; promote provision of more incentives for companies to employ retired SDF personnel; encourage employment of retired SDF personnel in the public sector. ❍ Promote the use of ready reserve personnel and reserve personnel in broad areas. • Appoint reserve personnel and their assignment to duties including possible opportunities to work at headquarters; improve training for call-ups; appoint reserve personnel equipped with specialized skills; promote increased public awareness of the reserve program and enhanced incentives for reserve personnel themselves and companies to employ reserve personnel, in order to increase the staffing rate of reserve personnel.|
|Medicine|❍ Establish an efficient and high-quality medical system including the upgrading of SDF hospitals into hubs with enhanced functions, and promote the formation of its networks. ❍ Arrangements for prompt treatment and medical evacuation, including consideration of the revision of regulations for emergency medical treatment in response to contingencies.|
|Defense Production and Technological Bases|❍ Formulate a strategy that sets forth the MOD’s future vision for Japan’s defense production and technical basis as a whole; promote cooperation on defense equipment and technology development with other countries. ❍ Promote the adaptation of defense equipment developed by the MOD/SDF to civilian uses.|
|Efficient Acquisition of Equipment|❍ In order to carry out effective and efficient acquisition of equipment, introduce a project manager system, and enhance consistent project management throughout the life-cycle of equipment. ❍ Actively train and appoint personnel related to the acquisition of equipment to positions. ❍ Develop a system that allows for reconsideration, including review of specifications and project plans, when there is a significant discrepancy between the estimated life-cycle cost and the real value of the life-cycle costs. ❍ Ensure transparency and fairness; sort and rank, as necessary, parties available for negotiated contracts. ❍ Consider a contract system to incentivize companies to lower prices, longer-term contracts, and the use of a consortium.|
|Research and Development (R&D)|❍ Technically review next-generation surface-to-air guided missiles to strengthen its air defense capabilities. ❍ Conduct strategic studies including empirical research relating to future fighter aircraft. ❍ In an effort to improve ISR capability, promote development of SIGINT aircraft as well as research on new fixed air defense radar, and sonars with higher detecting capabilities through simultaneous use of multiple sonars. ❍ Conduct research on unmanned equipment available for flexible operations in the case of various contingencies including large- scale natural disasters, R&D to improve existing equipment. ❍ Set a vision for future equipment which shows a direction of medium- and long-term R&D with regard to the development of major equipment. ❍ Actively utilize civilian technologies (dual-use technologies) by enhancement of coordination with universities and research institutions; transfer military technologies into civilian activities; strengthen the function of technology control to prevent outflow of advanced technologies.|
|Collaboration with Local Communities|❍ Advance measures targeting the areas around defense facilities; secure the understanding and cooperation of local governments and communities through intensive public relations activities. ❍ Give consideration to the attributes of each area in securing the understanding of local governments and residents on the reorganization of units, and deployment and administration of SDF camps and bases, etc.; promote measures conducive to local economies.|
|Boosting Communication Capabilities|❍ Provide information actively and effectively via various media sources such as social media networks. ❍ Facilitate provision of information to foreign countries about MOD/SDF efforts including the overseas activities of the SDF.|
|Enhancing the Intellectual Base|❍ Promote education on security-related matters at educational institutions, etc., including by MOD personnel presenting academic papers and sending MOD lecturers. ❍ Strengthen the role of the National Institute for Defense Studies (NIDS) as an MOD think tank through coordination with policy- making divisions and promotion of academic exchanges.|
|Promoting Reform of the MOD|❍ Reform the MOD’s work methods and organization to foster a sense of unity among civilian officials and uniformed personnel, optimize the build-up of defense capabilities, promote SDF joint operation functions, and enhance policy-making and communication functions. ❍ Take measures to facilitate efficiency and optimization in the acquisition of equipment, keeping in mind the option of establishing a new agency in the MOD. ❍ Conduct an organizational review including the reorganization or disbanding of the Bureau of Operational Policy by such efforts as integration of duties related to actual unit operations into the Joint Staff.|


Fig. II-2-2-4 Measures Related to the Basic Structure to Maximize Defense Capability

**Category** **Main measures**

❍ Expand the use of the good training environment in Hokkaido by SDF units across the country; facilitate active use of LSTs and
transport capabilities of the civilian sector, and improve unit mobility; expand the joint/shared use of U.S. Forces facilities with

Training and Exercises the SDF; actively engage in bilateral trainings with U.S. Forces.

❍ Reinforce coordination with relevant agencies including police and firefighters, and the Japan Coast Guard; conduct various
simulation exercises and training exercises regarding various situations in a tailored manner.

❍ Strengthen the SDF’s capabilities to immediately rebuild various support functions; take measures for the SDF to immediately
utilize civilian airports and ports in contingency situations; store necessary ammunition and spare parts in locations most
appropriate for operations; promote measures supporting families of military personnel to enable a sustained response posture

Operations Infrastructure

over the long term.
❍ Utilize a new contract system under which the price is to be determined according to realized performance regarding sustainment
and procurement.

❍ Achieve a composition of ranks given the characteristics of respective units; ensure an appropriate age distribution.

-  Secure and nurture appropriate numbers of officers, warrant officers and sergeants/petty officers; review the retirement age

of 60; research on new systems for early retirement; take measures to encourage airplane pilots to be re-employed in the
private sector as pilots.
❍ Make use of SDF personnel more effectively; promote measures related to honors and privileges.

-  Make use of female personnel more effectively; actively reappoint retiring personnel possessing advanced knowledge, skills,

and experience; expand the Defense Meritorious Badge program.
❍ Continue to secure competent personnel in the coming years; improve the re-employment environment for SDF personnel.

Personnel Education

-  Effectively engage in public relations to adjust to the changing times: enhance coordination and cooperation with relevant

ministries and agencies and local governments; promote provision of more incentives for companies to employ retired SDF
personnel; encourage employment of retired SDF personnel in the public sector.
❍ Promote the use of ready reserve personnel and reserve personnel in broad areas.

-  Appoint reserve personnel and their assignment to duties including possible opportunities to work at headquarters; improve

training for call-ups; appoint reserve personnel equipped with specialized skills; promote increased public awareness of the
reserve program and enhanced incentives for reserve personnel themselves and companies to employ reserve personnel, in
order to increase the staffing rate of reserve personnel.

❍ Establish an efficient and high-quality medical system including the upgrading of SDF hospitals into hubs with enhanced
functions, and promote the formation of its networks.

Medicine

❍ Arrangements for prompt treatment and medical evacuation, including consideration of the revision of regulations for emergency
medical treatment in response to contingencies.

❍ Formulate a strategy that sets forth the MOD’s future vision for Japan’s defense production and technical basis as a whole;

Defense Production and

promote cooperation on defense equipment and technology development with other countries.

Technological Bases

❍ Promote the adaptation of defense equipment developed by the MOD/SDF to civilian uses.

❍ In order to carry out effective and efficient acquisition of equipment, introduce a project manager system, and enhance
consistent project management throughout the life-cycle of equipment.
❍ Actively train and appoint personnel related to the acquisition of equipment to positions.

Efficient Acquisition of Equipment ❍ Develop a system that allows for reconsideration, including review of specifications and project plans, when there is a significant

discrepancy between the estimated life-cycle cost and the real value of the life-cycle costs.
❍ Ensure transparency and fairness; sort and rank, as necessary, parties available for negotiated contracts.
❍ Consider a contract system to incentivize companies to lower prices, longer-term contracts, and the use of a consortium.

❍ Technically review next-generation surface-to-air guided missiles to strengthen its air defense capabilities.
❍ Conduct strategic studies including empirical research relating to future fighter aircraft.
❍ In an effort to improve ISR capability, promote development of SIGINT aircraft as well as research on new fixed air defense radar,
and sonars with higher detecting capabilities through simultaneous use of multiple sonars.
❍ Conduct research on unmanned equipment available for flexible operations in the case of various contingencies including large
Research and Development (R&D) scale natural disasters, R&D to improve existing equipment.

❍ Set a vision for future equipment which shows a direction of medium- and long-term R&D with regard to the development of
major equipment.
❍ Actively utilize civilian technologies (dual-use technologies) by enhancement of coordination with universities and research
institutions; transfer military technologies into civilian activities; strengthen the function of technology control to prevent outflow
of advanced technologies.

❍ Advance measures targeting the areas around defense facilities; secure the understanding and cooperation of local governments
and communities through intensive public relations activities.

Collaboration with Local

❍ Give consideration to the attributes of each area in securing the understanding of local governments and residents on the

Communities

reorganization of units, and deployment and administration of SDF camps and bases, etc.; promote measures conducive to local
economies.

Boosting Communication Capabilities [❍][ Provide information actively and effectively via various media sources such as social media networks. ]
❍ Facilitate provision of information to foreign countries about MOD/SDF efforts including the overseas activities of the SDF.

❍ Promote education on security-related matters at educational institutions, etc., including by MOD personnel presenting academic
papers and sending MOD lecturers.

Enhancing the Intellectual Base

❍ Strengthen the role of the National Institute for Defense Studies (NIDS) as an MOD think tank through coordination with policymaking divisions and promotion of academic exchanges.

❍ Reform the MOD’s work methods and organization to foster a sense of unity among civilian officials and uniformed personnel,
optimize the build-up of defense capabilities, promote SDF joint operation functions, and enhance policy-making and
communication functions.

Promoting Reform of the MOD ❍ Take measures to facilitate efficiency and optimization in the acquisition of equipment, keeping in mind the option of establishing

a new agency in the MOD.
❍ Conduct an organizational review including the reorganization or disbanding of the Bureau of Operational Policy by such efforts
as integration of duties related to actual unit operations into the Joint Staff.


space and cyberspace. Furthermore, Japan will strengthen
and expand the Japan-U.S. cooperative relationship over
a broad range of fields, including intelligence cooperation
and information security, and defense equipment and
technology cooperation


Moreover, from the perspective of making the
stationing of the U.S. Forces in Japan more smooth and
effective, Japan will steadily ensure the Host Nation
Support (HNS).


-----

|Service|Equipment|Quantity|
|---|---|---|
|GSDF|Mobile Combat Vehicles Armored Vehicles Amphibious Vehicles Tilt-Rotor Aircraft Transport Helicopters (CH-47JA) Surface-to-Ship Guided Missiles Mid-Range Surface-to-Air Guided Missiles Tanks Howitzers (excluding mortars)|99 24 52 17 6 9 companies 5 companies 44 31|
|MSDF|Destroyers (Aegis-Equipped Destroyers) Submarines Other Ships Total (Tonnage) Fixed-Wing Patrol Aircraft (P-1) Patrol Helicopters (SH-60K) Multipurpose Helicopters (Ship-Based)|5 (2) 5 5 15 (approx. 52,000 t) 23 23 9|
|ASDF|New Airborne Early Warning (Control) Aircraft Fighters (F-35A) Fighter Modernization (F-15) New Aerial Refueling/Transport Aircraft Transport Aircraft (C-2) Upgrade of PATRIOT Surface-to-Air Guided Missiles (PAC-3 MSE)|4 28 26 3 10 2 groups & education|
|Joint units|Unmanned Aerial Vehicles|3|


Fig. II-2-2-5 Annex from the Medium Term Defense Program

**Service** **Equipment** **Quantity**

Mobile Combat Vehicles 99
Armored Vehicles 24
Amphibious Vehicles 52
Tilt-Rotor Aircraft 17

GSDF Transport Helicopters (CH-47JA) 6

Surface-to-Ship Guided Missiles 9 companies
Mid-Range Surface-to-Air Guided Missiles 5 companies
Tanks 44
Howitzers (excluding mortars) 31

Destroyers (Aegis-Equipped Destroyers) 5 (2)
Submarines 5
Other Ships 5

MSDF Total (Tonnage) 15 (approx. 52,000 t)

Fixed-Wing Patrol Aircraft (P-1) 23
Patrol Helicopters (SH-60K) 23
Multipurpose Helicopters (Ship-Based) 9

New Airborne Early Warning (Control) Aircraft 4
Fighters (F-35A) 28
Fighter Modernization (F-15) 26

ASDF

New Aerial Refueling/Transport Aircraft 3
Transport Aircraft (C-2) 10
Upgrade of PATRIOT Surface-to-Air Guided Missiles (PAC-3 MSE) 2 groups & education

Joint units Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 3

Note: Acquisition of ship-based unmanned aerial vehicles will be allowed within the number of Patrol Helicopters (SH-60K) specifi ed above.


**5 Quantities of Major Procurement**


The Annex Table shows details of the quantities of develop the defense forces described in the Annex Table
major procurement described in Section 3. Japan aims to of the NDPG over a 10-year time frame.

See>> Fig. II-2-2-5 (Annex from the Medium Term Defense Program)


**6 Expenditures**


The expenditures required to implement the defense
force developments described in this program amount to
approximately ¥24,670 billion in FY2013 prices. For the
duration of this program, in harmony with other measures
taken by the Government, approximately ¥700 billion will be
secured by means of further streamlining and rationalization
through efforts such as equipment procurement reform.
The annual defense budgets for the implementation of this

**7 Other**


While maintaining the deterrence of the U.S. Forces,
Japan will steadily implement specifi c measures
including the realignment of the U.S. Forces in Japan and


program will be allocated within a limit of approximately
¥23,970 billion over the next fi ve years.
This program will be reviewed after three years
as necessary, in consideration of such factors at home
and abroad as the international security environment,
trends in technological standards including information
communication technology, and fi scal conditions.

SACO (Special Action Committee on Okinawa) related
programs to mitigate the impact on local communities,
including those in Okinawa.


-----

**Section 3** **Build-Up of Defense Capability in FY2016**


Japan will steadily build up its defense capability during
FY2016, which serves as the third fi scal year under the
NDPG and MTDP, to establish a Dynamic Joint Defense
Force, based on these programs.
As part of this build-up, Japan will improve its
defense capabilities, focusing on further enhancement of
joint functions in order to seamlessly and dynamically
fulfi ll its defense responsibilities, which include providing
an effective deterrence and response to a variety of
security situations, and supporting stability in the AsiaPacifi c region, as well as improving the global security
environment. In doing so, Japan will place particular
emphasis on the following measures: ISR capabilities;


intelligence capabilities; transport capabilities; command,
control, communication, intelligence (C3I) capabilities;
response to attacks on remote islands; response to
ballistic missile attacks; response to outer space and
cyberspace threats; response to large-scale disasters, etc.;
and international peace cooperation efforts, etc.
Furthermore, considering the increasingly severe
situation in Japan’s public fi nance, Japan will strive to
achieve greater effi ciencies and streamlining through
efforts such as longer-term contracts, while harmonizing
these efforts with other measures taken by the Government.

See>> Fig. II-2-3-1 (Main Aspects of Build-up of Defense Capabilities for
FY2016)

|Category|Col2|Main Programs|
|---|---|---|
|I. Effective deterrence and response to various situations|Ensure security of the sea and airspace surrounding Japan|Acquire patrol helicopters (SH-60K), construct a submarine, acquire new airborne early-warning aircraft (E-2D), acquire part of the Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (Global Hawk) system, etc.|
||Response to attacks on remote islands|Develop facilities for the deployment of a coast observation unit on Yonaguni Island; procure f ighter aircraft (F-35A); procure new aerial refueling / transport aircraft (KC-46A); proceed with organizational transition of f gihter aircraft units, etc.; procure the Osprey (V-22; procure amphibious vehicles (AAV7); procure maneuver combat vehicles; upgrade “Osumi” class LST to enhance transport capabilities in amphibious warfare; develop the variable depth sonar system; etc.|
||Response to ballistic missile attacks|Construct an Aegis-equipped destroyer, conduct Japan-U.S. cooperative development of advanced ballistic missile interceptor (SM-3 Block IIA), recertify PAC-3 missiles, develop infrastructure for the PAC-3 unit deployment in Ichigaya, etc.|
||Response in outer space|Design a system for the Space Surveillance System as a whole, etc.|
||Response in cyberspace|Strengthen capability to collect intelligence regarding cyber attacks; increase the number of analysts in the Cyber Defense Group.|
||Response to large-scale disasters|Maintain and strengthen functions of camps and bases that will serve as hubs during a disaster, carry out training on large-scale and special disasters, improve alternative functions in case the Ichigaya building gets damaged due to a disaster, etc.|
||Strengthening intelligence capabilities|Strengthen the Defense Attachés management system, etc.|
|II. Stabilization of the Asia-Pacif ci region and improvement of the global security environment||Strengthen bilateral and multilateral cooperation for stabilizing the Asia-Pacif ic region, and carry out training and exercises as needed and as appropriate. More actively participate in international peace cooperation activities, etc., in order to respond appropriately to global security issues and other issues.|
|III. Measures for the strengthening of the Japan- U.S. Alliance||Steadily carry out specif ic measures such as the relocation of U.S. Marine Corps stationed in Okinawa to Guam, the relocation of Futenma Air Station, and return of the land south of Kadena Air Base.|
|IV. Measures for personnel and education||Strengthen recruiting operations and re-employment assistance, raise the staff ing rate of SDF reserve personnel and enhance and improve the SDF reserve personnel system, and promote successful female personnel through providing support for good work-life balance and improving the work environment.|
|V. Initiatives for greater eff iciency||Introduce long-term contracts for the procurement of equipment etc., review maintenance and improvement methods, purchase defense equipment in bulk, revise specif ications for the use of civilian items, etc.|
|VI. Other|SDF organization|In order to provide an effective deterrence and respond to various situations, implement projects to reorganize each unit and increase the actual number of SDF personnel.|
||Promotion of base measures|Steadily implement measures around bases in order to achieve harmony between defense facilities and surrounding communities as well as carry out measures to facilitate and streamline the stationing of U.S. Forces in Japan.|
||Strengthening of education and research systems|Conduct next generation f ighter aircraft related projects, conduct a study on large vessels and warhead technologies for guided missiles in response to threats to remote islands, conduct a study on high mobility powered suits, establish an initiative called the Innovative Science & Technology Initiative for Security, etc.|
||Enhancement of medical function|Carry out initiatives towards upgrading SDF hospitals into hubs with enhanced functions, improve f irst aid capabilities on the frontline in response to contingencies, conduct initiatives to contribute to smooth SDF activities in the southwestern region, etc.|
||Promotion of research and development|Conduct future f gihter aircraft-related projects, conduct a study on large vessels and warhead technologies for guided missiles in response to threats to remote islands, conduct a study on situational awareness technologies for remote control vehicles responding to CBRN, introduce systems to advance studies on technologies for security, etc.|

|Fig. II-2-3-1|Main Aspects of Build-up of Defense Capabilities for FY2016|
|---|---|
|Category Main Programs Ensure security of the sea and Acquire patrol helicopters (SH-60K), construct a submarine, acquire new airborne early-warning aircraft (E-2D), airspace surrounding Japan acquire part of the Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (Global Hawk) system, etc. Develop facilities for the deployment of a coast observation unit on Yonaguni Island; procure f ighter aircraft (F-35A); procure new aerial refueling / transport aircraft (KC-46A); proceed with organizational transition of f gihter Response to attacks on aircraft units, etc.; procure the Osprey (V-22; procure amphibious vehicles (AAV7); procure maneuver combat remote islands vehicles; upgrade “Osumi” class LST to enhance transport capabilities in amphibious warfare; develop the variable depth sonar system; etc. I. Effective Construct an Aegis-equipped destroyer, conduct Japan-U.S. cooperative development of advanced ballistic missile deterrence Response to ballistic missile interceptor (SM-3 Block IIA), recertify PAC-3 missiles, develop infrastructure for the PAC-3 unit deployment in and response attacks Ichigaya, etc. to various Response in outer space Design a system for the Space Surveillance System as a whole, etc. situations Strengthen capability to collect intelligence regarding cyber attacks; increase the number of analysts in the Cyber Response in cyberspace Defense Group. Maintain and strengthen functions of camps and bases that will serve as hubs during a disaster, carry out training Response to large-scale on large-scale and special disasters, improve alternative functions in case the Ichigaya building gets damaged due disasters to a disaster, etc. Strengthening intelligence Strengthen the Defense Attachés management system, etc. capabilities II. Stabilization of the Asia-Pacif ci region Strengthen bilateral and multilateral cooperation for stabilizing the Asia-Pacif ic region, and carry out training and and improvement of the global security exercises as needed and as appropriate. More actively participate in international peace cooperation activities, etc., environment in order to respond appropriately to global security issues and other issues. III. Measures for the strengthening of the Japan- Steadily carry out specif ic measures such as the relocation of U.S. Marine Corps stationed in Okinawa to Guam, the U.S. Alliance relocation of Futenma Air Station, and return of the land south of Kadena Air Base. Strengthen recruiting operations and re-employment assistance, raise the staff ing rate of SDF reserve personnel IV. Measures for personnel and education and enhance and improve the SDF reserve personnel system, and promote successful female personnel through providing support for good work-life balance and improving the work environment. Introduce long-term contracts for the procurement of equipment etc., review maintenance and improvement V. Initiatives for greater eff iciency methods, purchase defense equipment in bulk, revise specif ications for the use of civilian items, etc. In order to provide an effective deterrence and respond to various situations, implement projects to reorganize SDF organization each unit and increase the actual number of SDF personnel. Steadily implement measures around bases in order to achieve harmony between defense facilities and surrounding Promotion of base measures communities as well as carry out measures to facilitate and streamline the stationing of U.S. Forces in Japan. Conduct next generation f ighter aircraft related projects, conduct a study on large vessels and warhead Strengthening of education technologies for guided missiles in response to threats to remote islands, conduct a study on high mobility and research systems VI. Other powered suits, establish an initiative called the Innovative Science & Technology Initiative for Security, etc. Carry out initiatives towards upgrading SDF hospitals into hubs with enhanced functions, improve f irst aid Enhancement of medical capabilities on the frontline in response to contingencies, conduct initiatives to contribute to smooth SDF activities function in the southwestern region, etc. Conduct future f gihter aircraft-related projects, conduct a study on large vessels and warhead technologies for guided Promotion of research and missiles in response to threats to remote islands, conduct a study on situational awareness technologies for remote development control vehicles responding to CBRN, introduce systems to advance studies on technologies for security, etc.||


-----

Maneuver combat vehicle (prototype) New type aerial refueling and transport aircraft (KC-46A) (image)


**Section 4** **Defense-Related Expenditures**


**1 Overview of Defense-Related Expenditures**


Defense-related expenditures include expenses for
improving defense capabilities and maintaining and
managing the SDF, as well as expenses necessary for the
implementation of measures against neighborhood affairs
in the vicinity of defense facilities.
In comparison with the previous fi scal year, defenserelated expenditures for FY2016 were increased by
38.6 billion yen to 4.8607 trillion yen. When including
expenses related to Special Action Committee on
Okinawa (SACO) and the U.S. Forces realignment-related
expenses (the portion allocated for reducing the burden
on local communities) and the expenses associated with


the introduction of a new dedicated government aircraft,
defense-related expenditures were increased by 74 billion
yen from the previous fi scal year to 5.0541 trillion yen.
Additionally the supplementary budget for FY2015
contains an appropriation of 196.6 billion yen as
necessary expenses for securing stable operations of
the SDF, which includes restoring the SDF’s disaster
response capabilities.

See>> Fig. II-2-4-1 (Comparison Between FY2015 Budget and FY2016
Budget)

See>> Fig. II-2-4-2 (Trend in Defense-Related Expenditures Over the Past
15 Years)

|Category|Col2|FY2015|FY2016 Fiscal YOY growth (indicates negative growth)|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||Fiscal YOY growth (indicates negative growth)|
|Annual expenditure (note)||48,221|48,607|386 (0.8%)|
||Personnel and food provisions Material expenses|21,121 27,100|21,473 27,135|351 (1.7%) 34 (0.1%)|
|Future obligation (note)||39,530|43,070|3,540 (9.0%)|
||New contracts Existing contracts|22,998 16,532|20,800 22,270|2,198 ( 9.6%) 5,738 (34.7%)|

|Fig. II-2-4-1|Comparison Between FY2015 Budget and FY2016 Budget|
|---|---|
|(100 million) FY2016 Category FY2015 Fiscal YOY growth (indicates negative growth) Annual expenditure (note) 48,221 48,607 386 (0.8%) Personnel and food provisions 21,121 21,473 351 (1.7%) Material expenses 27,100 27,135 34 (0.1%) Future obligation (note) 39,530 43,070 3,540 (9.0%) New contracts 22,998 20,800 2,198 ( 9.6%) Existing contracts 16,532 22,270 5,738 (34.7%) Notes: Does not include SACO-related expenses, U.S. Forces realignment-related expenses (portion meant to reduce the burden on the local community), or expenses associated with the acquisition of new government aircraft based on “The Policy Concerning Government Aircraft” (August 7, 2013 decision by the Review Committee on Government Aircraft). If these are included, the f giures are 4,980.1 billion yen for FY2015 and 5,054.1 billion yen for FY2016; and for future obligation, 4,363.5 billion yen for FY2015 and 4,653.7 billion yen for FY2016.||


-----

Maneuver combat vehicle (prototype) New type aerial refueling and transport aircraft (KC-46A) (image)


**Section 4** **Defense-Related Expenditures**


**1 Overview of Defense-Related Expenditures**


Defense-related expenditures include expenses for
improving defense capabilities and maintaining and
managing the SDF, as well as expenses necessary for the
implementation of measures against neighborhood affairs
in the vicinity of defense facilities.
In comparison with the previous fi scal year, defenserelated expenditures for FY2016 were increased by
38.6 billion yen to 4.8607 trillion yen. When including
expenses related to Special Action Committee on
Okinawa (SACO) and the U.S. Forces realignment-related
expenses (the portion allocated for reducing the burden
on local communities) and the expenses associated with


the introduction of a new dedicated government aircraft,
defense-related expenditures were increased by 74 billion
yen from the previous fi scal year to 5.0541 trillion yen.
Additionally the supplementary budget for FY2015
contains an appropriation of 196.6 billion yen as
necessary expenses for securing stable operations of
the SDF, which includes restoring the SDF’s disaster
response capabilities.

See>> Fig. II-2-4-1 (Comparison Between FY2015 Budget and FY2016
Budget)

See>> Fig. II-2-4-2 (Trend in Defense-Related Expenditures Over the Past
15 Years)

|Category|Col2|FY2015|FY2016 Fiscal YOY growth (indicates negative growth)|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||Fiscal YOY growth (indicates negative growth)|
|Annual expenditure (note)||48,221|48,607|386 (0.8%)|
||Personnel and food provisions Material expenses|21,121 27,100|21,473 27,135|351 (1.7%) 34 (0.1%)|
|Future obligation (note)||39,530|43,070|3,540 (9.0%)|
||New contracts Existing contracts|22,998 16,532|20,800 22,270|2,198 ( 9.6%) 5,738 (34.7%)|

|Fig. II-2-4-1|Comparison Between FY2015 Budget and FY2016 Budget|
|---|---|
|(100 million) FY2016 Category FY2015 Fiscal YOY growth (indicates negative growth) Annual expenditure (note) 48,221 48,607 386 (0.8%) Personnel and food provisions 21,121 21,473 351 (1.7%) Material expenses 27,100 27,135 34 (0.1%) Future obligation (note) 39,530 43,070 3,540 (9.0%) New contracts 22,998 20,800 2,198 ( 9.6%) Existing contracts 16,532 22,270 5,738 (34.7%) Notes: Does not include SACO-related expenses, U.S. Forces realignment-related expenses (portion meant to reduce the burden on the local community), or expenses associated with the acquisition of new government aircraft based on “The Policy Concerning Government Aircraft” (August 7, 2013 decision by the Review Committee on Government Aircraft). If these are included, the f giures are 4,980.1 billion yen for FY2015 and 5,054.1 billion yen for FY2016; and for future obligation, 4,363.5 billion yen for FY2015 and 4,653.7 billion yen for FY2016.||


-----

Fig. II-2-4-2 Trend in Defense-Related Expenditures Over the Past 15 Years

50,000

49,392
49,262

49,000

48,760

48,607

48,297 48,221

48,000 47,815 47,838

47,903 47,426

47,028

47,000 46,826

46,804

46,625
46,453

46,000

14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28

Note: Does not include SACO-related expenses, portion meant to reduce the burden on the local community out of the U.S. forces realignment expenses, or expenses associated with
the acquisition of a new government aircraft. The total defense expenditures when including these items are 4,955.7 billion yen for FY2002, 4,952.7 billion yen for FY2003,
4,902.6 billion yen for FY2004, 4,856.0 billion yen for FY2005, 4,813.6 billion yen for FY2006, 4,801.3 billion yen for FY2007, 4,779.6 billion yen for FY2008, 4,774.1 billion yen
for FY2009, 4,790.3 billion yen for FY2010, 4,775.2 billion yen for FY2011, 4,713.8 billion yen for FY2012, 4,753.8 billion yen for FY2013, 4,848.8 billion yen for FY2014, and
4,980.1 billion yen for FY2015, and 5,054.1 billion yen for FY2016.


**2 Breakdown of Defense-Related Expenditures**


Personnel and food provision expenses as well as obligatory
outlay expenses, both of which are mandatory expenses,
account for 80% of the total defense-related budget.
The remaining 20% of the budget which is set aside for
general material expenses includes spending for repairing
equipment and for implementing measures to alleviate the
burden on local communities hosting U.S. bases in Japan.
As such, a high percentage of the budget is allocated for
maintenance purposes. For this reason, the breakdown of
the defense-related expenditures cannot be easily altered in
a signifi cant manner on a single-year basis.

See>> Fig. II-2-4-3 (Relationship between Annual Expenditure and Future
Obligation Due to New Contracts)

Personnel and food provision expenses were
increased by 35.1 billion yen from the previous fi scal year
due to the revision of the remuneration of civil servants
based on the FY2015 recommendation by the National
Personnel Authority and other factors. Obligatory outlay
expenses for the year increased by 500 million yen
from the previous year, while general material expenses
increased by 3.0 billion yen from the previous year.[1]

See>> Fig. II-2-4-4 (Breakdown of Defense-Related Expenditures (FY2016))
See>> Reference 14 (Changes in Composition of Defense-Related
Expenditures (Original Budget Basis))


In addition to the annual budget expenditure, the
amount of new future obligation also indicates payments
for the following year and beyond (the amount of future
obligation arising in the applicable fi scal year). In the
build-up of defense capabilities, it is common to take
multiple years from contract to delivery or completion,
in areas such as the procurement of vessels, aircraft, and
other primary equipment, as well as the construction
of buildings such as aircraft hangars and barracks.
Consequently, for such items, a procedure is undertaken
whereby a multi-year contract is arranged, and it is
promised in advance at the time of the contract that
payments will be made in the following fi scal year and
beyond (within fi ve years, in principle). The sum of
money to be paid in the following fi scal year and beyond,
based on such a multi-year contract, is called the “future
obligation.” The amount of new future obligation arising
in FY2016 decreased from the previous fi scal year by
219.8 billion yen (9.6%).
Furthermore, if looked at on a contract basis,[2] which
shows the scale of operations, there is a decline from the
previous fi scal year of 216.9 billion yen (6.6%).

See>> Part III, Chapter 3, Section 2 (Efforts toward Project Management, etc.)


The comparison with the previous year is concerning expenditure excluding the SACO-related expenses and the U.S. Forces realignment-related expenses (the portion for the reduction of the burden on local
communities and the expenses associated with the introduction of a new dedicated government aircraft). The same applies hereinafter in regard to this section.

The sum total of general material expenses and future obligation concerning new contracts, which shows the amount of the material expenses (operating expenses) that are to be contracted in the applicable ii


-----

|Contract|Col2|Col3|Payment|
|---|---|---|---|

|Contract|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|||

|Contract|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||||
||OObblliigg|aattoorryy|

|Contract|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||eexxpp||
||||
||||

|Contract ((3355|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
||..33%%))|

|Fig. II-2-4-4|Breakdown of Defense-Related Expenditures (FY2016)|
|---|---|
|R&D 2.2% Other 1.5% Facility development 3.0% Base measures Personnel and 9.3% food provisions 44.2% By purpose Procurement of of use equipment, etc. 15.8% Other General materials Maintenance, etc. 20.5% (9,948) 24.1% 16.4% (7,967) GSDF [0.3%] 36.0% (17,489) Personnel and By By expense food provisions organization 44.2% (21,473) ASDF [1.7%] 23.0% (11,196) Obligatory outlays 35.3% (17,187) MSDF [0.0%] 24.6% (11,954) Notes: 1. ( ) is the budget amount; unit: 100 million yen. 2. The above figure does not include SACO-related expenses (2.8 billion yen), the portion meant to reduce the burden on the local community (176.6 billion yen) out of the realignment expenses, nor the expenses associated with the acquisition of new government aircraft (10.8 billion yen) 3. Figures in square brackets [ ] indicate year on year growth rate (%)||


Fig. II-2-4-3 Relationship between Annual Expenditure and Future Obligation Due to New Contracts

2012 2013 2014 2015 **2016** 2017 2018 2019 2020

Amount of future obligation

When improving defense capabilities, it is common for work in areas like the procurement
of equipment and the upgrading of facilities to be carried out over several years.
Consequently, a procedure is undertaken whereby a contract that extends for multiple
years is arranged (five years in principle), and the Government promises in advance at the
time of the agreement to make the payment at a fixed time in the future.
Future obligation refers to the sum of money to be paid in the following year and beyond
under such contracts, which extend for multiple years. Example: A case in which 10 billion
yen of equipment is procured under a contract that runs for four years

Personnel FY2016 FY2017 FY2018 FY2019

provisionsprovisionsand foodand food Contract Payment

expensesexpenses expenses paid in part Obligatory outlay expenses paid in part Obligatory outlay expenses paid in part Obligatory outlay Remaining sum paid(6 billion yen)

(1 billion yen) (1 billion yen) (2 billion yen)

General material Obligatory outlay Obligatory outlay Obligatory outlay

((44.244.2%)%) expenses expenses expenses expenses

2012 Contract Future obligation (9 billion yen)

Amount of contract (10 billion yen)

2013 Contract

ObligatoryObligatory

outlayoutlay Existing

2014 Contract expensesexpenses contracts

Future

2015 Contract obligation

((35.335.3%)%)

Structure of Defense-related Expenditures ContractContract GeneralGeneral New

Annual expenditure materialmaterial contracts

Defense-related expenditures are broadly classified into personnel and food provision expensesexpenses
expenses and material expenses (operating expenses). Material expenses on contract basis

(activity(activity

Personnel and Expenses relating to wages for personnel, retirement
food provisionsexpenses allowance, meals in barracks, etc. expenses)expenses)

Expenses relating to procurement; repair and upgrading of ((20.520.5%)%)
equipment; purchase of oil; education and training of staff;

(operating expenses)Material expenses facilities improvement; barracks expenses such as lighting, heating, water and supplies; technological research and development; cost-sharing for the stationing of USFJ; and

expenses related to measures to alleviate the burden on local
communities hosting U.S. bases in Japan **FY2016**

General materialoutlay expensesObligatory Expenses paid in FY2016 based on contracts made before FY2015 **Defense-relatedexpenditures**
expenses Expenses paid in FY2016 based on contracts made in FY2016
(activity expenses)


-----

**3 Comparison with Other Countries**


Monolithic understanding of the defense expenditures of
each country is not possible in view of differences in the
socioeconomic and budgetary systems. There is not an
internationally unifi ed defi nition of defense expenditures,
and breakdowns of defense expenditures are unclear in
some countries where such data is publicly disclosed.
Furthermore, in comparing the defense expenditures
of each country, though there exists the method of
converting their defense expenditures into dollar amounts
at respective currency rates, their dollar-based defense
expenses calculated in this way do not necessarily refl ect
the precise value based on each country’s price levels.
Therefore, the results of converting Japan’s defenserelated expenditures and those of other countries offi cially
published by each government into dollar amounts, using
the purchasing power parity[3] of each country reported
by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), are shown in Figure II-2-4-5 (The
Defense Budgets of Major Countries (FY2014)).

See>> Part I, Chapter 2 (Defense Policies of Countries); Reference 15 (Trend
of Defense Expenditures of Major Countries)

In addition, Fig. II-2-4-6 (Changes in Defense
Budgets in Surrounding Countries Over the Past Ten
Years) shows the changes in defense expenditures of
Japan’s neighboring counties over the past ten years.

|lion USD)|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Defense budgets (100 million USD) Defense budgets as % of GDP|||||||
|Japan|U. S.|China|Russia|ROK Aus|tralia UK|France|
|457|5,779|2,290|1,166|405 1|99 493|475|
|1.0|3.4|1.3|3.5|2.4 1|.8 1.9|1.8|

|Fig. II-2-4-5|The Defense Budgets of Major Countries (FY2014)|
|---|---|
|(100 million USD) (%) 8,000 6.0 7,000 Defense budgets (100 million USD) 5.0 Defense budgets as % of GDP 6,000 4.0 5,000 4,000 3.0 3,000 2.0 2,000 1.0 1,000 0 0.0 Japan U. S. China Russia ROK Australia UK France 457 5,779 2,290 1,166 405 199 493 475 1.0 3.4 1.3 3.5 2.4 1.8 1.9 1.8 Notes: 1. Defense budgets are based on each country’s public documents. Dollar conversions have been made while referring to each country’s purchasing power parity for FY2014 as published by the OECD (official rate listed on the OECD website) (as of April 2016). (1 dollar=104.71517 yen=3.529838 yuan=21.261009 rubles =881.928774 won=1.470092 Australian dollars=0.699324 pound =0.818852 euros (France)) 2. Defense budgets as a proportion of GDP have been estimated based on figures published by the governments of each country. 3. Documents published by NATO show that the U.K.’s defense budgets as a percentage of GDP was 2.2% in 2014.||

|Fig. II-2-4-6|Changes in Defense Budgets in Surrounding Countries Over the Past Ten Years|
|---|---|
|(Times) 5.00 RRuussssiiaa 44..6622 ttiimmeess 4.00 CChhiinnaa 33..4400 ttiimmeess 3.00 2.00 RROOKK 11..7722 ttiimmeess AAuussttrraalliiaa 11..6688 ttiimmeess 1.00 UU..SS.. 11..1155 ttiimmeess JJaappaann 11..0011 ttiimmeess 0.00 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Notes: 1. Created based on the defense budgets published by each country. 2. These are numerical values obtained by simple calculation of the ratio between the defense budgets each year, with the FY2006 value as 1 (times) (rounded to two decimal places). 3. The definition and breakdown of the defense budgets of each country are not necessarily clear. As we must take into account various factors such as foreign exchange fluctuations and price levels of each country, it is very difficult to draw a comparison of defense budgets among countries.||


-----

**Human Foundation and Organization that Supports**

**Section 5**

**the Defense Force**


In order to exert its defense capabilities with the maximum
effectiveness, it is necessary that the MOD/SDF further
enhances and strengthens its human foundation, which

**1 Recruitment and Employment**


- 1  Recruitment


supports the defense force, as well as further deepening
mutual trust among local communities, the people, and
the SDF.

recruitment counselors. Moreover, local governments
are also carrying out some of the administrative activities
regarding the recruitment of uniformed SDF personnel
and candidates for uniformed SDF personnel, such as
announcing the recruitment period and promoting the
SDF as a workplace, for which the MOD allocates them
the requisite budget.


It is vital to secure highly qualifi ed personnel for the
MOD/SDF to carry out various missions appropriately.
Expectations from the public for the MOD/SDF have
continued to rise. In Japan, however, due to the declining
birthrate and popularization of higher education, the
general recruitment condition of uniformed SDF
personnel is anticipated to become increasingly severe.
In light of these circumstances, it is necessary to recruit
personnel with superior abilities and a strong desire to
enlist, after carefully explaining to them the missions,
roles, duties, and working conditions of the SDF.

See>> Fig. II-2-5-1 (Changes in the Number of People Eligible to Join the SDF)

For this reason, the MOD/SDF holds recruiting
meetings at schools and also maintains Provincial
Cooperation Offi ces in 50 locations throughout Japan
to respond to the individual needs of applicants, with
the understanding of educators and support from



- 2  Employment

**(1) Uniformed SDF personnel**
Based on a voluntary system, respecting individuals’
free will, uniformed SDF personnel are recruited under
various categories.

See>> Fig. II-2-5-2 (Overview of Appointment System for SDF Regular Personnel)

Due to the uniqueness of their duties, personnel
management of uniformed SDF personnel differs from
that of general civilian government employees,[1] including


Fig. II-2-5-1 Changes in the Number of People Eligible to Join the SDF

The number of 18–26 year-olds Number of newly-employed

(thousand people) personnel (people)

20,000 30,000

The number of 18–26 year-olds: About 17 million The number of newly-employed personnel

19,000 ⇒ About 11 million (down by about 40%) The number of 18-26 year olds (thousand people)

18,000 About 17 millionpeople 25,000

The number of newly-employed personnel: varies from year to year
(approximately equal to or larger than that of FY1994)

17,000

20,000

16,000

About 13,000

15,000 people 15,000

About 12,000
people

14,000

10,000

13,000

About 11 million

12,000 people

5,000

11,000

10,000 0

1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 (FY)

Material sources: Data before FY2014 (excluding data for FY2005 and FY2010) are based on “Population Estimates of Japan 1920–2000” and “Annual Report on Population Estimates,”

Statistics Bureau, Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications.

Data for FY2005 and FY2010 are the proportionally adjusted populations of unknown age ascertained by the National Institute of Population and Social Security
Research based on “Population Census,” Statistics Bureau, Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications.

Data from FY2015 onward are based on “Population Projection for Japan” (medium estimates in January 2012), National Institute of Population and Social Security Research.


-----

|Col1|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Leadin|g|Private|
||||


Fig. II-2-5-2 Overview of Appointment System for SDF Regular Personnel

<Rank>

General (GSDF, ASDF),
Admiral (MSDF) to SecondLieutenant (GSDF, ASDF), Officer
Ensign (MSDF)

Warrant Officer Warrant Officer (Note 1)

Sergeant Major (GSDF),
Chief Petty Officer (MSDF),
Senior Master Sergeant (ASDF)
Master Sergeant (GSDF)
Petty Officer First Class (MSDF) Officer Candidate
Master Sergeant (ASDF) Enlisted (upper)
Sergeant First Class (GSDF)
Petty Officer Second Class (MSDF)
Technical Sergeant (ASDF)
Sergeant (GSDF)
Petty Officer Third Class (MSDF) (Note 5)
Staff Sergeant (ASDF)

(Note 3) (Note 2)

Leading Private (GSDF)
Leading Seaman (MSDF) Leading Private
Airman First Class (ASDF) (Note 4) SDF

Personnel (u)
in short-term
service

Private First Class (GSDF)
Seaman (MSDF) 3rd Class
Airman Second Class (ASDF)

Candidate
for SDF

Private (GSDF) Personnel (u)
Seaman Apprentice (MSDF) 2nd Class (3 month)
Airman Third Class (ASDF)

1st Class

Aged 18 or older and under 27 Senior high school, and others

Junior high school,
and others

Notes: 1. Staff candidates for the medicine, dentistry, and pharmacy faculties will be promoted to the position of First Lieutenant if they pass the national examinations in medicine.
2. Student candidates for enlistment (upper) refers to a candidate who has been appointed as an officer with the premise that he/she will be promoted to a fixed-term position of “Enlisted (upper).”

Until FY2006, there were two programs consisting of “Student candidates for enlistment (upper)” and “Enlisted (upper) candidates.” However, these two programs were reorganized and combined,
and since 2007, candidates have been appointed as “General candidates for enlistment (upper)”.

3. As for the SDF candidates, in order to enhance the initial education of SDF personnel in short-term service, in July 2010, it was decided that their status for the first three months of their

enlistment would be as non-SDF personnel, and they would engage exclusively in fundamental education and practice as non-regular Ministry of Defense personnel.

4. GSDF High Technical School trains people to be SDF personnel who will be capable not only of operating and making full use of equipment in the GSDF but also of conducting missions in the
international community. For SDF students, starting from FY2010 appointments, their status was changed from SDF officer to “students,” which is a new non-regular status. New students receive a
high school diploma at the conclusion of a student course (three years) through distance learning. From the FY2011 appointments, a new recommendation system was introduced in which those
who are considered appropriate to be a GSDF High Technical School student are selected from among the candidates based on the recommendation of the principal of their junior high school etc.,
in addition to the conventional general examination.

5. A three-year program ended in FY2013. A new four-year program was established at the National Defense Medical College, Faculty of Nursing in 2014.


“Early Retirement System” and “Fixed Term System”
to maintain the SDF’s strength. After employment,
uniformed SDF personnel are assigned their branch
of service and duties at units all around Japan, in
accordance with their choice or aptitude, following
basic education and training at respective training units
or schools of respective SDF services.

See>> Reference 16 (Authorized and Actual Strength of Uniformed SDF
Personnel); Reference 17 (Status of Application and Recruitment of
Uniformed SDF Personnel (FY2015))

See>> Fig. II-2-5-3 (Rank and Retirement Age of SDF Regular Personnel)

Prime Minister Abe delivering an address during a graduation ceremony at the National Defense
Academy [Photo courtesy of the Cabinet Secretariat Public Relations Office]

|Fig. II-2-5-3|Rank and Retirement Age of SDF Regular Personnel|
|---|---|

|Rank|Designation|Mandatory Retirement Age|
|---|---|---|
|General (GSDF), Admiral (MSDF), General (ASDF)|Sho|60|
|Major General (GSDF), Rear Admiral (MSDF), Major General (ASDF)|Shoho||
|Colonel (GSDF), Captain (MSDF), Colonel (ASDF)|Issa|56|
|Lieutenant Colonel (GSDF), Commander (MSDF), Lieutenant Colonel (ASDF)|Nisa|55|
|Major (GSDF), Lieutenant Commander (MSDF), Major (ASDF)|Sansa||
|Captain (GSDF), Lieutenant (MSDF), Captain (ASDF)|Ichii|54|
|First Lieutenant (GSDF), Lieutenant Junior Grade (MSDF), First Lieutenant (ASDF)|Nii||
|Second Lieutenant (GSDF), Ensign (MSDF), Second Lieutenant (ASDF)|Sani||
|Warrant Officer (GSDF), Warrant Officer (MSDF), Warrant Officer (ASDF)|Juni||
|Sergeant Major (GSDF), Chief Petty Officer (MSDF), Senior Master Sergeant (ASDF)|Socho||
|Master Sergeant (GSDF), Petty Officer First Class (MSDF), Master Sergeant (ASDF)|Isso||
|Sergeant First Class (GSDF), Petty Officer Second Class (MSDF), Technical Sergeant (ASDF)|Niso|53|
|Sergeant First Class (GSDF), Petty Officer Second Class (MSDF), Technical Sergeant (ASDF)|Sanso||
|Leading Private (GSDF), Leading Seaman (MSDF), Airman First Class (ASDF)|Shicho|—|
|Private First Class (GSDF), Seaman (MSDF), Airman Second Class (ASDF)|Isshi||
|Private (GSDF), Seaman Apprentice (MSDF), Airman Third Class (ASDF)|Nishi||


**Mandatory**
**Rank** **Designation**
**Retirement Age**

General (GSDF), Admiral (MSDF), General (ASDF) Sho
Major General (GSDF), Rear Admiral (MSDF), 60
Shoho
Major General (ASDF)

Colonel (GSDF), Captain (MSDF), Colonel (ASDF) Issa 56
Lieutenant Colonel (GSDF), Commander (MSDF),
Nisa
Lieutenant Colonel (ASDF)
55
Major (GSDF), Lieutenant Commander (MSDF),
Sansa
Major (ASDF)

Captain (GSDF), Lieutenant (MSDF), Captain
Ichii
(ASDF)

First Lieutenant (GSDF), Lieutenant Junior Grade
Nii
(MSDF), First Lieutenant (ASDF)

Second Lieutenant (GSDF), Ensign (MSDF),
Sani
Second Lieutenant (ASDF)

54

Warrant Officer (GSDF), Warrant Officer (MSDF),
Juni
Warrant Officer (ASDF)

Sergeant Major (GSDF), Chief Petty Officer
Socho
(MSDF), Senior Master Sergeant (ASDF)

Master Sergeant (GSDF), Petty Officer First Class
Isso
(MSDF), Master Sergeant (ASDF)

Sergeant First Class (GSDF), Petty Officer Second
Niso
Class (MSDF), Technical Sergeant (ASDF)
53
Sergeant First Class (GSDF), Petty Officer Second
Sanso
Class (MSDF), Technical Sergeant (ASDF)

Leading Private (GSDF), Leading Seaman
Shicho
(MSDF), Airman First Class (ASDF)

Private First Class (GSDF), Seaman (MSDF),
Isshi —
Airman Second Class (ASDF)

Private (GSDF), Seaman Apprentice (MSDF),
Nishi
Airman Third Class (ASDF)

Notes: 1. The mandatory age of retirement for SDF Regular Personnel who hold the
rank of General (GSDF and ASDF) or Admiral (MSDF), and serve as Chief of
Staff of Joint Staff Office, GSDF Chief of Staff, MSDF Chief of Staff, or ADSF
Chief of Staff, is 62.

2. The mandatory age of retirement for SDF Regular Personnel who hold
positions such as physician, dentist, pharmacist, musician, military police
officer, or information analyst, is 60.


-----

**y**

**Aviation Student System of the ASDF (Celebrating Its 60th Anniversary)** **Column**

The aim of the aviation student system of the ASDF is to nurture pilots for aircraft of the
ASDF, and the system celebrated its 60th anniversary last year.
Young men and women who have begun pursuing careers as pilots after passing the
aviation student examination are enrolled in the 12th Flying Training Wing for a two-year
aviation student program at Hofu Kita Air Base in Yamaguchi Prefecture, from which one

Pilot insignia “Wing mark”

can see the Seto Inland Sea, for basic education mainly composed of classroom lectures.
Upon completing the program, this time as an offi cer candidate, they go through two years
of operators’ education which places an emphasis on fl ying training as an offi cer candidate.
After this, they acquire qualifi cation as a pilot and the pilot insignia, “Wing mark,” is pinned
on their uniform.
One of the major advantages of the aviation student system is that one can become a
pilot at a young age regardless of gender. Since the fl ying training starts from only two years
after joining the ASDF, some begin to fl y in an aircraft at the age of twenty, and acquire “Wing
mark” and national qualifi cation as “commercial pilot” at twenty three.

A graduate of the system, this pilot is playing a vital role

The inaugural class enrolled in training in June 1955, and currently the 71st and 72nd in his unit.
classes are working hard day and night to become pilots in the future.
The aviation student system has produced over 5,000 aviation offi cer candidates so far, and approximately 60% of the pilots of the ASDF
are graduates of the system. They are playing a core role in the aviation units.


**(2) SDF Reserve Personnel, SDF Ready Reserve**
**Personnel, and Candidates for SDF Reserve Personnel**

It is essential to secure the required number of uniformed
SDF personnel promptly depending on situational
changes in the event of a crisis. To secure the required
number promptly and systematically, the MOD maintains
the following three systems: the SDF Reserve Personnel
system, the SDF Ready Reserve Personnel system, and
the Candidates for SDF Reserve Personnel system.[2]

See>> Fig. II-2-5-4 (Overview of Systems Related to SDF Reserve Personnel)

SDF Reserve Personnel become uniformed SDF
personnel after the issuance of a defense call-up order and
others, and carry out logistical support and base guard
duties. SDF Ready Reserve Personnel become uniformed
SDF personnel, and are assigned to carry out their mission
together with uniformed SDF regular personnel as part of
frontline units following the issuance of a defense callup order and others. SDF Reserve Personnel candidates,
some of whom are recruited among those with no prior
experience as uniformed SDF personnel, are to be
assigned as SDF Reserve Personnel after completing the
necessary education and training to work as uniformed
SDF personnel.


As SDF Reserve Personnel and others work in their
own civilian jobs during peacetime, they need to adjust
their work schedule to participate in periodic training
exercises. Therefore, understanding and cooperation from
the companies that employ these personnel are essential
for the smooth operation of the systems.
For this purpose, the MOD provides a special
subsidy to the companies that employ SDF Ready
Reserve Personnel and take necessary measures to allow
such employees to attend training sessions for 30 days
a year, by taking into consideration the burden on such
companies. Moreover, the MOD takes various measures
to gain understanding and cooperation from those
companies, such as issuing special certifi cates[3] to offi ces
that strive to create an environment for their employees to
participate in training sessions.
Furthermore, the MOD promotes the use of SDF
Reserve Personnel in a range of fi elds, such as by
appointing retired SDF pilots, who are to be reemployed
in the private sector, to SDF Reserve Personnel through
the reemployment system.[4]


Many other countries also have reserve personnel systems.

The SDF Reserve Personnel Cooperation Offi ces Display System was introduced in FY2015, and was certifi ed by the directors of Provincial Cooperation Offi ces, followed by the issuance of the special certifi cates
in the same fi scal year. The Minister of Defense will be in charge of certifi cation starting in FY2016. The certifi ed offi ces are listed on the websites of the MOD and the Provincial Cooperation Offi ces.

The reemployment system for SDF pilots is aiming to prevent the outfl ow of active young SDF pilots to civil aviation companies in an unregulated manner. This system is also designed to utilize SDF pilots over i


-----

|Col1|SDF Reserve Personnel|SDF Ready Reserve Personnel|SDF Reserve Candidate Personnel|
|---|---|---|---|
|Basic concept|❍ After the issuance of defense call-up order and others, serve as SDF Regular Personnel|❍ Serve as SDF Regular Personnel in a pre-designated GSDF unit, as part of the basic framework of defense capability|❍ Appointed as SDF Reserve Personnel in the GSDF or MSDF upon completion of education and training|
|Candidate|❍ Former SDF Regular Personnel, former SDF Ready Reserve Personnel, former SDF Reserve Personnel|❍ Former SDF Regular Personnel, former SDF Reserve Personnel|(Common to General and Technical Employment Categories) ❍ Those with no experience as SDF personnel (includes those with less than a year of SDF experience)|
|Age|❍ Enlisted (Lower): 18–36 years old ❍ Off icer, Warrant Off cier, Enlisted (Upper): Under the age of two years added to respective retirement age|❍ Enlisted (Lower): 18–31 years old ❍ Off icer, Warrant Off icer, Enlisted (Upper): Under the age of three years subtracted from respective retirement age|❍ General: 18–33 years old; Technical: between the age of 18 and 52–54 depending on technical skills possessed|
|Employment|❍ Employed by screening, based on application ❍ Candidate for SDF Reserve Personnel is appointed as SDF Reserve Personnel upon completion of education and training|❍ Employed by screening, based on application|❍ General: Employed by examination, based on application ❍ Technical: Employed by screening, based on application|
|Rank|❍ Former SDF Regular Personnel: Rank at the point of retirement in principle ❍ SDF Ready Reserve Personnel: Currently designated rank ❍ Former SDF Reserve Personnel and Former SDF Ready Reserve Personnel. Rank at the point of retirement in principle ❍ Candidate for SDF Reserve Personnel • General: Private • Technical: Designated based on skills|❍ Former Regular Personnel: Rank at the point of retirement in principle ❍ Former Reserve Personnel: Designated rank at the point of retirement in principle|❍ Not designated|
|Term of service|❍ Three Years/One term|❍ Three Years/One term|❍ General: Maximum of three years ❍ Technical: Maximum of two years|
|Education/ Training|❍ Although the Self-Defense Forces Act designates a maximum of 20 days per year, actual implementation is 5 days per year as a standard|❍ 30 days per year|❍ General: 50 days within three years (equivalent to Candidate SDF personnel (private level) course) ❍ Technical: 10 days within two years (training to serve as SDF Regular Personnel by utilizing their special skills)|
|Promotion|❍ Promotion is determined by screening the service record of personnel who have fulf illed the service term (actual serving days)|❍ Promotion is determined by screening the service record of personnel who have fulf illed the service term (actual serving days)|❍ Since there is no designated rank, there is no promotion|
|Benef its, allowances, and other terms|❍ Training Call-up Allowance: ¥8,100/day ❍ SDF Reserve Allowance: ¥4,000/month|❍ Training Call-up Allowance: ¥10,400–14,200/day ❍ SDF Ready Reserve Allowance: ¥16,000/month ❍ Continuous Service Incentive Allowance: ¥120,000/one term ❍ Special subsidy for corporations employing SDF Ready Reserve Personnel: ¥42,500/month|❍ Education and Training Call-up Allowance: ¥7,900/day ❍ Allowance as Candidate for SDF Reserve Personnel is not paid because defense call-up duty is not required|
|Call-up duty and other duties|❍ Defense call-up, civil protection call-up, disaster call-up, training call-up|❍ Defense call-up, civil protection call-up, security call-up, disaster call-up, training call-up|❍ Education and training call-up|


Fig. II-2-5-4 Overview of Systems Related to SDF Reserve Personnel

**SDF Reserve Personnel** **SDF Ready Reserve Personnel** **SDF Reserve Candidate Personnel**

❍ After the issuance of defense call-up order and ❍ Serve as SDF Regular Personnel in a pre-designated GSDF unit, as ❍ Appointed as SDF Reserve Personnel in the GSDF or
Basic concept
others, serve as SDF Regular Personnel part of the basic framework of defense capability MSDF upon completion of education and training

❍ Former SDF Regular Personnel, former SDF ❍ Former SDF Regular Personnel, former SDF Reserve Personnel (Common to General and Technical Employment Categories)
Candidate Ready Reserve Personnel, former SDF Reserve ❍ Those with no experience as SDF personnel (includes
Personnel those with less than a year of SDF experience)

❍ Enlisted (Lower): 18–36 years old ❍ Enlisted (Lower): 18–31 years old ❍ General: 18–33 years old; Technical: between the
❍ Offi cer, Warrant Offi cer, Enlisted (Upper): Under ❍ Offi cer, Warrant Offi cer, Enlisted (Upper): Under the age of three age of 18 and 52–54 depending on technical skills

Age

the age of two years added to respective years subtracted from respective retirement age possessed
retirement age

❍ Employed by screening, based on application ❍ Employed by screening, based on application ❍ General: Employed by examination, based on
❍ Candidate for SDF Reserve Personnel is application

Employment

appointed as SDF Reserve Personnel upon ❍ Technical: Employed by screening, based on
completion of education and training application

❍ Former SDF Regular Personnel: Rank at the point ❍ Former Regular Personnel: Rank at the point of retirement in ❍ Not designated
of retirement in principle principle
❍ SDF Ready Reserve Personnel: Currently ❍ Former Reserve Personnel: Designated rank at the point of
designated rank retirement in principle
❍ Former SDF Reserve Personnel and Former SDF

Rank

Ready Reserve Personnel. Rank at the point of
retirement in principle
❍ Candidate for SDF Reserve Personnel

-  General: Private

-  Technical: Designated based on skills

❍ Three Years/One term ❍ Three Years/One term ❍ General: Maximum of three years
Term of service
❍ Technical: Maximum of two years

❍ Although the Self-Defense Forces Act designates ❍ 30 days per year ❍ General: 50 days within three years (equivalent to
a maximum of 20 days per year, actual Candidate SDF personnel (private level) course)

Education/

implementation is 5 days per year as a standard ❍ Technical: 10 days within two years (training to

Training

serve as SDF Regular Personnel by utilizing their
special skills)

❍ Promotion is determined by screening the ❍ Promotion is determined by screening the service record of ❍ Since there is no designated rank, there is no
Promotion service record of personnel who have fulfi lled personnel who have fulfi lled the service term (actual serving days) promotion
the service term (actual serving days)

❍ Training Call-up Allowance: ¥8,100/day ❍ Training Call-up Allowance: ¥10,400–14,200/day ❍ Education and Training Call-up Allowance: ¥7,900/day

Benefi ts, ❍ SDF Reserve Allowance: ¥4,000/month ❍ SDF Ready Reserve Allowance: ¥16,000/month ❍ Allowance as Candidate for SDF Reserve Personnel
allowances, and ❍ Continuous Service Incentive Allowance: ¥120,000/one term is not paid because defense call-up duty is not
other terms ❍ Special subsidy for corporations employing required

SDF Ready Reserve Personnel: ¥42,500/month

Call-up duty and ❍ Defense call-up, civil protection call-up, disaster ❍ Defense call-up, civil protection call-up, security call-up, disaster ❍ Education and training call-up
other duties call-up, training call-up call-up, training call-up


**VOICE**

**Companies that Support SDF Reserve Personnel** **Column**
**(SDF Reserve Personnel Cooperation Offi ces)**

**Mr. Masao Yamamasu**
**President, Kyodo Keibi Hosho Co., Ltd.**

Ever since its foundation in 1986, our company has contributed to the safety and security of the community, mainly through providing security
for machines and traffi c control with the following three basic ideas: employment creation, sound management ensuring tax payment, and
participation in volunteer activities. We have been a member of the Council for the Employment of Retired SDF Personnel since the company’s
foundation, and have employed SDF Ready Reserve Personnel since 2004. SDF Ready Reserve Personnel are playing active roles as vital
members of the company, exerting their sense of responsibility and the physical and mental strength they have acquired through their service
in the SDF.
It was very encouraging for us to be certifi ed as a SDF Reserve Personnel Cooperation Offi ce. We would like to continue to make further
efforts as a bridge between the SDF and the local community, and do our best to contribute to national security and safety.

Author receiving a special sticker from the Director of SDF Tottori Provincial
Cooperation Offi ce (left)


-----

**VOICE**

**Five Years since the Great East Japan Earthquake** **Column**

**ASDF Komaki Airbase (Komaki City, Aichi Prefecture)**
**Airman First Class Suguru Koseki, Rescue Training Squadron, Air Rescue Wing**

When the Great East Japan Earthquake occurred on March 11, 2011, I was
working as usual on a ship under construction in a shipyard on the coast of
Miyagi Prefecture, where I was employed. It was when the work was settled
and I called to my co-workers around me to take a break that I felt massive
shaking that was stronger than anything I had ever felt before. All I could do
was crouch down on the ship and stay where I was. When I looked around
after the shake had stopped, I realized the ship I was on had been thrown
into the sea. I was terrifi ed that the ship might sink immediately as the ship
was still being built. But when the ship started to drift out to sea, it came into
contact with a crane inside the shipyard, and at that moment I jumped onto
the crane. I spent the night on the crane, waiting for help in fear in the cold.
In the dark with nobody around me, I thought to myself “I was always

Author (center), medic candidate, and his classmates

a troublemaker for my parents and others. If I get out of here alive, I want to
do something good for other people!” That is why I decided to join the ASDF.
It has been fi ve years since the earthquake. I am currently undergoing rigorous training in the Rescue Training Squadron at Komaki
Air Base with my classmates to become a medic. Always keeping the motto of the Air Rescue Wing, “That others may live,” in mind, I am
determined to work hard so that I can become a fi ne medic and save as many lives as I can.


**(3) Administrative Offi cials, Technical and Engineering**
**Offi cials, Instructors, and Other Civilian Personnel**

There are approximately 21,000 civilian personnel—
administrative offi cials, technical and engineering
offi cials, instructors, and others[5]—in addition to
uniformed SDF personnel in the MOD/SDF. Civilian
personnel are mainly employed from among those who
have passed the Examination for National Public Offi cials
for either career track or general staff run by the National
Personnel Authority (NPA), and those who have passed
the Examination for Defense Ministry Professional
Civilian Offi cials run by the MOD. After participating in
the common training course, civilian personnel recruited
in this process undertake a wide range of work.
Administrative offi cials are engaged in defenserelated policy planning in the Internal Bureau of the
MOD and at the Acquisition, Technology and Logistics
Agency (ATLA); analysis and research at the Defense


Intelligence Headquarters; and a variety of administrative
work at the SDF bases, the Regional Defense Bureaus,
and other locations throughout the country.
Technical and engineering offi cials are engaged in
constructing various defense facilities (headquarters,
runways, magazines, etc.), carrying out R&D, as well as
effective procurement, maintenance and improvement of
a range of equipment, and providing mental health care
for SDF personnel at the Internal Bureau of the MOD,
ATLA, as well as at the SDF bases, the Regional Defense
Bureaus, and other locations throughout the country.
Instructors conduct advanced research on defenserelated issues and provide high-quality education to SDF
personnel at the National Institute for Defense Studies,
the National Defense Academy, the National Defense
Medical College, and other organizations.

See>> Reference 18 (Breakdown of Ministry of Defense personnel)


Among the employees of the MOD, special national government employees are called ”SDF personnel,” which include administrative offi cials, technical and engineering offi cials, instructors, and others in


-----

**2 Daily Education and Training**



- 1  Education of Uniformed SDF Personnel


In addition to such training for national defense,
enhanced training is given in response to the diversifi ed
roles required of the SDF in recent years, such as
peacekeeping operations and large-scale disaster relief
operations. Moreover, in order to strengthen joint
operational capabilities and to respond better to various
situations, efforts are being made including the expansion
of the scope of joint exercises and bilateral and multilateral
exercises participated in by the individual SDF services.[6]

**(2) Training Environment**
SDF training has been planned and conducted under
conditions that are as close as possible to actual combat
situations, yet many restrictions remain. Therefore,
the SDF makes maximum use of its limited domestic
training areas, including further use of the prime training
environment of Hokkaido stated in the National Defense
Program Guidelines (NDPG) and other guidelines. They
also strive to carry out more practical combat training
by conducting joint exercises and other training and
exercises in the United States and surrounding sea and
airspace where they can secure training conditions not
available in Japan.

See>> Reference 20 (Results of Firing Training and Related Training by
Dispatch of Each of the Self-Defense Forces to the United States
(FY2015))


Enhancing the ability of the individual uniformed
SDF personnel who comprise SDF units is essential
for the execution of the units’ duties. For this purpose,
the respective SDF training units and schools provide
opportunities for phased and systematic education
according to rank and duties to nurture necessary qualities
and instill knowledge and skills.
A considerable extent of human, temporal, and
economic efforts such as securing instructors with
special skills, and improving equipment and educational
facilities, are necessary for providing education. In
the event that personnel need to further improve their
professional knowledge and skills, or that it is diffi cult
for them to acquire such knowledge and skills within the
SDF, the MOD and the SDF commissions education to
external institutions, including those abroad, as well as
domestic companies and research institutes.

- 2  SDF Training


**(1) Training by Each SDF**
Training conducted by units in each service can be
broadly divided into training for individual SDF
personnel to improve the necessary profi ciency for
their respective fi elds, and training for units to enhance
their systematic capabilities. Training for individuals is
conducted one-on-one in stages based on occupational
classifi cation and individual ability. Training for units
is conducted depending on the size of unit, from small
to large; meanwhile, large-scale comprehensive training
including coordination between units is also conducted.

See>> Reference 19 (Major Exercises Conducted in FY2015)



- 3  Safety Management Initiatives

Any accidents that can cause injury to the public, damage
to its property, or the loss of life of SDF personnel,
must be avoided at all costs. Therefore, during routine
training, the MOD/SDF makes a united effort to ensure
the constant management of safety through the utmost
mindfulness of ensuring safety.


Newly joined members of the GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF giving their all during training

Training includes SDF Joint Exercises, Japan-U.S. Bilateral Joint Exercises, and Ballistic Missile Response training which are to prevent and repel direct threats to Japan. Other additional training includes
International Peace Cooperation Exercises that assumes SDF’s international peace cooperation activities and Joint International Humanitarian Operation Training, in which the treatment of prisoners of war and


-----

**3 Promotion of the Careers of Female Personnel**



- 1  Expansion of the Recruitment and Appointment
**of Female Personnel**

The MOD/SDF has been proactively encouraging the
active participation of female personnel, and the number
of female personnel is on the rise. In January of 2015,
the MOD formulated the “Action Plan for Promoting the
Active Participation of Female Employees and Work-Life
Balance,” which incorporated three reforms—“Working
style reform,” “Reform to realize a successful career
with a balanced life between childrearing and nursing,
etc.,” and “Reform for promoting successful female
personnel,” and the “Action Plan of the MOD Based on
the Law to Promote the Role of Women in the Workforce
(FY2016-FY2020)” in April 2016 in order to promote the
work-life balance of the personnel in a unifi ed manner
whilst further expanding the recruitment and promotion
of female personnel. Along with these initiatives, the
MOD is also making various efforts to advance the
promotion of motivated and qualifi ed female personnel
by setting up specifi c goals with regard to the recruitment
and promotion of female personnel.


LTC Osaki engaged in disaster relief operations

CDR Otani, the fi rst female MSDF offi cer to command a destroyer


**(1) Female Administrative Offi cials, Technical and**
**Engineering Offi cials, Instructors, and Others**

As of the end of March 2016, the number of female
administrative offi cials, technical and engineering
offi cials, and instructors, etc., is approximately 3,200
(about 23.4% of total administrative offi cials). Compared
with ten years ago (end of March 2006, at around
23.1% of total administrative offi cials), this is a rise of
0.3 percentage point, indicating that the ratio of female
civilian personnel has been on an increasing trend in
recent years.
With regard to recruitment, in line with the central
government target, the MOD has set up its goal of
ensuring that women account for over 30% of newly hired
staff at the ministry from FY2016 and onward. Moreover,
regarding furthering the careers of women, as a goal to be
achieved by the end of FY2020, the proportion of women
reaching the Division-Director level at local organizations
and Assistant-Division-Director or equivalent level at the
ministry proper should be approximately 5%, and the
proportion of women serving at the Division-Director
level or equivalent level at the ministry proper should
be about 2%, and the proportion of women reaching
the Unit-Chief or equivalent level at the ministry proper
should be around 20%.


MAJ Osaka playing vital roles as a C-1 pilot

**(2) Female SDF Personnel**
As of the end of March 2016, the number of female
uniformed SDF personnel is about 13,000 (about 5.9%
of total uniformed SDF personnel). Compared with ten
years ago (end of March 2006, at around 4.8% of total
uniformed SDF personnel), this is a rise of 1.1 percentage
point, indicating that the ratio of female uniformed SDF
personnel has been on an increasing trend in recent years.
In order to increase the proportion of female
uniformed SDF personnel among total uniformed SDF


-----

Fig. II-2-5-5 Trends in Incumbent Female SDF Personnel

(Number) (%)

14,000 6.0

Recruitment of female uniformed SDF

Female uniformed SDF personnel (Medical personnel)

personnel started for aviation students of

12,000 Female uniformed SDF personnel (Regular personnel) the MSDF and the ASDF

5.0

Female uniformed SDF personnel (Total number) /
Total number of uniformed SDF personnel Recruitment of female

uniformed SDF personneI
(personnel) started for students of

10,000 the National Defense Academy

4.0

8,000 Recruitment of female

uniformed SDF

Recruitment of femaleuniformed SDF students of the Nationalpersonnel started for 3.0

Recruitment of female personnel started for the Defense Medical College

6,000 uniformed SDF position of medical

personnel started in the officer and dental officer
regular service area of
the MSDF and the ASDF

2.0

4,000 Recruitment of female

uniformed SDF
personnel started in
the regular service
area of the GSDF

1.0

2,000

0 0.0

54 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 (FY)

Note: As of the end of March 2016, the total number of female uniformed SDF personnel is 13,476 (approximately 5.9% of the total number of the current uniformed SDF personnel)


personnel to over 9% by 2030, there are plans to ensure
that women account for more than 10% of total newly
employed uniformed SDF personnel starting in FY2017.
In addition, with regard to furthering their careers, the
proportion of women among uniformed SDF personnel
with a rank of field officer or higher is planned to be
increased from the current 3.1%. As for the careers of
the personnel anticipated to reach a rank of field officer
or higher in the future, an emphasis is given on assigning
them to a command or assistant command post in a unit
at the rank of company officer, with the hope of allowing
them to gain experience and grow.
While all service areas in the SDF are open to female
uniformed SDF personnel, there are still limitations to
certain assignments such as infantry companies and
submarines, etc., due to the requirement for protecting
motherhood and securing privacy. In order to appropriately
respond to the diversified missions of the SDF in recent
years, the restriction preventing women from working in
the flight squadrons of anti-tank helicopter units and part
of the GSDF Central NBC Weapon Defense Unit, missile
boats and minesweepers as well as the Special Boarding
Units of the MSDF, and fighter and reconnaissance
aircraft of the ASDF was lifted in FY2015 from the
viewpoint of utilizing human resources more effectively.
Following this, female uniformed SDF personnel can
now be assigned to all posts of the MSDF except for
submarines and all posts of the ASDF In addition all


Promotion tool for Work Life Balance in the MOD

pilot assignments have been opened to female uniformed
SDF personnel.

See>> Fig. II-2-5-5 (Trends in Incumbent Female SDF Personnel)



- 2  Improving the Working Environment for All Personnel

Based on the “Action Plan for Promoting the Active
Participation of Female Employees and Work-Life
Balance at the MOD” formulated in January 2015 and the
“Action Plan to Support a Good Work-Life Balance of the
Personnel of the MOD” (FY2015-FY2020) formulated
in March 2015 based on the Act on Advancement of
Measures to Support Raising Next-Generation Children
(Act No. 120 of 2003), and the “Action Plan of the MOD
Based on the Law to Promote the Role of Women in the
Workforce (FY2016 FY2020)” formulated inApril 2016


-----

**VOICE**

**Participating in Support Operations for the 57th Antarctic Expedition** **Column**

**MSDF Yokosuka Naval Base district (Yokosuka City, Kanagawa Prefecture)**
**Petty Offi cer First Class Mayumi Hirakawa, Icebreaker “Shirase”**

The news that female uniformed SDF personnel were going to participate in the supporting operation of the 57th Antarctic Expedition onboard
“Shirase” for the fi rst time drew much attention, and as the ten female members of the crew we did our best to fulfi ll the duties given to us, in
the hope that our hard work would open new doors for other women in the service. While I felt truly honored that my fi rst assignment onboard
a ship was on “Shirase,” I also felt some pressure to make it a successful tour.
“Shirase” was able to berth off the coast of Showa Base again, and the
female crew worked with the male crew on missions such as transporting
fuel and supplies as well as carrying out other work at Showa Base and on
the Antarctic. We gained a wide range of experiences through our missions,
including assisting the transfer of an observation crew off a stranded
Australian icebreaker. Moreover, having the opportunity to admire the
magnifi cent, beautiful nature of the Antarctic was an invaluable experience
for me.
A tour on “Shirase” was a long deployment in the harsh environment
of the Antarctic with only a few port calls. It gave me great confi dence that
we, the female crew, were able to fully leverage our skills. I believe we
were able to pave a new path not only for female personnel currently in the
service but also for women who are considering joining the SDF to serve “Shirase” berthed off the coast of Showa Base and the ten female crew
onboard “Shirase.” (author: far right)


the MOD/SDF encourages personnel to use the system,
which supports them in their efforts to balance work with
family through educational lectures, etc., in order to make
the MOD a workplace where both male and female
personnel with time constraints due to child rearing
or nursing care for elderly relatives can play an active
role. In addition, the MOD/SDF is also committed to
changing the mindset of personnel, and streamlining and
simplifying work through the expansion of the fl extime
system, information sharing as well as publicity with
the use of mascots so that a good work-life balance can
be promoted.
To allow personnel who are rearing children to
concentrate on their duties without anxiety, internal
crèche facilities have been developed to respond to the
need for special working arrangements within the SDF.
Including the facility opened at ASDF Iruma Air Base in
April 2016, internal crèche facilities have been opened at
six locations so far (GSDF Camp Mishuku, GSDF Camp
Kumamoto, GSDF Camp Makomanai, GSDF Asaka
dormitory district, MSDF Yokosuka Naval Base district,


“Kids Garden Asaka” – Internal crèche facility in GSDF Asaka dormitory district

and ASDF Iruma Air Base). Additionally, three internal
crèche facilities are scheduled to be opened at Ichigaya
district, ASDF Fuchu Air Base, and ASDF Hamamatsu
Air Base in the future. In addition, the required supports
are being enhanced on an ongoing basis, to facilitate the
temporary care of children when personnel must suddenly
attend to duties, such as disaster relief operations.


-----

**4 Measures Aimed at Ensuring Effective Use of Human Resources**



- 1  Measures for Personnel System Reform and for
**the Enhancement of Pay and Conditions**


similar facilities have been established to answer the
various questions and concerns raised by the families.

- 3  Initiatives to Maintain Strong Discipline


With regard to the personnel structure of the SDF, the
fi xed number of the SDF personnel has been constantly
reduced. On the other hand, there has been the need
for further skilled and professional personnel in order
to respond to the advancement of equipment as well as
diversifi cation and internationalization of SDF missions.
In light of such circumstances, it is stated in the
NDPG that measures are to be implemented with regard to
personnel system reform in order to ensure the robustness
of the SDF and to make effective use of human resources
under the constrained budget. Specifi cally, the MOD will
implement the following measures to ensure an appropriate
age distribution, taking into account the various missions
and characteristics of each branch of the SDF: the
retirement age of 60 will be reviewed; an early retirement
system will be proactively adopted; more suitable personnel
management of personnel will be implemented; and the reemployment of aircraft pilots in the private sector will be
carried out. Furthermore, fi nal promotion rates of offi cers,
warrant offi cers, sergeants and petty offi cers will be
reviewed, and in order to maintain the strength of the SDF,
more appropriate personnel management, which takes into
account physical attributes, will be adopted.
Furthermore, due to the harsh environmental
circumstances under which uniformed SDF personnel
have to perform their duties, the MOD and the SDF strive
to provide salaries, allowances, welfare and other benefi ts
that refl ect the special nature of their duties in order to
let uniformed SDF personnel concentrate on their duties
with pride, relieved of anxiety. The MOD and the SDF
also promote measures relating to awards and honors,
beginning with the expansion of the system of Defense
Meritorious Badges.

- 2  Initiatives to Support Families


The MOD/SDF strives to foster well-disciplined personnel
by impressing in them an awareness of compliance with
the law through setting up such campaign periods as the
“Anti-Drug Abuse Month,” the “Self-Defense Forces
Personnel Ethics Week,” and “Self-Defense Personnel
Sexual Harassment Prevention Week.”
With regard to the prevention of power harassment in
particular, the MOD established a directive in April 2016
with the aim of creating a healthy work environment in
which its personnel can fully perform their abilities and
their individuality and dignity are respected. Measures to
prevent power harassment include providing education
to personnel, assigning counsellors to units and
organizations around the country, and setting up hotlines
connected to the Internal Bureau, as well as the Staff
Offi ces of the GSDF, MSDF and ASDF.

- 4  Initiatives to Prevent Suicide among SDF Personnel


While a record was set in FY2005, with 101 SDF personnel
suicides, subsequent fi gures have shown a decline, with 73
suicides in FY2015. The suicide of SDF members is truly
a great tragedy for both the individuals themselves and
their bereaved families. It also represents a great loss to
the MOD/SDF in terms of the loss of capable personnel,
and the MOD/SDF is taking on-going measures to prevent
suicides, including the following initiatives: (1) Expansion
and enhancement of the counseling system (internal/
external counselors, a 24-hour telephone counseling
hotline, assignment of clinical psychotherapists at camps
and bases, etc.); (2) Strengthening of education to raise
awareness about mental health for commanders as well
as enlisted personnel; (3) Establishment of a campaign
period for enhancing mental health care, close monitoring
by commanders of the mental health condition of their
subordinates whose working environment has been
changed due to personnel transfers, etc., and distribution
of various reference materials.

- 5  Commemorating Personnel who Perished in
**the Line of Duty**


Exchanges between units and personnel’s families,
as well as between families are pursued as routine
initiatives. Furthermore, specifi c welfare services for
SDF personnel deployed overseas include facilitating
direct communication between SDF personnel and their
families in Japan by means such as e-mail and video
conference systems. In addition, support for sending
comfort items from their families on a later day is also
provided. Moreover, briefi ng sessions for families of
the dispatched personnel are held to provide them with
a variety of information and family support centers and


Since the establishment of the National Police Reserve
in 1950 and through its evolution via the National Safety


-----

resources, the MOD conducts support measures such
as occupational training useful for their re-employment.
The measures to support the re-employment of retired
uniformed SDF personnel is also important from the
perspective of enabling them to give back to society with
their various skills, thereby reinforcing human resources
infrastructure.
As the MOD does not have the authority to provide
them with employment placement, the Foundation for
the SDF Personnel Support Association provides free job
consultation services with permission from the Minister
of Health, Labor and Welfare and the Minister of Land,
Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
Retired uniformed SDF personnel have excellent
abilities in planning, leadership, faculty, cooperativeness
and responsibility gained through their work performance,
education, and training. Furthermore, they have various
qualifications and licenses acquired through their duties
and occupational training. Therefore, they are making
positive contributions in a broad range of sectors,
including the manufacturing and service industries, as
well as the finance, insurance, real estate, and construction
industries, in addition to the areas of disaster prevention
and risk management at local governments. Based on the
NDPG, the MOD will make further effort to improve the
re-employment of retired uniformed SDF personnel by
considering measures to increase incentives for private
companies to hire them, and by promoting further use of
retired uniformed SDF personnel in the public sector.
For the purpose of ensuring an environment where
uniformed SDF personnel can devote themselves to
their duties without any concerns, the MOD allows
uniformed SDF personnel to be reappointed for fixed
terms within three years before the age of 60 (one year
for SDF administration officials and others). The MidTerm Defense Program (MTDP) states that the SDF will
actively reappoint retiring personnel possessing advanced
knowledge, skills and experience where such personnel
prove beneficial to the SDF’s strength.

See>> Reference 21 (Main Measures for Re-employment Support)

Meanwhile, with regard to the re-employment of
SDF personnel, new regulations about re-employment
were introduced in October 2015 replacing the former
prior approval system. As are the cases of other national
government employees, the following three regulations
were put in place in order to ensure the trust of the public
regarding the fairness of official duties: 1) Regulation on


A scene from the Memorial for SDF Members Killed in the Line of Duty held in FY2015

Force and the Coastal Safety Force into the SDF today,
SDF personnel have been striving to accomplish the noble
mission of protecting the peace and independence of
Japan. They have been devoting themselves unstintingly
to training, day and night, to live up to the expectations
and trust of the Japanese citizens, regardless of danger,
and with a strong sense of responsibility. During this time
period, however, more than 1,870 personnel have lost
their lives in the line of duty.
In the MOD/SDF, funeral ceremonies are carried out
by each unit to which the personnel who perished in the
line of duty belonged, in order to express condolences.
Moreover, in order to eternally recognize the achievements
of the SDF personnel who perished in the line of duty,
and to express deep honor and condolences, memorial
ceremonies are carried out in various forms, such as the
Memorial for SDF Members Killed in the Line of Duty
conducted with the participation of the Prime Minister.[7]



- 6  Dealing with Retirement and Re-Employment of
**SDF Personnel**

In order to maintain the strength of the SDF, many
uniformed SDF personnel retire in their mid-50s
(personnel serving under the early retirement system)
or in their 20s (most uniformed SDF personnel serving
under the fixed-term service system). Therefore, many of
them need to find another job after retirement in order to
secure their livelihoods.
Since supporting re-employment is the responsibility
of the Japanese government (the MOD) as the employer,
and is crucially important both for resolving any
concerns that uniformed SDF personnel may have about
their future as well as for securing qualified human


The Monument for SDF Personnel who Perished in the Line of Duty was constructed in 1962 in Ichigaya. In 1998, the Memorial Zone in its current form was completed by combining this monument with other
monuments located in the same area. The MOD holds an annual memorial ceremony for SDF personnel who perished in the line of duty with the attendance of surviving family members, the Prime Minister,
high-ranking officials of the MOD/SDF including the Minister of Defense, former Defense Ministers, and others. At the Monument for SDF Personnel who Perished in the Line of Duty in the Memorial Zone,
there is an iron plate containing the names and other information of personnel who perished in the line of duty. When foreign dignitaries such as Defense Ministers visit the MOD, they make offerings of flowers,


-----

**VOICE**

**Successful First Flight of the MRJ** **Column**

**Mr. Yoshiyuki Yasumura**
**Chief test pilot for the MRJ, Mitsubishi Aircraft Cooperation**

I had been an ASDF pilot for 23 years, during which time I was on assignments that include the 8th Air Wing, and Air Development and Test
Wing. After my 23 years with the ASDF, I was hired by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries through the reemployment system and have been here since.
Since the MRJ’s development (Mitsubishi Regional Jet) gained momentum in 2008, I have offered ideas from the viewpoint of a pilot about
navigation systems and the design of the cockpit, and I was also responsible for maneuverability tests using a simulator. After the aircraft’s fi rst
fl ight in November last year, we have been carrying out fl ight tests to check the aircraft’s maneuverability, engine systems and power supply,
while gradually increasing the altitude and speed of fl ight.
I may be in a different fi eld now but my seniors in the SDF have ingrained in me the mindset of a pilot and attitude as a person involved in
the development of an aircraft, which is helping me greatly as I work on the development of a commercial aircraft.
I want to make the MRJ an aircraft that satisfi es users around the world. I wish for the success and good health of all uniformed SDF
personnel on active duty who exert themselves to meet the great expectation and responsibility required of them.

**Mr. Kazuo Toda**
**Test pilot for the MRJ, Mitsubishi Aircraft Cooperation**

I had been working as a pilot during my 35 years with the Ministry of Defense (MSDF Air Development Squadron 51, MSO, and so on). Since I
had completed the MSDF test pilot course and had experience working on the development of an MSDF aircraft, I got employed by Mitsubishi
Heavy Industries through the reemployment system. I attend meetings on development, test the fl ight control system simulator, and conduct
test fl ights of the MRJ.
When I fl ew aircraft in the MSDF, I was engaged in surveillance activities with a crew of about a dozen in addition to the pilots. Similarly,
with test fl ights for the MRJ, the mission is carried out in a team with a crew consisting of test fl ight engineers (engineers who collect data and
other engineers who analyze the data), designers, mechanics, suppliers, and pilots, all of whom fl y together on a test fl ight.
Such a fl ight mission would not be possible without the cooperation of the crew. Furthermore, the safety of a test fl ight would be at risk
unless all involved in the fl ight work earnestly and coordinate closely with one another. Needless to say, the goal of a test fl ight would otherwise
not be possible to reach. We must work as a team while maintaining harmony.
Our urgent task is to make the MRJ, an aircraft that everyone has been dreaming of, a beloved and reliable aircraft. However, test fl ights
have only just begun, so we will work as a team and overcome the challenges while collaborating closely with the public sector. We appreciate
your support.

Mr. Yasumura (right), chief test pilot, and Mr. Toda (left), test pilot, returning MRJ and accompanying T-4
from the MRJ’s fi rst fl ight


-----

**VOICE**

**Active Roles Played by Retired Uniformed SDF Personnel** **Column**

**Mr. Kiminori Hiura**
**President, Nichitoku Kisen Inc.**

My fi rst impression of him was that he was polite and honest, and that remains unchanged even today.
Being a crew member onboard a domestic vessel can be a tough job both mentally and physically, since
you have to face the perils of nature and to be away from your family and society. Nevertheless, he has
been operating ships safely with excellent responsibility and toughness that he gained in his duties in the
SDF. In our company, you are required to have wide-ranging skills in order to operate a large 10,000-ton
vessel with a small number of crew. He has been making steady progress since he joint our company. I
expect him to do a great job as an executive crew member in the future.

**Mr. Bunta Sawai**
**Nichitoku Kisen Inc. (Retired as Leading Seaman, MSDF)**

I was able to get used to my new job on domestic vessels right away thanks to my job experience on
MSDF destroyers. I am enjoying my time on the ships with my colleagues now. We are all given private
rooms on the ships, and we get a month-long leave period after working on the ships for three months,
enriching my private life with distinct work hours and off hours. Moreover, there is a chance for us to
become a ship’s captain if we get the necessary qualifi cations. That keeps me motivated and encourages
me to set goals for myself.

**Mr. Yuya Kawamura**
**Managing Director of Kyoto Offi ce, Tokusyu Kousyo Gijutsu Inc.**

Our company provides services such as surveys, inspections and repairs of infrastructure including bridges,
hydroelectric plants, and wind turbine generators designed for use in high places with special technology.
The physical strength and skills cultivated through my duties in the SDF are useful in my current
work which requires using ropes. A strong sense of responsibility and organizational skills are also helpful
when working as a team to complete the work.
Mr. Masuhara, whom we employed last year, is demonstrating his physical strength, initiative and
perseverance he acquired in the SDF. He stands out from the other young employees and is bringing
vitality to our company. He is well trusted by his bosses, making us feel that we want to let him do various
works. This job involves protecting social infrastructure, which is in common with the missions of the SDF
to protect our country. I am looking forward to his continued success in the future.

**Mr. Takayuki Masuhara**
**(Retired as Leading Private GSDF)**
**Kyoto Offi ce, Tokusyu Kousyo Gijutsu Inc.**

My responsibilities here include inspections of bridges and repairs of blades on wind turbine generators.
I feel that the physical strength and perseverance I gained through my duties in the SDF is a great
help when I perform fi eld works bringing a sense of tension and put together survey results requiring
responsibility. I still have a lot to learn from my seniors, but I am working hard every day so that they can
entrust various works to me.


-----

requesting re-employment of other personnel and retired
personnel and requesting information; 2) regulation
on seeking employment opportunities at companies
in which retired personnel had a stake whilst in offi ce;
and 3) regulation on re-employed personnel making
requests.[8] In order to ensure strict observation of these
regulations, bodies comprised of academic experts with
no history serving as SDF members (Defense Personnel

**5 Enhancement of Medical Functions**


- 1  Enhancement of Education of Medical Offi cers
**and Nurses**


Review Board’s Separate Meeting for Monitoring Reemployment and Cabinet Offi ce’s Re-employment
Surveillance Commission) monitor the situation and
any violation will be met with penalties. Additionally,
re-employment information is carefully managed in a
centralized manner and appropriately disclosed to the
public by institutionalizing notifi cation and announcement
of such information.

infectious diseases, as well as increasing their motivation
for work.
Furthermore, with the aim of training and securing
high-quality nurses who are capable of fully responding
to the diversifi cation of missions and the sophistication
of medical technology, a four-year “nursing program”[9]
was established in the School of Medicine at the National
Defense Medical College in April 2014 for the training of
public health/registered nurses.


While greater abilities are required of personnel
engaged in medical care, such as medical offi cers, due
to the diversifi cation of missions, only 80% of medical
offi cer positions in particular have been fi lled. Such low
suffi ciency is caused by medical offi cers leaving the
SDF, one of the major reasons of which is the lack of
opportunity to engage in medical training and practice.
The MOD/SDF will make efforts to implement various
measures to prevent medical offi cers from leaving the
SDF by enhancing clinical education after graduation
from the National Defense Medical College and so on,
providing them with more opportunities to engage in
training and medical practice, helping them acquire and
improve specialized knowledge and skills in areas such as

Minister of Defense Nakatani conferring a diploma during a graduation ceremony at the National
Defense Medical College



- 2  SDF Hospitals as Hub Hospitals with
**Enhanced Functions**

SDF hospitals play the role of hospitals that are to admit
SDF personnel injured while in service in response to
various emergency events, and in normal circumstances,
these hospitals are required to play a role in providing
medical treatment and also educating medical staff.
For this reason, based on the NDPG, etc., SDF
hospitals will be centralized and their performance
levels increased, making an active contribution to local
medical care, in order to establish a high-quality medical
care system, while also improving the aid capabilities
on the front line when responding to contingencies
and promoting the improvement of the arrangements
for prompt onward transfer of patients. In addition, the
function of the National Defense Medical College will be
strengthened to make it a center of training and research
for defense medicine, with features not available in
general medical schools.


Stipulated in Parts 2, 3 and 4 of Article 65 of the SDF Actii


-----

**Chapter 3** **[Development of Legislation ]**
**for Peace and Security**


**Section 1** **Circumstances of the Development of Legislation**


**1 Background to the Development of Legislation**


The security environment surrounding Japan is increasingly
severe, and we are now in an era where threats could
easily spread beyond national borders, and no country can
maintain its own security only by itself any longer. Against
this background, it is f rst and foremost important to advance
vibrant diplomacy in order to maintain peace and security
of Japan, and ensure its survival, as well as to secure its
people’s lives. However at the same time, it is also necessary
to prepare for the worst-case scenario. Specif cally, it is
essential to avoid armed conf icts beforehand and prevent
threats from reaching Japan by appropriately developing,
maintaining and operating Japan’s own defense capability,
strengthening mutual cooperation with the United States
which is Japan’s ally, and other partner countries, and in
particular, further elevating the effectiveness of the JapanUnited States Security Arrangements and enhancing the
deterrence of the Japan-United States Alliance for the
peace and stability of Japan and the Asia-Pacif c region.
On that basis, in order to resolutely secure the lives and
peaceful livelihood of its people under any situation
and contribute even more proactively to the peace and
stability of the international community under the policy

**2 Background and Signifi cance of the Development of Legislation**


Following the Cabinet Decision, a legislation drafting team
was launched under the National Security Secretariat in the
Cabinet Secretariat. In addition, the Ministry of Defense
established “The Study Committee on the Development
of Security Legislation” with the Minister of Defense as
its Chairman, and conducted the deliberations toward the
development of security legislation.
The deliberations in the Government were conducted
based on the discussions at a total of 25 meetings in the


of “Proactive Contribution to Peace” based on the principle
of international cooperation, it is necessary to develop
domestic legislation that enables seamless responses.
In February 2013, Prime Minister Abe resumed the
Advisory Panel on Reconstruction of the Legal Basis
for Security. Following a total of seven meetings, the
Advisory Panel submitted its report to Prime Minister
Abe in May 2014.
Following the Advisory Panel’s report and in
accordance with the basic orientation for the way that
further deliberations would take place as presented
by Prime Minister Abe, discussions were held in the
ruling parties and studies were also conducted by the
Government. Following this, in July 2014, a cabinet
decision was made on “Development of Seamless
Security Legislation to Ensure Japan’s Survival and
Protect its People,” which set forth the basic policy for
the development of legislation that enables seamless
responses to any situations.

See>> Fig. II-3-1-1 (Outline of the Cabinet Decision and the Development
of Legislation); Reference 23 (Development of Seamless Security
Legislation to Ensure Japan’s Survival and Protect its People)

ruling parties, and, on May 14, 2015, the Government
made cabinet decisions on two bills, the Bill for the
Development of Legislation for Peace and Security[1] and
the International Peace Support Bill.[2] The two bills were
then submitted to the 189th ordinary session of the Diet on
May 15, 2015. These two bills enable seamless responses
to any situations, from the protection of assets including
weapons of units of the U.S. Forces and armed forces
of foreign countries during peacetime, support activities


Bill for Partial Amendments to the Self-Defense Forces Law and Other Existing Laws for Ensuring Peace and Security of Japan and the International Community


-----

|Items of the Cabinet Decision|Outline|Legislation Development|
|---|---|---|
|1. Response to an Infringement that Does Not Amount to an Armed Attack|❍ Under the basic policy that relevant agencies including the police and Japan Coast Guard are to respond in close cooperation in accordance with their respective duties and authorities, the Government will further strengthen necessary measures in all areas, including enhancing the respective agency’s response capabilities and strengthening collaboration among agencies. In cases of responding to a situation where police forces are not present nearby or police agencies cannot respond immediately, the Government will consider measures for issuing orders swiftly and accelerating procedures for public security operations or maritime security operations. ❍ The Government will develop legislation that enables the SDF to carry out very passive and limited “use of weapons” to the minimum extent necessary to protect weapons and other equipment of the units of the U.S. and other countries’ Armed Forces that are, in cooperation with the SDF, currently engaged in activities that contribute to the defense of Japan (including joint exercises), in line with the provisions of Article 95 of the SDF Act.|→ Acceleration of procedures to issue orders for public security operations/maritime security operations → Revision of the SDF Act (Protection of weapons and other equipment of the units of the U.S. and other countries’ Armed Forces)|
|2. Further Contributions to the Peace and Stability of the International Community|A. So-called Logistics Support and “Integration with the Use of Force” (*1) ❍ The Government takes the recognition that Japan’s support activities such as supply and transportation conducted at a place which is not “the scene where combat activities are actually being conducted” by a foreign country are not regarded as “Integration with the use of force” of that country. Based on that recognition, the Government will proceed with developing legislation which enables necessary support activities for the armed forces of foreign countries engaging in activities for ensuring Japan’s security or for the peace and stability of the international community. ❍ Japan does not conduct support activities in “the scene where combat activities are actually being conducted” by armed forces of a foreign country to which Japan provides support. ❍ Japan will immediately pause or cease support activities if the place where Japan is conducting support activities becomes “the scene where combat operations are actually being conducted” due to changes of the situation. B. Use of Weapons Associated with International Peace Cooperation Activities Based on the following positions, the Government will proceed with developing legislation in order to enable the SDF’s use of weapons associated with so-called “kaketsuke-keigo” (coming to the protection of individuals related to operations in response to urgent request) and the “use of weapons for the purpose of execution of missions” in international peace cooperation activities that do not involve the “use of force,” including U.N. peacekeeping operations, as well as police- like activities that do not involve the “use of force,” including the rescuing of Japanese nationals with the consent from the territorial State. ❍ As for U.N. peacekeeping operations, etc., under the framework of the Five Principles for PKOs, “a quasi-state organization” (*2) other than parties to the conflict who have given consent of acceptance is, in principle, not expected to appear as an adversary. ❍ When the SDF units conduct police-like activities that do not involve “use of force” including the rescuing of Japanese nationals in a foreign country based on the consent of the territorial State’s Government, it is natural that the activities be conducted in the area within which the consent of the territorial State’s Government is valid, i.e. the area within which its authority is maintained. This means that no “quasi-state organization” exists in that area. ❍ The Cabinet will make a decision on whether the consent of acceptance is stably maintained and whether the area within which the consent of the territorial State’s Government is valid, etc., based on deliberations, etc., at the National Security Council.|→ The Act Concerning the Measures for the Peace and Security of Japan in Situations That Will Have an Important Infulence on Japan’s Peace and Security (Revision of the Act Concerning the Measures for the Peace and Security of Japan in Situations in Areas Surrounding Japan), Revision of the Ship Inspection Operations Act, Enactment of the International Peace Support Act → Revision of the International Peace Cooperation Act, revision of the SDF Act (Rescue of measures for Japanese nationals overseas)|
|3. Measures for Self- Defense Permitted under Article 9 of the Constitution|❍ The Government believes that not only when an armed attack against Japan occurs but also when an armed attack against a foreign country that is in a close relationship with Japan occurs and as a result threatens Japan’s survival and poses a clear danger to fundamentally overturn people’s right to life, liberty and pursuit of happiness, and when there is no other appropriate means available to repel the attack and ensure Japan’s survival and protect its people, use of force to the minimum extent necessary should be interpreted to be permitted under the Constitution as measures for self-defense in accordance with the basic logic of the Government’s view to date. ❍ The aforementioned “use of force” permitted under the Constitution could have, under international law, a basis on the right of collective self-defense. Although this “use of force” includes those which are triggered by an armed attack occurring against a foreign country, they are permitted under the Constitution only when they are taken as measures for self-defense which are inevitable for ensuring Japan’s survival and protecting its people, in other words for defending Japan. ❍ The Government will stipulate in the draft legislation that the prior approval of the Diet is in principle required upon issuing orders for operations to the SDF for carrying out “use of force” permitted under the Constitution when an armed attack occurs not against Japan but against a foreign country, in the same manner as the procedures related to defense operations stipulated in the current laws and regulations.|→ Revision of Legislation for Responses to Armed Attack Situations, revision of the SDF Act (The provisions concerning defense operations)|


Fig. II-3-1-1 Outline of the Cabinet Decision and the Development of Legislation

**Items of the Cabinet**
**Outline** **Legislation Development**
**Decision**

❍ Under the basic policy that relevant agencies including the police and Japan Coast Guard are → Acceleration of procedures to
to respond in close cooperation in accordance with their respective duties and authorities, the issue orders for public security
Government will further strengthen necessary measures in all areas, including enhancing the operations/maritime security
respective agency’s response capabilities and strengthening collaboration among agencies. In operations

1. Response to an cases of responding to a situation where police forces are not present nearby or police agencies
Infringement that Does cannot respond immediately, the Government will consider measures for issuing orders swiftly
Not Amount to an Armed and accelerating procedures for public security operations or maritime security operations.
Attack ❍ The Government will develop legislation that enables the SDF to carry out very passive and limited → Revision of the SDF Act

“use of weapons” to the minimum extent necessary to protect weapons and other equipment (Protection of weapons and
of the units of the U.S. and other countries’ Armed Forces that are, in cooperation with the SDF, other equipment of the units of
currently engaged in activities that contribute to the defense of Japan (including joint exercises), the U.S. and other countries’
in line with the provisions of Article 95 of the SDF Act. Armed Forces)

A. So-called Logistics Support and “Integration with the Use of Force” (*1)
❍ The Government takes the recognition that Japan’s support activities such as supply and → The Act Concerning the
transportation conducted at a place which is not “the scene where combat activities are Measures for the Peace and
actually being conducted” by a foreign country are not regarded as “Integration with the use of Security of Japan in Situations
force” of that country. Based on that recognition, the Government will proceed with developing That Will Have an Important
legislation which enables necessary support activities for the armed forces of foreign countries Influence on Japan’s Peace and
engaging in activities for ensuring Japan’s security or for the peace and stability of the Security (Revision of the Act
international community. Concerning the Measures for the
❍ Japan does not conduct support activities in “the scene where combat activities are actually Peace and Security of Japan in
being conducted” by armed forces of a foreign country to which Japan provides support. Situations in Areas Surrounding
❍ Japan will immediately pause or cease support activities if the place where Japan is Japan), Revision of the Ship
conducting support activities becomes “the scene where combat operations are actually being Inspection Operations Act,
conducted” due to changes of the situation. Enactment of the International

Peace Support Act

B. Use of Weapons Associated with International Peace Cooperation Activities

2. Further Contributions to
the Peace and Stability Based on the following positions, the Government will proceed with developing legislation in order → Revision of the International
of the International to enable the SDF’s use of weapons associated with so-called “kaketsuke-keigo” (coming to Peace Cooperation Act,

the protection of individuals related to operations in response to urgent request) and the “use of revision of the SDF Act

Community

weapons for the purpose of execution of missions” in international peace cooperation activities (Rescue of measures for
that do not involve the “use of force,” including U.N. peacekeeping operations, as well as police- Japanese nationals overseas)
like activities that do not involve the “use of force,” including the rescuing of Japanese nationals
with the consent from the territorial State.
❍ As for U.N. peacekeeping operations, etc., under the framework of the Five Principles for PKOs,
“a quasi-state organization” (*2) other than parties to the conflict who have given consent of
acceptance is, in principle, not expected to appear as an adversary.
❍ When the SDF units conduct police-like activities that do not involve “use of force” including
the rescuing of Japanese nationals in a foreign country based on the consent of the territorial
State’s Government, it is natural that the activities be conducted in the area within which the
consent of the territorial State’s Government is valid, i.e. the area within which its authority is
maintained. This means that no “quasi-state organization” exists in that area.
❍ The Cabinet will make a decision on whether the consent of acceptance is stably maintained
and whether the area within which the consent of the territorial State’s Government is valid,
etc., based on deliberations, etc., at the National Security Council.

❍ The Government believes that not only when an armed attack against Japan occurs but also when → Revision of Legislation for
an armed attack against a foreign country that is in a close relationship with Japan occurs and as Responses to Armed Attack
a result threatens Japan’s survival and poses a clear danger to fundamentally overturn people’s Situations, revision of the SDF
right to life, liberty and pursuit of happiness, and when there is no other appropriate means Act (The provisions concerning
available to repel the attack and ensure Japan’s survival and protect its people, use of force to defense operations)
the minimum extent necessary should be interpreted to be permitted under the Constitution as
measures for self-defense in accordance with the basic logic of the Government’s view to date.

3. Measures for Self- ❍ The aforementioned “use of force” permitted under the Constitution could have, under
Defense Permitted international law, a basis on the right of collective self-defense. Although this “use of force”
under Article 9 of the includes those which are triggered by an armed attack occurring against a foreign country, they
Constitution are permitted under the Constitution only when they are taken as measures for self-defense

which are inevitable for ensuring Japan’s survival and protecting its people, in other words for
defending Japan.
❍ The Government will stipulate in the draft legislation that the prior approval of the Diet is in
principle required upon issuing orders for operations to the SDF for carrying out “use of force”
permitted under the Constitution when an armed attack occurs not against Japan but against a
foreign country, in the same manner as the procedures related to defense operations stipulated in
the current laws and regulations.

Notes: 1. As for Japan’s support activities, however, legal frameworks limiting the area of such activities to “rear area” or so-called “non-combat area,” etc., have been established in past
legislations to ensure that the issue of “integration with the use of force” (forming an “integral part” of the use of force) does not arise, in relation to Article 9 of the Constitution. This is
intended to avoid Japan from being legally evaluated as carrying out by itself the “use of force” which is not permitted under the Constitution because its support activities would form
an “integral part” of the use of force (“integration with the use of force”) by other countries.

2. Use of weapons associated with so-called “kaketsuke-keigo” (coming to the aid of geographically distant units or personnel under attack) or “use of weapons for the purpose of the
execution of missions” could constitute the “use of force” prohibited by Article 9 of the Constitution, if such use of weapons is directed against “a state or a quasi-state organization.”


-----

to armed forces of foreign countries, etc., in situations
that have an important infl uence on Japan’s peace and
security and situations that the international community
is collectively addressing for peace and security (to
be discussed later), to the limited use of the right of
collective self-defense as a measure for self-defense to
the minimum extent necessary to defend Japan when the
“Three New Conditions”[3] are satisfi ed.
Following the longest extension of a Diet session in
the postwar, as a result of about 116 hours of debate in the
House of Representatives and about 100 hours of debate
in the House of Councilors, about 216 hours, in total the
longest Diet debate of security-related bills in the postwar
period, the two bills were passed at a plenary session of
the House of Councilors and enacted on September 19
2015, upon formation of broad consensus, with approval
of not only the ruling parties but also the three opposition
parties of the Assembly to Energize Japan, the Party
for Future Generations and the New Renaissance Party
(altogether fi ve parties out of the ten political parties).
Just before the passage, these fi ve parties reached the
“Agreement Concerning the Legislation for Peace and
Security” (the “Five-Party Agreement”), which include
matters that should be taken into consideration in judging
the applicability of the Three New Conditions related to
the recognition of a “survival-threatening situation,” and
committed them to obtaining a conclusion on the shape of
a Diet organization for the constant surveillance and postverifi cation of SDF activities based on the Legislation for

**Commentary**

**Why Is the Legislation for Peace and Security Needed Now?** **Column**

The security environment surrounding Japan is increasingly severe, as seen in the shift in the global power balance, development and
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles, and threats such as international terrorism. Also there exists a situation in
which any threats, irrespective of where they originate in the world, could have a direct impact on the security of Japan. No country can maintain
its own security only by itself.
Maintaining the peace and security of Japan and ensuring its survival as well as securing its people’s lives are the primary responsibility
of the Government. In order to fulfi ll its responsibility, the Government, fi rst and foremost, has to prevent the emergence of threats by advancing
vibrant diplomacy and has to pursue peaceful settlement in the event of the occurrence of disputes. Moreover, it is essential to prevent threats
from reaching Japan by appropriately developing Japan’s own defense capabilities, further elevating the effectiveness of the Japan-United
States Security Arrangements and enhancing the deterrence of the Japan-United States Alliance.
On that basis, in order to resolutely secure the lives and peaceful livelihood of its people under any situation and contribute even more
proactively to the peace and stability of the international community under the policy of “Proactive Contribution to Peace” based on the principle
of international cooperation, the Legislation for Peace and Security that enables seamless responses is necessary.


3 The “three new conditions” are as follows: (1) When an armed attack against Japan has occurred, or when an armed attack against a foreign country that is in a close relationship with Japan occurs and as a
result threatens Japan’s survival and poses a clear danger to fundamentally overturn people’s right to life, liberty and pursuit of happiness; (2) When there is no appropriate means available to repel the attack


-----

and Security, the fi ve parties are engaging in discussions
on the Diet’s involvement and other issues.[4]
With the security environment surrounding Japan
becoming increasing severe, the enforcement of the
Legislation for Peace and Security has a historical
signifi cance as further ensuring peace and security of
Japan through enhancing deterrence and making more
proactive contributions to the peace and stability of the
region and the international community.
The Legislation for Peace and Security has been
highly appraised around the world, drawing strong support
from the United States, which is Japan’s ally, Australia,
India and countries of Southeast Asia and Europe as well
as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and the European Union (EU). This fact clearly shows
that the Legislation for Peace and Security strengthens
the Japan-U.S. Alliance and enhances deterrence, and
also contributes to the peace and stability of the region
and the international community. (See Column)


Peace and Security, and the strengthening of the Diet’s
involvement. The Government also made a cabinet
decision to the effect that the Government will respect
the Five-Party Agreement and handle these matters
appropriately. The Legislation for Peace and Security
was put into force on March 29, 2016. Based on the FiveParty Agreement concerning the Legislation for Peace


**Commentary**

**Foreign Countries’ Recognition of the Legislation for Peace and Security** **Column**

The Legislation for Peace and Security has received strong support and high marks, from the United States, which is Japan’s ally, Australia,
India and the countries of Southeast Asia and Europe, as well as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the European Union
(EU), etc.
At the Japan-U.S. Summit Meeting in November 2015, for example, U.S. President Obama expressed his congratulations on the enactment
of the Legislation for Peace and Security, and said the legislation enhances Japan’s defense functions and enables Japan and the United States
to further broaden their cooperation in the region and the world. The U.S. Senate Foreign Relations Committee and Armed Services Committee
also welcomed the enactment of the Legislation for Peace and Security in a joint statement in September 2015, saying that it “will strengthen
the vital alliance between our two countries.” Furthermore, in February 2016, Commander Harris of the U.S. Pacifi c Command, stated regarding
responses to ballistic missile launches by North Korea, that the Legislation for Peace and Security and the new Guidelines for Japan-U.S.
Defense Cooperation enhanced the capabilities of both Japan and the United States and also improved cooperation between Japan and the
United States.
In the Japan-Australia Joint Statement of December 2015, Australia welcomed and supported Japan’s passage of the Legislation for
Peace and Security, which enables Japan to contribute even more actively in securing the peace, stability and prosperity of the region and the
world in line with its policy of “Proactive Contribution to Peace.”
At the Japan-ASEAN Summit Meeting in November 2015, the ASEAN side supported Japan’s Legislation for Peace and Security and said
that ASEAN has high expectations for Japan’s contribution to the region’s peace and stability.
As described above, the strong support given to the Legislation for Peace and Security clearly shows that this legislation will help deter
war and contribute to the peace and security of the world.


The Five-Party Agreement states that “after enactment of this legislation, the fi ve parties will examine and obtain a conclusion regarding the modality of a Diet organization for the routine system of surveillance
and ex post facto verifi cation of SDF activities based on the Legislation for Peace and Security and the strengthening of the Diet’s involvement in situations that have an important infl uence on Japan’s peace


-----

**y**

**The Relationship between the Legislation for Peace and Security and**

**Column**

**the Constitution**

The “use of force” is permitted under the Constitution

-  When an armed attack against Japan occurs or when an armed attack against a foreign country that is in a close
**relationship with Japan occurs and as a result threatens Japan’s survival and poses a clear danger to fundamentally**
**overturn people’s right to life, liberty and pursuit of happiness;**

-  When there is no other appropriate means available to repel the attack and ensure Japan’s survival and protect its
**people; and**

-  Use of force is limited to the minimum extent necessary.

only when the Three New Conditions above are satisfi ed.

Even for the “use of force” permitted under the Three New Conditions,

-  The language of Article 9 of the Constitution appears to prohibit the “use of force” in international relations in all
**forms. However, when considered in light of “the right (of all peoples of the world) to live in peace” as recognized**
**in the Preamble of the Constitution and the purpose of Article 13 of the Constitution which stipulates, “their (all of**
**the people’s) right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness” shall be the supreme consideration in governmental**
**affairs, Article 9 of the Constitution cannot possibly be interpreted to prohibit Japan from taking measures of self-**
**defense necessary to maintain its peace and security and to ensure its survival.**

-  Such measures for self-defense are permitted only when they are inevitable for dealing with imminent unlawful
**situations where the people’s right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness is fundamentally overturned due to**
**an armed attack by a foreign country, and for safeguarding these rights of the people. Hence, the “use of force” to**
**the minimum extent necessary to that end is permitted.**

basic logic of the constitutional interpretation presented in the Governmental view of 1972 (above) is not changed.

Furthermore, the “use of force” permitted under the Three New Conditions remains within the scope of the Supreme Court decision on the
Sunagawa Case. The Supreme Court decision states that

-  “it must be pointed out that it is natural for Japan, in the exercise of powers inherent in a state, to take measures
**for self-defense that may be necessary to maintain its peace and security, and to ensure its survival.”**

In other words, the decision can be interpreted as recognizing that Japan should be able to take “measures for self-defense” to maintain its
peace and security and ensure its survival after stating that Japan has the right to self-defense, without making a distinction between the right
to individual self-defense and the right to collective self-defense.

As the Legislation for Peace and Security, which refl ects the Three New Conditions described above in just proportion, maintains the basic
logic of the constitutional interpretation hitherto presented by the Government and remains within the scope of the Sunagawa Case decision
by the Supreme Court, the only institution endowed with the power to fi nally determine the constitutional interpretation. It is consistent with
the Constitution.


**Commentary**

**About the Use of Weapons and the Use of Force** **Column**

In general, the “use of force” in Paragraph 1, Article 9 of the Constitution means the act of combat by Japanese physical and personnel
organizations as part of an international armed confl ict. In contrast to this, the “use of weapons” as referred to in the Self-Defense Forces
Act, etc., means the use of equipment and machinery, etc., designed to directly kill or harm people, or to destroy things as a means of armed
fi ghting, in accordance with their original usages. While the “use of force” in Paragraph 1, Article 9 of the Constitution is the idea related to
resorting to force, including the “use of weapons,” all sorts of the “use of weapons” do not necessarily fall under the category of the “use of
force” prohibited under Article 9 of the Constitution.
The “use of force” is permitted under the Constitution only in cases where the Three New Conditions (See Page 166) are satisfi ed.


-----

**Section 2** **Outline of the Legislation for Peace and Security**


The Legislation for Peace and Security consists of the
Act for the Development of the Legislation for Peace
and Security, (which bundles together a host of partial
amendments to existing laws) and the newly enacted


International Peace Support Act.

See>> Fig. II-3-2-1 (Layout of the Legislation for Peace and Security);
Fig. II-3-2-2 (Key Points regarding the Legislation for Peace and
Security)

|Fig. II-3-2-1|Layout of the Legislation for Peace and Security|
|---|---|
|Peace and Security Legislation Development Act （Bundling together partial amendments to the existing laws） Act for the Development of the Legislation for Peace and Security: Law Concerning Partial Amendments to the Self-Defense Forces Law and Other Existing Laws for In * Ensuring the Peace and Security of Japan and the International Community addition 1. Self-Defense Forces Act to 2. International Peace Cooperation Act those Act on Cooperation with United Nations Peacekeeping Operations and Other Operations in 3. Act Concerning Measures to Ensure the Peace and Security of Japan in Situations in Areas Surrounding Japan → Changed to Act Concerning Measures to Ensure the Peace and Security of Japan in Situations that Will Have an Important Influence on Japan’s Peace and Security left Act Concerning Measures to Ensure Peace and Security of Japan in Situations that will Have an Important Influence on Japan’s Peace and Security column, 4. Ship Inspection Operations Act Law Concerning Ship Inspection Operations in Situations that Will Have an Important Influence on Japan’s Peace and Security and Other Situations the 5. Armed Attack Situations Response Act 10 Law for Ensuring Peace and Independence of Japan and Security of the State and the People in armed attack situations, etc., and Survived-Threatening Situation existing 6. U.S. Military Actions Related Measures Act → Changed to the U.S. and Others’ Military Actions Related Measures Act laws Law Concerning the Measures Conducted by the Government in Line with U.S. and Other Countries’ Military Actions in armed attack situations, etc., and Survived-Threatening Situation were 7. Act Regarding the Use of Specific Public Facilities Law Concerning the Use of Specific Public Facilities and Others in Situations including Where an Armed Attack against Japan Occurs revised 8. Maritime Transportation Restriction Act Law Concerning the Restriction of Maritime Transportation of Foreign Military Supplies and Others in armed attack situations, etc., and Survived-Threatening Situation for technical 9. Prisoners of War Act Law Concerning the Treatment of Prisoners of War and Other Detainees in armed attack situations, etc., and Survived-Threatening Situation 10. Act for Establishment of the National Security Council reasons. New enactment (one) International Peace Support Act: Law Concerning Cooperation and Support Activities to Armed Forces of Foreign Countries, etc. in Situations where the International Community is Collectively Addressing for International Peace and Security||

|Fig. II-3-2-2|Key Points regarding the Legislation for Peace and Security|
|---|---|
|Images of Situations and Conditions Transportation of Japanese nationals overseas, etc. Support activities (including logistics support) in situations Response to armed attack situations, etc [Self-Defense Forces Act] that will have an important influence on Japan’s peace [Legislation for Responses to Situations] Concerning Rescue of Japanese nationals overseas, etc. (New) and security (Expansion) Responses to “Survived-Threatening Situation” (New) [Act Concerning Measures to Ensure Peace and Security ・ “Use of force” permitted under the “Three New Conditions” Protection of SDF’s weapons/other equipment of Japan in Situations that will Have an Important Influence on Japan’s Peace and Security] [Self-Defense Forces Act] (Revision of the Act Concerning Measures to Ensure Peace and Japan Protection of weapons/other equipment of the U.S. and Security of Japan in Situations in Areas Surrounding Japan) other countries’ armed forces (New) Provision of supplies and services to the U.S. Armed ・ C thla er i pfi uc ra pt oio sn e o of f t th he e p Au cr t）pose of the revisio（nRevision of (1) When an armed aT th tae c k“ T agh ar ie ne st N Jae pw a nC oo cn cd urit si o on r s w” hen an armed attack Japanese and Forces in peacetime [Self-Defense Forces Act] (Expansion) ・ Support activities for armed forces of foreign countries against a foreign country that is in a close relationship with Japan occurs ・ E a Jx asp pta ahn ned g s uit au ra dt inio gn s o fw fah ce ir le it iesu s p op f li te hs e/ s Ue .r Sv . i Ace rms eca dn F ob re c p esro sv ti ad te iod n, esu dc ih n ・ E(n xo pt a o nn sl iy o nth oe f U th.S e . s) cope of support activities (2) a f eWu nn n h sd d e a na rem s t h Jea e an r pr t eae ls nil syu l no t sv o t ue h o rr vr t tu he ivr ea an rt e p a an e p ns o p p r J pola e p r’p os r tia a ern i t cg e’ ts h im t ts stu e o par elv nif oi sev ,a a ll el vi b aa e in lr ad ty b p la eo n ts d oe p rs eu a prs ec u l l i te t h a o efr ahd taa tp an p cg i kne e ar s nt so d u a ’s l d p Nationals Ship Inspection Operations (Expansion) (3) Use of force limited to the minimum extent necessary [Ship Inspection Operations Act] ・ Enable ship inspection operations in situations that the international community is International Peace Cooperation Activities c po el ale cc et i av ne dly s a ed cd ur re its ysing for international Concerning [International Peace Cooperation Act] U.N. PKO (Addition) ・ Additional roles by Japanese Corps in operation (ensuring security of specified areas including Cooperation and Support activities to armed forces of International protection of local population) foreign countries in situations that the international ・ Review of authority to use weapons (small arms) in community is collectively addressing for international necessary cases peace and security (New) [International Peace Support Act (New)] Internationally coordinated operations for peace The exercise of the right of collective self-defense is not Cooperation and security permitted for the purpose of the so-called defense of a foreign (Multinational cooperation outside U.N. PKO framework, New) country, namely, for the purpose of turning back an attack made against a foreign country. Reorganizing the Agenda Items of the National Security Council (NSC) [Act for Establishment of the National Security Council] (Note) Cabinet Decisions on accelerating procedures to issue orders for public security operations and maritime security operations in cases of responding to a situation where an infringement that does not amount to an armed attack occurs in areas surrounding remote islands, etc., and police forces are not present nearby (Development of no new legislation)||


Images of Situations and Conditions

Transportation of Japanese nationals overseas, etc. Support activities (including logistics support) in situations Response to armed attack situations, etc

[Self-Defense Forces Act] that will have an important influence on Japan’s peace [Legislation for Responses to Situations]


-----

**1 Outline of the Act for the Development of the Legislation for Peace and Security**



- 1  Revision of the Self-Defense Forces Law

**(1) Establishment of Provisions for Measures to Rescue**
**Japanese Nationals Overseas (Article 84-3)**

Previously, operations to protect Japanese nationals
overseas in emergency situations were limited to
transporting to safe places those who need protection of
their lives or bodies, and rescue of Japanese nationals
overseas involving the use of weapons was not allowed
even in cases of terrorist attacks. In light of these
circumstances, the newly established provisions enable
the units of the SDF to take “rescue measures” that go
beyond transportation and include guarding and rescue of
Japanese nationals overseas whose lives or bodies could
be harmed in emergency situations when the following
requirements are satisfi ed:
a. Procedures
Upon the request of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
after subsequent consultations between the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Defense, the Minister
of Defense issues an order following approval by the
Prime Minister.
b. Requirements for Implementation
When all of the following are met, the rescue measures
may be implemented:
(1) It is recognized that in places where the rescue measures
are taken, the competent authorities of the country
concerned are maintaining public safety and order at the
time, and no act of combat will be conducted;
(2) The country concerned consents to the SDF taking the
rescue measures (including the use of weapons); and
(3) It is expected that coordination and cooperation can
be ensured between the units of the SDF and the
competent authority of the country concerned in order
to carry out the rescue measures as smoothly and
safely as possible in response to anticipated dangers.
c. Use of Weapons (Article 94-5)
In carrying out their duties to implement the rescue
measures, SDF personnel are permitted to use weapons to
the extent judged to be reasonably necessary, depending
on the situation when there are adequate grounds to
recognize the compelling need to use weapons to protect
the lives and bodies of Japanese nationals and others.
Subject to the rescue measures as well as themselves or
to eliminate actions to obstruct their duties (including
the permission to resort to the so-called use of weapons


for the defense of mandate.[1] However, causing harm
to people is permitted only in cases of legitimate selfdefense and evasion of clear and present danger.)

**(2) Establishment of Provisions for the Protection of**
**Weapons and Other Equipment of the Units of the**
**Armed Forces of the United States and Other Foreign**
**Countries (Article 95-2)**

The newly established provisions enable SDF personnel
to protect the weapons and other equipment of the units
of the armed forces of the United States and other foreign
countries that are, in cooperation with the SDF, currently
engaged in activities that contribute to the defense of Japan.
a. Coverage
Weapons and other equipment of the units of the United
States Armed Forces, armed forces of other foreign
countries and other similar organizations, that are, in
cooperation with the SDF, currently engaged in activities
that contribute to the defense of Japan (including joint
exercises but excluding activities in the scene where the
combat activities are actually being conducted.)
b. Procedures, etc.
When the request is made by the armed forces of the
United States and other foreign countries, and only
when the Minister of Defense deems it necessary, SDF
personnel provide protection (the operational policy,
setting out basic matters concerning the operation of this
system, including how the Cabinet should get involved, is
to be formulated.)
c. Use of Weapons
In protecting weapons and other equipment described in a.
above as part of their duties SDF personnel are permitted
to use weapons to the extent judged to be reasonably
necessary depending on the situation when there are
adequate grounds to recognize the need to use weapons to
protect persons, weapons, and other equipment (however,
causing harm to people is permitted only in cases of
legitimate self-defense and evasion of present danger.)


**(3) Development of Provisions concerning the Expansion**
**of the Provision of Supplies and Services to the**
**United States Armed Forces (Article 100-6)**

Regarding the provision of supplies or services to the United
States Armed Forces, the scope of the U.S. Armed Forces
and the scope of supplies covered were expanded as follows:


While the so-called “right to use weapons of self-preservation type” permits the use of weapons only for the protection of oneself and others (oneself, SDF members who are at the same scene as oneself, or
those under the supervision of oneself), the so-called “right to use weapons for the purpose of execution of missions” allows the use of weapons beyond self-preservation, for example, to protect the lives and


-----

**y**

**Measures to Rescue Japanese Nationals Overseas** **Column**

While globalization advances and a growing number of Japanese companies and Japanese nationals are active overseas today, there are more
chances that Japanese nationals become subject of acts of terrorism and other emergency situations given the global rise in the number of
terrorist attacks.
In light of these circumstances, the newly created “Measures to Rescue Japanese Nationals Overseas” allow Self-Defense Forces (SDF)
units, in emergency situations overseas, not only to “transport” but also “guard” or “rescue” Japanese nationals whose lives are in danger or
who are at risk of suffering bodily harm, even by using weapons to protect their lives or bodies, when certain requirements are met. Specifi c
scenarios envisioned for specifi c cases, for example, include a situation where a large-scale natural disaster occurs in a foreign country, when
the country’s security authorities, preoccupied with the rescue of the affected people, lack resources to spare for the protection of Japanese
nationals, and thus SDF units are headed to a congregation point for Japanese nationals, but the situation changes and Japanese nationals
at the congregation point are surrounded by mobs. Another scenario is a situation where the Japanese embassy in a foreign country is
attacked and occupied, with Japanese nationals taken hostage, and the government of that country allows the SDF to respond to the situation,
considering the SDF’s response capabilities to be higher than its own.


a. Scope of the United States Armed Forces Covered
(1) The scope extended to the United States Armed Forces
that are on fi eld sites along with the units of the SDF
carrying out the following actions or activities and
engaged in activities similar to those of the SDF units:

-  Guarding of facilities and areas of bases, etc., of
U.S. Forces Japan

-  Counter-piracy operations

-  Operations necessary to take measures to destroy
ballistic missiles, etc.

-  Removal and disposal of mines and other explosive
hazardous objects

-  Protection measures for Japanese nationals, etc., in
emergency situations in foreign countries

-  Activities to collect information by ships or
aircraft about the movements of the armed forces
of foreign countries and other information that
contributes to the defense of Japan
(2) The scope extended to the U.S. Armed Forces
participating in multilateral exercises of three or more
countries, including Japan and the United States, in
addition to the U.S. Armed Forces participating in
Japan-U.S. bilateral exercises
(3) The scope extended to the U.S. Armed Forces that
are in fi eld sites along with SDF units temporarily
staying at facilities of the U.S. Armed Forces for
day-to-day operations, in addition to the U.S. Forces
temporarily staying at SDF facilities
b. Scope of Supplies to be Provided
Added ammunition (weapons remain excluded)


**(4) Establishment of Provisions for the Punishment of**
**Those Who Commit Crimes Overseas (Article 122-2)**

Since the duties of the SDF overseas are to be expanded
under the latest legal revisions, it is necessary to more
adequately ensure the discipline and control of the
activities of the SDF overseas. For this reason, provisions
were established for the punishment of those who commit
crimes overseas such as the following: (1) Colluded
defi ance of superiors’ offi cial orders and unlawful
command of units, (2) Defi ance of and disobedience to
superiors’ orders by those given defense operation orders

- 2  Law Concerning Measures to Ensure the Peace
**and Security of Japan in Situations that Will**
**Have an Important Infl uence on Japan’s Peace**
**and Security (Revision of the Law Concerning**
**Measures to Ensure the Peace and Security of**
**Japan in Situations in Areas Surrounding Japan)**


The Law Concerning Measures to Ensure the Peace and
Security of Japan in Situations in Areas Surrounding Japan
stipulated rear area support,[2] rear area search and rescue
operations[3] and ship inspection operations (those set forth
in the Ship Inspection Operations Law) (discussed below)
conducted by Japan as measures to respond to situations
that will have an important infl uence on Japan’s peace
and security in areas surrounding Japan (situations that,
if left unattended, could result in a direct armed attack on
Japan, and these situations are called “situations in areas
surrounding Japan”).
In accordance with changes in the security
environment surrounding Japan, the latest law revision
deleted “in areas surrounding Japan” from situations


Rear area support means support measures, including the provision of goods, services, and conveniences, given by Japan in rear areas to the U.S. Armed Forces conducting activities that contribute to the
achievement of the objectives of the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty in situations in areas surrounding Japan.

Rear area search and rescue operations mean operations conducted by the SDF in situations in areas surrounding Japan to search and rescue those who were engaged in combat and were stranded in rear


-----

that will have an important influence on Japan’s peace
and security and changed the name of situations from
“situations in areas surrounding Japan” to “situations
that will have an important influence,”[4] and also
expanded the scope of support targets and response
measures as follows.

**(1) Support Targets**
On top of the existing “U.S. Armed Forces engaged in
activities contributing to the achievement of the objectives
of the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty,” the revised law added
“armed forces of other foreign countries engaged in
activities contributing to the achievement of the objectives
of the U.N. Charter” and “other similar organizations” as
armed forces, etc., responding to situations that will have
an important influence on Japan’s peace and security.


conducted.” Regarding search and rescue operations,
however, when the personnel having been stranded
have already been found and rescue operations have
commenced, search and rescue activities concerning
them are allowed to continue as long as the safety of
the SDF units is ensured.
(2) The commanding officers, etc., of the SDF units
order the temporary suspension of activities, etc., if
combat operations occur or are expected to occur at
the site of their activities or in the vicinity.
(3) The Minister of Defense designates the area for
implementing activities, and if it is deemed difficult
to implement operations smoothly and safely in the
whole or part of that area, the Minister must promptly
change the designation of the area or order the
cessation of the activities being implemented there.

**(4) Diet Approval**
As before the law revision, prior Diet approval is
required, in principle, and ex-post facto approval is also
allowed in emergency.


**(2) Response Measures to Situations that Will Have an**
**Important Influence on Japan’s Peace and Security**

The revised law sets out measures to respond to situations
that will have an important influence on Japan’s peace
and security as (1) logistics support activities, (2) search
and rescue activities, (3) ship inspection operations, and
(4) other measures necessary to respond to situations that
will have an important influence on Japan’s peace and
security, and added “lodging, storage, use of facilities
and training services” as the types of goods and services
provided by the SDF in (1) logistics support activities, on
top of the “supply, transportation, repair and maintenance,
medical activities, communications, airport and seaport
services, and base services” previously. While the
provision of weapons is not included, as before, the
revised law now allows the “provision of ammunition”
and “refueling and maintenance of aircraft ready to take
off for combat operations.”
The revised law also made it possible to implement
response measures in foreign territories, but only when
the foreign country concerned consents.

**(3) Measures to Avoid Integration with the Use of Force**
The revised law sets forth the following measures in order
to avoid integration with the use of force by a foreign
country and also to ensure the safety of SDF personnel:
(1) The SDF does not carry out response measures in
“the scene where combat activities are actually being



- 3  Revision of the Ship Inspection Operations Law

Ship inspection operations mean operations to inspect
and confirm the cargo and destination of ships (excluding
warships and others) and to request, if necessary, a
change of sea route, or destination port or place, for the
purpose of strictly enforcing the regulatory measures
concerning trade or other economic activities to which
Japan is a party, conducted based on the U.N. Security
Council resolutions or with the consent of the flag state.[5]
Previously, ship inspection operations were stipulated
as to be conducted only in situations in areas surrounding
Japan.[6] However, in light of the global accumulation
of examples of ship inspection operations against
international threats such as cross-border movements of
weapons of mass destruction and weapons of international
terrorist organizations, etc., since 2000 when the Ship
Inspection Operations Law was enacted, it was made
possible to conduct ship inspection operations in situations
threatening the international peace and security that
the international community is collectively addressing[7]
(discussed below) set forth in the International Peace
Support Act. In conjunction with this, the revision to the


Previously, “situations in areas surrounding Japan” was understood to be an idea that focuses on the nature of situations, not a geographical idea. In light of the changes in the security environment in recent
years, however, the definition was revised since it is not appropriate to use an expression that could be interpreted as geographically limiting areas where situations that will have an important influence
on Japan’s peace and security may arise. In association with this, the title of the Law was amended from the “Law Concerning Measures to Ensure the Peace and Security of Japan in Situations in Areas
Surrounding Japan” to the “Law Concerning Measures to Ensure the Peace and Security of Japan in Situations that Will Have an Important Influence on Japan’s Peace and Security.”

The state that has the right to fly its flag as prescribed in Article 91 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.

At the time when the Ship Inspection Operations Law was enacted, the conduct of ship inspection operations in situations other than situations in areas surrounding Japan was positioned as a separate issue
on the agenda (an answer given by then Minister for Foreign Affairs Kono at a meeting of the House of Councilors Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defense on November 28, 2000).

Situations that threaten peace and security of the international community, where the international community is collectively addressing the situations in accordance with the objectives of the U.N. Charter to


-----

law was made in association with the review of the Law
Concerning Measures to Ensure the Peace and Security of
Japan in Situations in Areas Surrounding Japan.

- 4  Amendment to the International Peace
**Cooperation Act**


Given the diversification and qualitative change of the
international peace cooperation activities, Japan, in order
to contribute further to peace and stability of international
community under the policy of “Proactive Contribution to
Peace” based on the principle of international cooperation,
expanded the scope of tasks that can be implemented in U.N.
PKOs and reviewed the authority to use weapons, and also
introduced new provisions to allow for active participation
in humanitarian and reconstruction assistance, safetyensuring, and other operations not under the control of the
United Nations (“Internationally Coordinated Operations
for Peace and Security”).

**(1) Requirements for Participation**
a. U.N. Peacekeeping Operations
While maintaining the framework of the Five Principles
for Participation, consent for acceptance of the countries
to which the areas where those operations are to be
conducted belong is deemed to be consistently maintained
throughout the duration of the operation is required
for the implementation of so-called “safety-ensuring”
operations and so-called “kaketsuke-keigo” operations
require that the consent of acceptance of countries to
which the areas where these operations are conducted
belong is stably maintained throughout the duration of the
operations in addition to those required for implementing
the operations.
b. Internationally Coordinated Operations for Peace and Security
Japan is now able to participate in Internationally
Coordinated Operations for Peace and Security, on top
of the existing three types of operations (U.N. PKOs,
International Humanitarian Relief Operations and
International Election Observation Operations), when any
of the following is satisfied, in addition to the fulfillment
of the Five Principles for Participation.
(1) Based on resolutions of the General Assembly, the
Security Council or the Economic and Social Council
of the United Nations
(2) At the requests by any of the following international
organizations:

-  The United Nations

-  Organs established by the U.N. General Assembly

or Specialized Agencies, Funds and Programmes
of the U.N. such as the Office of the U.N. High
Commissioner for Refugees or otherwise specified
by a Cabinet Order

-  Regional organizations, as prescribed in Article


The International Peace Cooperation Act, enacted in
1992, sets forth a framework for extending appropriate
and prompt cooperation for the three categories of
operations of U.N. PKOs, International Humanitarian
Relief Operations, and International Election Observation
Operations, and for Japan to take measures to provide
Contributions in Kind for those operations, thereby
enabling Japan to actively contribute to international
peace efforts centering upon the United Nations. The law
also stipulates a set of basic guidelines (so-called “Five
Principles for Participation”) for Japan’s participation in
these activities: (1) Agreements on a ceasefire have been
reached among the Parties to Armed Conflict; (2) Consent
for the conduct of U.N. Peacekeeping Operations as well
as Japan’s participation in such operations have been
obtained from the countries to which the areas where
those operations are to be conducted belongs as well as
the Parties to Armed Conflict; (3) The operations shall
be conducted without partiality to any of the Parties to
Armed Conflict; (4) Should any of the requirements in
the above-mentioned guideline cease to be satisfied, the
International Peace Cooperation Corps shall terminate
the International Peace Cooperation Assignments; and
(5) The use of weapons shall be limited to the minimum
necessity for the protection of the lives of personnel
dispatched, in principle.[8]
At the time of enactment of the Act, it was assumed
that Japan was to cooperate with the ceasefire monitoring in
conventional conflicts between states within the framework
of U.N. PKOs under the control of the United Nations.
However, the nature of conflicts for the international
community to address has been transformed into intra-state
conflicts and a combination of inter-state and intra-state
conflicts, and as such, support for the nation-building of state
parties to conflict and the creation of a safe environment
necessary to achieve this end have become important tasks
in international peace cooperation activities. Furthermore,
there are a wide range of international peace cooperation
activities implemented within the frameworks not under the
control of the United Nations.[9]


Following the latest amendment of the Act, additional condition; “when the consent for acceptance is deemed to be consistently maintained, the use of weapons in defense of the mission mandate is allowed
for implementation of so-called “safety-ensuring” operations and the so-called ‘kaketsuke-keigo’ (coming to protection of individuals related to operations in response to urgent request) operations as the use
of force beyond self-preservation and Article 95 of the SDF Act (the use of force for protection of weapons, etc.).” has been added to (5) of the Five Principles for Participation.

These activities include the Aceh Monitoring Mission (AMM), implemented at the request of the European Union, and the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI), implemented at the request


-----

52 of the U.N. Charter or organs established by
multilateral treaties, acknowledged as having the
actual achievements or expertise pertaining to the
activities of Internationally Coordinated Operation
for Peace and Security such as the European Union
or otherwise specified by a Cabinet Order
(3) At the requests of the countries to which the area
where those operations are to be conducted belongs
(limited to only those cases that are supported by any
of the principal organs of the U.N. as prescribed in
Article 7 (1) of the U.N. Charter.)

**(2) Description of Tasks**
In addition to ceasefire monitoring and humanitarian relief
operations for afflicted persons, the following tasks have
been added and expanded to tasks in U.N. PKOs, etc.
(1) Addition of monitoring, stationing, patrol, inspections
at checkpoints and security escort and protection for
the purpose of safety of specified areas including
prevention and suppression of injury or harm against
lives, bodies and property of local population,
afflicted persons and other populations requiring
protection (so-called “safety-ensuring” operations)
(2) Addition of protection of lives and bodies of
individuals engaging in international peace
cooperation operations or providing support for
those operations, in response to urgent requests
when unexpected dangers to lives or bodies of
such individuals related to operations occur or are
imminent (so-called “kaketsuke-keigo” operations)
(3) Expansion of tasks such as provision of advice or
guidance related to works for the purpose of assisting
in establishing or re-establishing organizations of
the Government relating to national defense or other
organizations
(4) Expansion of tasks conducted at organizations for
supervision and coordination of tasks to include
planning, drafting, coordination or collection and
updating of information in Headquarters Office or
coordination offices conducting U.N. PKOs and
Internationally Coordinated Operation for Peace and
Security, for the implementation of tasks (of mission
headquarters’ operations)


spend their time when not conducting operations outside
camps, and the last bastions, so to speak, to secure the
safety of lives and bodies of those inside. Thus, in the case
of unexpected situations, such as attacks against camps of
U.N. PKOs, etc. by armed groups, it is essential for SDF
personnel stationing in the camps, even if they are not
the direct targets of such attacks, to coordinate with the
personnel of other countries and protect each other and
deal with the common danger. In light of this, the use of
weapons for the purpose of protecting individuals jointly
stationing at the camps was allowed as a type of the use
of weapons for self-preservation.[10]
b. The Authority to Use Weapons in the So-Called
“Kaketsuke-Keigo” Operations
In carrying out so-called “kaketsuke-keigo” operations,
uniformed SDF personnel are permitted to use weapons
within the limits judged reasonably necessary according
to the circumstances, when reasonable grounds are found
for the unavoidable necessity to protect the lives or
bodies of themselves or individuals related to operations
that they intend to protect (however, inflicting injury on
a person is permitted only in the cases of legitimate selfdefense and aversion of clear and present danger).
c. The Authority to Use Weapons for So-Called “SafetyEnsuring” Operations
In carrying out so-called “safety-ensuring” operations,
uniformed SDF personnel are permitted to use weapons
within the limits judged reasonably necessary according
to the circumstances, when reasonable grounds are found
for the unavoidable necessity to protect the lives, bodies
or properties of themselves or other individuals, or to
eliminate obstructive behavior for their duties (however,
inflicting injury on a person is permitted only in the
cases of legitimate self-defense and aversion of clear and
present danger).

**(4) Diet Approval**
Diet approval is necessary prior to the commencement
of so-called “safety-ensuring” operations, in addition to
ceasefire monitoring, in principle (ex-post facto approval
is permitted when the Diet is in recess or the House of
Representatives is dissolved).


**(5) Ensuring Safety of Personnel of the International**
**Peace Cooperation Corps of Japan**

The provision for the consideration to ensuring the safety
of personnel of the International Peace Cooperation Corps
was added, while the measures for ensuring the safety of
personnel of the International Peace Cooperation Corps


**(3) Authority to Use Weapons**
a. Expansion of the Authority to Use Weapons for Selfpreservation (Joint Protection of Camps)
Camps of U.N. peacekeeping operations (PKOs), etc.,
are the bases where personnel of participating countries


10 The authority to use weapons for self-preservation is allowed in view of the existence of particular circumstances, whereby armed personnel, who protect camps which are the last bastions of safety, are in the


-----

**y**

**“Kaketsuke-Keigo” (coming to protection of individuals related to operations**

**Column**

**in response to urgent request)**

In past operations of the Self-Defense Forces (SDF) based on the Act on Cooperation in the U.N. Peace Keeping Operations, for example in
1994 when vehicles of a Japanese nongovernmental organization (NGO) operating in a refugee camp in Goma in former Zaire were seized by
refugees, the NGO asked for help by SDF units dispatched there for the relief of refugees.
Currently, at the site of the activities of SDF units, SDF offi cials are engaged in a variety of peacetime cooperation with staff of international
organizations and NGOs, such as information sharing and exchanges. Given these circumstances, there is a good chance that SDF units will
receive requests for rescue from people associated with such organizations at risk going forward.
In the so-called “kaketsuke-keigo” (coming to protection of individuals related to operations in response to urgent request) incorporated in
line with these ideas, SDF engineering units, in response to emergency requests, provide urgent and temporary protection to civilian personnel
of peacekeeping operations and/or NGO staff involved in peacekeeping operations, ensuring safety within their capabilities, when they are at
imminent risk, such as the danger of being surrounded by rioters or refugees, if such SDF units are situated closer to the scenes of problems
than the security forces of a territorial State or infantry units of U.N. peacekeeping operations.
The Japanese Government decided to allow the implementation of the so-called “kaketsuke-keigo” when the Five Principles for
Participation are satisfi ed and the consent of the territorial State and the parties to the confl ict is deemed to be stably maintained throughout
the period of U.N. activities and Japan’s operations.
If these conditions are met, “a state” or “a quasi-state organization” does not appear as the object of the operation. Therefore, even when
weapons are used, it would not amount to the “use of force” prohibited under the Constitution and as such, would not violate the Constitution.


were incorporated into the matters to be stipulated in the
Implementation Procedures.

**(6) Other Key Points of Amendment**
(1) Dispatch of uniformed SDF personnel to the United
Nations (dispatch of Force Commanders of U.N.
PKOs, etc.)
The Act was amended to make it possible to dispatch
uniformed SDF personnel and have them engage in
the tasks of the United Nations and those concerning
overall management of tasks implemented by units of
SDF, etc., or units of armed forces of foreign states
participating in U.N. PKOs, at the request of the United
Nations, with the consent of the Prime Minister.[11]
(2) Provision of supplies and services to the Armed
Forces of the United States, etc., for their operations
to cope with large-scale disaster.[12]
The Act was amended to make it possible for the
SDF, when the Armed Forces of the United States
of America or the Australian Defense Force that is
located in the area together with units of the SDF,
etc., and is undertaking operations to cope with largescale disaster requests units of the SDF to provide
supplies or services necessary for the activities
of urgent nature to be undertaken in that area of
activities, so far as it does not hinder the performance
of International Peace Cooperation Assignments,


etc., of the SDF, to provide the Armed Forces of the
United States of America or the Australian Defense
Force with the supplies or services requested.



- 5  Revision of Legislation for Responses to Armed
**Attack Situations**

As the security environment surrounding Japan changes,
it is likely that an armed attack occurring against a
foreign country could threaten Japan’s survival as well,
depending on its purpose, scale and manner. For this
reason, in addition to the armed attack situations, etc.,
(an armed attack situation,[13] and an anticipated armed
attack situation[14]), “Survival-Threatening Situation” (a
situation where an armed attack against a foreign country
that is in a close relationship with Japan occurs and
as a result threatens Japan’s survival and poses a clear
danger to fundamentally overturn people’s right to life,
liberty and pursuit of happiness) was newly added to the
situations to which Japan has to respond for the defense
of Japan, and responses to a such situation was defi ned
as one of the SDF’s primary missions as avoidable selfdefense measures for Japan’s defense. The following
amendments, including the above, were made to relevant
laws, including the Armed Attack Situations Response
Act and the SDF Law.


11 Consent for acceptance of the countries to which the areas where those operations are to be conducted belong is deemed to be consistently maintained throughout the duration of the operation is required for
the dispatch of uniformed SDF personnel.

12 MOD and SDF participated in the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) following the major earthquake that struck Haiti in 2010, were unable to provide supplies and services to the U.S.
Armed Forces engaged in disaster relief operations in Haiti outside the framework of U.N. PKOs, due to the absence of the necessary domestic legislation.

13 A situation where an armed attack from outside against Japan has occurred, or an imminent danger of the armed attack occurring is acknowledged


-----

**(1) Revision of the Armed Attack Situations Response Act[15]**

a. Purpose
Responses to survival-threatening situations were added,
in addition to the responses to armed attack situations, etc.
b. The Basic Response Plan to Respond to Armed Attack
Situations, etc. or Survival-Threatening Situations
The Basic Response Plan should include the following
points: (1) Developments in the situation, the confirmation
of the situation as an armed attack situations, etc., an
anticipated armed attack situation or Survived-Threatening
Situation, and the facts that serve as the premises supporting
the confirmation; (2) When the situation is confirmed as
an armed attack situations, etc., or Survived-Threatening
Situation, reasons why there is no other appropriate means
available to ensure Japan’s survival and protect its people,
and the use of force is necessary to respond to the situation;
and (3) An overall plan to respond to the armed attack
situations, etc., or Survived-Threatening Situation.
c. Diet Approval
When an order is given to the SDF for defense operations
to respond to a “situation where an armed attack against
a foreign country results in threatening Japan’s survival,”
prior Diet approval is required, in principle, in the same
manner as for the armed attack situations, etc.

**(2) Revision of the Self-Defense Forces Law**
a. Positioning as the Mission of the SDF (Article 3)
The SDF’s response to Survived-Threatening Situation
was defined as one of the primary missions of the SDF.
b. Defense Operation (Article 76)
Survived-Threatening Situation was categorized as a
situation in which a defense operation will be ordered.
c. Others
Among the provisions setting forth a variety of authorities,
etc., and special measures necessary for SDF operations,
those whose purpose is entirely for responses to direct
armed attacks against Japan and physical damage are not
to be applied to Survived-Threatening Situation.[16]


the armed forces of other foreign countries in survivalthreatening situations were added.
b. Maritime Transportation Restriction Act
The provisions to restrict maritime transportation in
Survived-Threatening Situation were added. Furthermore,
the waters to impose the restrictions on maritime
transportation are defined as Japan’s territorial waters,
territorial waters of foreign countries (only when their
consent is obtained) and the high seas.
c. Prisoners of War Act
The provisions were added for the application of the
Prisoners of War Act to Survived-Threatening Situation
as well.
d. Act Regarding the Use of Specific Public Facilities
The operations of the armed forces of foreign countries
other than the United States in armed attack situations,
etc. were added to the scope of coordination of the use of
specific public facilities.

- 6  Revision of the Act for Establishment of
**the National Security Council**

Responses to “Survived-Threatening Situation” and
responses to “situations threatening the international
peace and security that the international community
is collectively addressing” were added as the items
for deliberation, and items for deliberation regarding
“situations in areas surrounding Japan” were changed to
items for deliberation regarding “situations that will have
an important influence on Japan’s peace and security.”
Furthermore, the following items (all items are related
to the stable maintenance of the consent of acceptance
of hosting countries) were specified as the items the
National Security Council must deliberate without fail.
❍ Regarding international peace cooperation operations,
decisions on and changes in plans for implementation
related to the implementation of the so-called safetyensuring operations or the so-called “kaketsuke-keigo”
operations
❍ Dispatch of uniformed SDF personnel (force
commanders, etc.) who are to be engaged in supervisory
duties for operations conducted by units of countries
participating in U.N. PKOs
❍ Implementation of protection measures, including
guarding and rescue, of Japanese nationals overseas
and others


**(3) Revisions to Other Relevant Legislation**
a. Act Related to the Actions of the U.S. Forces and Others
In addition to support for the U.S. Armed Forces
responding to armed attack situations, etc., support
operations for the armed forces of foreign countries other
than the United States in armed attack situations, etc., as
well as support operations for the U.S. Armed Forces and


15 Following the addition of survival-threatening situations, the title of the Act was revised from the “Act on the Peace and Independence of Japan and Maintenance of the Nation and the People’s Security in Armed
Attack Situations, etc.,” to the “Act on the Peace and Independence of Japan and Maintenance of the Nation and the People’s Security in Armed Attack Situations, etc., and Survived-Threatening Situation.”

16 The examples of application include the organization of special units, and the defense call-up of SDF Personnel and SDF Ready Reserve Personnel, etc., while the examples of non-application include measures


-----

**2 Outline of the International Peace Support Act**


The International Peace Support Act is the newly
enacted law that enables Japan to conduct cooperation
and support operations, for the armed forces of foreign
countries engaged in operations for international peace
and security in situations threatening the international
peace and security that the international community is
collectively addressing (situations that threaten the peace
and security of the international community, and the
international community is collectively addressing the
situations in accordance with the objectives of the U.N.
Charter to remove the threat, and Japan, as a member
of the international community, needs to independently


and proactively contribute to these activities) in order to
ensure peace and security of the international community.

- 1  Requirements


Either of the following U.N. resolutions (by the General
Assembly or the Security Council) is required for the
operations of armed forces of foreign countries that are
covered by Japan’s cooperation and support operations.
(1) Resolutions that decide, call upon, recommend or
authorize foreign countries subject to Japan’s support
operations to respond to the situation that threatens


**Commentary**

**Why Is the International Peace Support Law (General Law) Necessary?** **Column**

With the security environment becoming increasingly severe, we are now in an era where no country can maintain its own peace only by itself
any longer and it is necessary for the international community to cooperate more than ever to secure peace.
Japan has enacted the Act on Special Measures against Terrorism and other special measures laws in the past, and under these laws,
Japan conducted at-sea replenishment for the vessels of the military forces of foreign countries engaged in maritime interdiction operations to
prevent and deter the movements of terrorists and transportation of weapons and other related materials in the Indian Ocean. These operations
by Japan have been highly praised by the international community.
From the perspective of enabling seamless responses to any situation, rather than developing new legislation in response to every
emergence of a specifi c need in the future, the International Peace Support Law, enacted as general law, enables Japan to conduct support
operations more expeditiously and effectively for the military forces of foreign countries operating for international peace and security, making
it possible to proactively contribute to international peace and security at Japan’s own initiative.
The International Peace Support Law also enables Japan to conduct intelligence gathering and education/training in cooperation with
other countries during peacetime and refl ect the achievements of those operations in the development of its basic preparedness.
Furthermore, the law enables the prompt implementation of fi eld surveys and coordination with other countries prior to dispatch of the
SDF units in order to specify the needs for their activities and the size of units to be dispatched, thereby increasing the possibility for SDF units
to conduct operations they are skilled at in better locations and making it possible to conduct training, including security measures, in a more
productive manner based on the information obtained. In other words, the law is also considered to be conducive to safer SDF operations with
minimized risk.


**Commentary**

**Risk of Being Dragged into a War** **Column**

The “use of force” permitted as a measure for self-defense under Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution must meet the very strict requirements
of the Three New Conditions (see Page 166). They are extremely stringent requirements not seen anywhere else in the world and serve as
a clear constitutional restraint. Furthermore, when the Minister of Defense issues a defense operation order to actually conduct the “use of
force,” the Government must seek Diet approval in advance, in principle. As such, since the SDF conducts its activities in compliance with the
Constitution and laws enacted by the Diet, it will never happen in which the “use of force” by the SDF expands endlessly, resulting in Japan
being dragged against its intention into the war of another country.
In addition, under the Legislation for Peace and Security, the Japan-U.S. Alliance will function more for Japan’s peace and security. By
sending this message out to the world, Japan’s capability to prevent a confl ict from occurring, in other words its deterrence capability, will be
further enhanced, and the risk of Japan coming under an attack will be further reduced. Furthermore, it will enable Japan to cooperate further
with the international community for the maintenance of peace and development of the region and the world, making the world more peaceful.


-----

**y**

**Risk for SDF Members** **Column**

The missions by SDF members defi nitely entail risk, but the degree of risk varies depending on the situation in the region to which they are
actually dispatched and details of their activities, etc., and SDF members are dispatched only when it is judged as possible to dispatch them
after assessing risk in the course of considering concrete cases of dispatches. Moreover, in dispatching SDF members, the SDF strives to
minimize risks associated with their performance of missions. These processes are no different from those adopted in dispatching SDF
members on disaster relief missions following the eruption of Mt. Ontake and the Great East Japan Earthquake or on UN peacekeeping
operations in South Sudan.
While new missions may give rise to new sorts of risks, when the SDF dispatches its members, it minimizes and localizes such risks by
legal and operational mechanisms for security. For example, the legal mechanism for security includes provisions for the designation of areas of
activities where SDF units can conduct their activities smoothly and safely and for the cessation/suspension of activities when areas of activities
by SDF units become “the scene where combat operations are actually being conducted.” In addition, the operational mechanism for security
includes adequate information gathering on situations in areas of activities, carrying enough equipment to secure the safety of SDF members,
and adequate education and training.
Moreover, the dispatch of SDF units must go through appropriate procedures, such as the development of robust plans, cabinet decisions
and approval by the Diet.
The SDF is thoroughly committed to security measures for SDF members by taking a variety of measures as described above.


the peace and security of the international community
(2) Other than (1), resolutions that regard the situations as a
threat to peace or a breach of the peace and call on U.N.
member states to respond to the situation concerned

- 2  Response Measures



- 3  Measures to Avoid Integration with the Use of Force


The revised law sets forth the following measures in order
to avoid integration with the use of force by a foreign
country and also to ensure the safety of SDF personnel:
(1) Japan does not implement support activities in the
scene where combat operations are actually being
conducted. However, when the personnel having
been stranded have already been found and rescue
operations have commenced, search and rescue
activities concerning them are allowed to continue as
long as the safety of the SDF units is ensured.
(2) The commanding offi cers of the SDF units, etc.,
order a temporary suspension of support activities if
combat operations occur or are expected to occur at
the site of their activities or in the vicinity.
(3) The Minister of Defense designates the area for
implementing activities, and if it is deemed diffi cult
to implement operations smoothly and safely in the
whole or part of that area, must promptly change the
designation of the area or order the cessation of the
activities being implemented there.

- 4  Diet Approval


The following response measures can be implemented in
situations threatening the international peace and security
that the international community is collectively addressing.
(1) Cooperation and support activities
Supplies and services to armed forces of foreign countries
(supply, transportation, repair and maintenance, medical
services, communications, airport and seaport services, base
services, lodging, storage, use of facilities, training services
and construction) are to be provided. While the provision of
weapons is not included as in the Law Concerning Measures
to Ensure the Peace and Security of Japan in Situations
that Will Have an Important Infl uence on Japan’s Peace
and Security, the revised law now allows the “provision of
ammunition” and “refueling and maintenance of aircraft
ready to take off for combat operations.”
(2) Search and rescue activities
(3) Ship inspection operations (those set forth in the Ship
Inspection Operations Law)


Prior Diet approval required without exception, and each
house of the Diet has an obligation to make efforts toward
decisions within 7 days (excluding any period when the
Diet is in recess). In addition, re-approval is required
in the case of a lapse of more than two years since the
commencement of the response measures.


-----

**y**

**Comments on the Conscription System** **Column**

In general, the conscription system is the universal conscription system that obligates people to serve mandatory military service. Under the
system, a country maintains military forces on a permanent basis, conscripts required soldiers every year, trains them for a specifi c period of
time, rejuvenates the forces and prepares them as needed personnel to be ready for war-time.
Under Japan’s constitutional legal framework, such a conscription system is not socially recognized as a duty that should naturally be
borne by a member of society in organizing his or her life, from a public welfare perspective. The adoption of the conscription system in Japan
would essentially mean the imposition of an obligation of rendering military service. Therefore, regardless of whether it is during peacetime or an
emergency situation, the draft system should not be allowed in view of the intent of the provisions of Article 13 and Article 18 of the Constitution.
There is absolutely no leeway to change this interpretation of the Constitution. Whatever change occurs in the security environment, it
would not change the fundamental nature of the conscription system, which requires that a person serve mandatory military service even if it
is against that person’s will. Thus, there is no leeway for the conscription system to become constitutionally accepted in the future.
Moreover the Self-Defense Forces (SDF) is a force consist of professionals, armed with high-tech equipment, and it takes a long time and
considerable work to foster and train SDF members. The conscription system, under which members of the forces are replaced within a short
period of time, is not conducive to a strong SDF. Thus, the conscription system is not necessary from the perspective of security policy, either.
Germany and France, which had maintained the conscription system for many years, abolished the system in their own countries at the turn of
the century, and currently, no Group of Seven (G7) country has a conscription system in place.


**3 Acceleration of Procedures to Issue Orders for Public Security Operations and Maritime Security Operation**


Considering the increasingly severe security environment
surrounding Japan, situations that are neither pure
peacetime nor contingencies (the so-called gray zone
situations) are liable to occur, posing risks which could
develop into more serious situations. In order to respond
promptly to such situations of infringement that do not
amount to an armed attack, and ensure seamless and
suffi cient responses to any unlawful acts, the Government
made cabinet decisions regarding the acceleration of
procedures to issue orders for public security operations
and maritime security operations, etc., in May 2015,
particularly in the following three cases:
❍ Responses to foreign naval vessels making maritime
navigation through the territorial sea or the internal
waters of Japan that does not fall under the category of
innocent passage under international law


❍ Responses to the unlawful landing on a remote island
or its surrounding seas by an armed group
❍ Responses to acts of infringement when Self-Defense
Forces ships or aircraft detect foreign ships committing
said acts against Japanese private ships on the high seas
Specifi cally, when an urgent decision is necessary
concerning the issuance of orders for public security
operations, etc., but it is diffi cult to promptly convene
an extraordinary cabinet meeting, the Prime Minister
can preside over a cabinet meeting to make the decision
by obtaining the consent of the Ministers of State by
telephone and other means. Any Minister of State who
could not be contacted in advance shall be notifi ed of the
cabinet decision ex post facto.

See>> Fig. II-3-2-3 (Acceleration of Procedures to Issue Orders for Public
Security Operations and Maritime Security Operation)


-----

Fig. II-3-2-3 Acceleration of Procedures to Issue Orders for Public Security Operations and Maritime Security Operation

H Cabinet dicision to accelerate procedures to issue orders for public security/maritime security operations in the following three cases,
referring to Cabinet Decision on Government Responses when there is a Risk of Large-Scale Terrorism (November 2, 2001):

Responses to Foreign Naval Vessels
Making Maritime Navigation that Does Not Responses to Illegal Landing on Remote Responses to Foreign Vessels Infringing on
Fall under the Category of Innocent Islands by Armed Groups Japanese Commercial

Vessels on the High Seas

Passage under International Law

H Responses are made by SDF units under H When armed groups or groups that are H When Japanese commercial vessels are
orders for maritime security operations highly probable to be armed are likely to actually subject to infringement activities,
in principle. illegally land or actually land on remote H It is necessary to hold a cabinet meeting
H The Ministry of Defense, the Ministry of islands, to issue orders for (urgent) counterForeign Affairs and the Japan Coast H It is necessary to hold a cabinet meeting piracy operation or maritime security
Guard promptly and expeditiously share to issue orders for maritime security operation.
information, coordinate and cooperate. operations/public security operations.
H It is necessary to hold a cabinet meeting
to issue orders for maritime security
operations.

When an urgent decision is necessary but it is difficult to promptly convene an adhoc cabinet meeting, the Prime Minister
can preside over a cabinet meeting to make the decision by obtaining the consent of the Ministers by telephone and
other means (any Ministers who could not be contacted in advance shall be notified of the cabinet decision ex post facto).


**4  Frameworks for Responses to Armed Attack Situations, etc., and Survived-Threatening Situation**



- 1  Responses to Armed Attack Situations, etc., and
**Survived-Threatening Situation**

The Act on the Peace and Independence of Japan and
Maintenance of the Nation and the People’s Security in
Armed Attack Situations, etc., and Survived-Threatening
Situation specifi es items that should be stipulated as
basic principles and basic policies (the Basic Response
Plan) regarding responses to armed attack situations,
etc., and Survived-Threatening Situation as well as the
responsibilities of national and local governments in the
event of an armed attack situation.

See>> Fig. II-3-2-4 (Procedures for Responding to Armed Attack Situations,
etc., and Survived-Threatening Situation); References 24 (Main
Operations of the Self-Defense Forces); References 25 (Statutory
Provisions about Use of Force and Use of Weapons by SDF Personnel)


serve as the premises supporting the confi rmation
b. When the situation is confi rmed as an armed attack
situations, etc., or Survived-Threatening Situation,
reasons why there is no other appropriate means
available to ensure Japan’s survival and protect its
people, and the use of force is necessary to respond
to the situation
(2) An overall plan to respond to the armed attack
situations, etc., or Survived-Threatening Situation
(3) Important matters related to the response measures

**(2) Response Measures**
When responding to an armed attack situations, etc., or
Survived-Threatening Situation, the designated government
institutions, local governments and designated public
institutions will implement the required measures based on
legal provisions during the period between the formulation
and termination of the Basic Response Plan.

See>> Fig. II-3-2-5 (Measures to be Implemented by Designated Administrative
Institutions, Local Governments or Designated Public Institutions)


**(1) Basic Response Plan, etc.**
In situations such as an armed attack situations, etc., or
Survived-Threatening Situation, the Cabinet must decide
upon the following items for a Basic Response Plan and
ask for approval by the Diet. In addition, when the Basic
Response Plan is decided, a temporary Task Force for
Armed Attack Situations, etc., (the Task Force) is to be
established within the Cabinet, and it will implement
these measures.
(1) The following items concerning situations that need
to be dealt with:
a. Developments in the situation, the confi rmation of
the situation as an armed attack situations, etc., or
Survived Threatening Situation and the facts that


**(3) Responsibilities of the National and Local Governments**
The responsibilities of the national and local governments
as defi ned in the Act on the Peace and Independence of
Japan and Maintenance of the Nation and the People’s
Security in Armed Attack Situations, etc., and SurvivedThreatening Situation are as outlined below.

See>> Fig. II-3-2-6 (Responsibilities of the National and Local Governments, etc.)


-----

|Local governments|Designated public institutions|
|---|---|

|Fig. II-3-2-5|Measures to be Implemented by Designated Administrative Institutions, Local Governments or Designated Public Institutions|
|---|---|
|Measures implemented according to changes in circumstances caused by Measures implemented according to changes in circumstances caused by armed attacks, in order to bring an armed attack situation, etc., to an end Survived-Threatening Situation in order to bring the situation to an end (1) The use of force, deployment of units, etc. and other actions taken by the (1) The use of force, deployment of units, etc. and other actions taken by the SDF necessary to repel an armed attack SDF necessary to repel an armed attack against a foreign country that is in (2) Provision of articles, facilities and services, or other measures a close relationship with Japan which as a result threatens Japan’s survival implemented so that the actions of the SDF specified in (1), actions taken and poses a clear danger to fundamentally overturn the people’s right to by the United States Armed Forces under the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty life, liberty and pursuit of happiness (a survival-threatening armed attack) necessary to repel an armed attack, and actions taken by armed forces of (2) Provision of articles, facilities and services, or other measures implemented other foreign countries in cooperation with the SDF necessary to repel an so that the actions of the SDF specified in (1) and actions taken by armed armed attack can be conducted smoothly and effectively forces of foreign countries in cooperation with the SDF necessary to repel (3) Diplomatic and other measures on top of (1) and (2) above an armed attack against a foreign country that results in threatening Japan’s survival can be conducted smoothly and effectively (3) Diplomatic and other measures on top of (1) and (2) above Measures to protect the lives, bodies and properties of citizens from an armed attack, or minimize the impact of an armed attack on the people’s Measures to protect the lives, bodies and properties of citizens from a lives and the national economy implemented according to changes in survival-threatening armed attack, or minimize the impact of a armed attack situations, etc. survival-threatening armed attack on the people’s life and the national economy implemented according to changes in a situation where an armed (1) Measures to announce warnings, give instructions on evacuation and the attack against a foreign country results in threatening Japan’s survival rescue of injured parties, measures for the restoration of facilities and equipment, and other measures (2) Price stabilization and distribution of daily necessities etc., and other • Measures to ensure the security of public facilities and secure the stable measures supply of daily necessities, etc.||


Fig. II-3-2-4 Procedures for Responding to Armed Attack Situations, etc., and Survived-Threatening Situation

Occurrence of armed attack, etc.

Creation of a draft basic response plan (1) Formulation of the draft basic response

plan by the Prime Minister

The Government

National Security Council

(2) The draft basic response plan sent to

Deliberation of the draft basic response plan Consultation the National Security Council for deliberation

(3) Recommendation by the National Security

Special Advisory Committee for Contingency Planning

Recommendation Council to the Prime Minister concerning

Specialized assistance to National Security Council the draft basic response plan

Cabinet decision on the basic response plan (4) Cabinet decision on the basic response plan

The Diet

Task Force for Armed Attack Situations, etc. (note) Request for the approval of the Diet (5) Approval of the basic response plan by Diet
(Task Force Chief: Prime Minister)

Approval Rejection

-  Comprehensive promotion of response measures

-  Formulation of usage guidelines for specific public Terminate immediately
facilities, etc.

Response according to the basic

Designated government institutions Local governments Designated public institutions

response plan and usage guidelines

Note: The Task Force will be established in the Cabinet for the comprehensive promotion of measures to respond to armed attack situations or a situation where an armed attack against
a foreign country results in threatening Japan’s survival


-----

**(5) Report to the United Nations Security Council**
In accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Government shall immediately report
measures it has taken to terminate armed attacks on Japan
to the Security Council.

- 2  Responses to Emergency Situations other than
**Armed Attack Situations, etc.**


The Act on the Peace and Independence of Japan and
Maintenance of the Nation and the People’s Security in
Armed Attack Situations, etc., and Survived-Threatening
Situation provides for appropriate and rapid response
measures to be implemented in emergency situations[17]
other than an armed attack situation and a situation where
an armed attack against a foreign country resulting in
threatening Japan’s survival, in order for the Government
to ensure the peace and independence of the country, and
to maintain the security of the country and its people.

- 3  Initiatives for Civil Protection

|Subject|Responsibility|
|---|---|
|Government|• Have a unique mission to defend Japan, protect the homeland and the lives, bodies, and properties of the people • Respond to armed attack situations, etc., and Survived- Threatening Situation by taking every possible measure and using all organizations and functions • Implement all possible measures as a whole nation|
|Local Government|• Have responsibilities of protecting the region and the lives, bodies and properties of the residents • Implement necessary measures to deal with armed attack situations, etc., in mutual cooperation with the national government, other local governments and other institutions|
|Designated Public Institutions|• Implement necessary measures to deal with armed attack situations, etc., in the scope of their work, in mutual cooperation with the national government, local governments, and other institutions|
|Nationals|• Strive to provide necessary cooperation when the designated administrative institutions, local governments or designated public institutions implement response measures to deal with armed attack situations, etc.|


Responsibilities of the National and
Fig. II-3-2-6
Local Governments, etc.

**Subject** **Responsibility**

-  Have a unique mission to defend Japan, protect the

homeland and the lives, bodies, and properties of the
people

Government -  Respond to armed attack situations, etc., and Survived
Threatening Situation by taking every possible measure
and using all organizations and functions

-  Implement all possible measures as a whole nation

-  Have responsibilities of protecting the region and the

lives, bodies and properties of the residents

Local -  Implement necessary measures to deal with armed
Government attack situations, etc., in mutual cooperation with the

national government, other local governments and other
institutions

-  Implement necessary measures to deal with armed

Designated

attack situations, etc., in the scope of their work, in

Public

mutual cooperation with the national government, local

Institutions

governments, and other institutions

-  Strive to provide necessary cooperation when the

designated administrative institutions, local governments

Nationals

or designated public institutions implement response
measures to deal with armed attack situations, etc.


**(4) Authority of the Prime Minister for Response Measures**
Following the stipulation of the Basic Response Plan,
for overall promotion of response measures, the Task
Force for Armed Attack Situations, etc., (the Task Force)
will be established within the Cabinet, with the Prime
Minister appointed as the Chief of the Task Force and
appropriate Ministers of State as the Deputy Chief and
other members of the Task Force.
If the Prime Minister recognizes that there are
obstacles to protecting the lives, bodies or properties of the
people, or to eliminating an armed attack, and particularly
when necessary response measures under comprehensive
coordination are not implemented, the Prime Minister may
instruct the head of the local government concerned and
other relevant persons to implement the necessary response
measures. In circumstances where the necessary response
measures are not implemented or if there are obstacle to
protecting the lives, bodies and properties of the people or
to eliminating an armed attack, and emergency responses
are required in light of the situations, the Prime Minister
or the Minister of State responsible for operations relating
to the relevant countermeasures may take responsibility
for and implement the response measures that the local
governments or designated public institutions have failed
to implement, after notifying the relevant heads of local
government or other relevant individuals.


**(1) Basic Guidelines for Civil Protection and the Roles of**
**the Ministry of Defense and the SDF**

In March 2005, the Government established the Basic
Guidelines for Civil Protection (hereinafter the “Basic
Guidelines”), based on Article 32 of the Civil Protection
Act. The Basic Guidelines presume four types of armed
attack situations, including amphibious landing invasion,
guerilla or special operations forces unit attacks, ballistic
missile attacks, and air attacks, and prescribe matters
requiring attention to implement civil protection measures
in response to each of them.
The MOD and the SDF established the MOD/
Acquisition, Technology & Logistics Agency Civil
Protection Plan based on the Civil Protection Act and
the Basic Guidelines. The Plan calls upon the SDF, in
an armed attack situations, etc., to go all out to perform
its primary mission of forcing back the armed attack,
and also implement civil protection measures to support
the evacuation and rescue of residents and deal with the
armed attack-induced disasters to the extent possible
without interfering with the primary mission.
In the event of an armed attack situations, etc., and an
emergency response situation, the SDF may undertake such
operations as support for the evacuation of residents, relief
of evacuated residents and stopgap restoration work as civil
protection measures and emergency response protection


17 A contingency situation other than an armed attack situation and a situation where an armed attack against a foreign country resulting in threatening Japan’s survival that may have a significant impact on the
security of the nation and its people, including an emergency response situation (a situation arising due to actions that may kill or injure many people which uses methods equivalent to those used in an armed


-----

measures based on the civil protection dispatches.
The Civil Protection Act, from the perspective of
protecting the people and its livelihood from a direct
attack against Japan and its physical damage, provides
for necessary matters to that end, including issuance of
warnings and measures for the evacuation and relief of
residents. Survived-Threatening Situation and a situation
that requires warning issuance and the evacuation and
relief of residents is nothing less than a situation where an
armed attack against Japan is anticipated or imminent. In
such a case, it is recognized as an armed attack situations,
etc., and necessary measures are to be implemented under
the Civil Protection Act. (In the case that an armed attack
against a foreign country resulting in threatening Japan’s
survival is not regarded as an armed attack situations, etc.,
a series of measures are to be implemented to ensure the
stability of the people’s livelihood, including the stable
supply of daily necessities, based on a variety of existing
laws and regulations, taking thoroughgoing response
measures to protect the people’s livelihood without
invoking the Civil Protection Act.)

See>> Fig. II-3-2-7 (Mechanism of Civil Protection Dispatches)

**(2) Activities by the MOD and the SDF to Facilitate**
**the Civil Protection Measures**

(a) Participation in Training for Civil Protection
In order to appropriately and promptly implement civil
protection measures in armed attack situations, etc., it
is essential to jointly coordinate matters related to the
implementation of civil protection measures in peacetime
with other ministries and agencies, local governments,
and other relevant organizations.
From this perspective, the MOD and the SDF have
held civil protection training with cooperation from
relevant government organizations, or local governments.
In addition, the MOD and the SDF actively participate
and cooperate in civil protection training implemented by
relevant government organizations, or local governments.

See>> References 26 (Record of Joint Exercises for Civil Protection
Implemented by the National and Local Governments (FY 2015))


Civil Protection Exercise held in Asahikawa, Hokkaido

|Fig. II-3-2-7|Mechanism of Civil Protection Dispatches|
|---|---|
|Municipal mayors Ask for dispatch Communication (When a dispatch request cannot be sought) request Prefectural governors Task Force Chief1 Request for Ask for dispatch Notification dispatch Report (When communication is established by a Municipal mayors) Report Minister of Defense Prime Minister Approve Issue an order to Issue an order for civil gather for civil protection dispatches protection, etc.2, 3 SDF Ready Reserve Personnel SDF Reserve Personnel Report for duty Units Notes: 1. Armed Attack Situations, etc. Task Force Chief or Emergency Response Situation Task Force Chief 2. If specifically needed 3. Ready reserve personnel and reserve personnel will be called on if necessary upon the approval of the Prime Minister||



Civil Protection Councils have been established
in prefectures and municipalities as institutions to
comprehensively promote policies related to civil
protection measures, with members of the SDF and
employees of the regional defense bureaus appointed as
council members.
In addition, in some cases, retired SDF personnel
are employed by local governments as crisis management
supervisors to facilitate cooperation with the MOD and the
SDF and help to develop and implement disaster response
plans and training programs as experts on civil protection.


(b) Coordination with Local Governments in Peacetime
During peacetime, the MOD and the SDF closely
coordinate with local governments. The Provincial
Liaison & Coordination Division has been posted
within the GSDF Regional Army Headquarters to
achieve effective implementation of civil protection
measures through close coordination. To strengthen
functions relating to coordination and cooperation with
local governments, etc., a Civil Protection and Disaster
Countermeasures Liaison Coordination Officer post was
established in each SDF Provincial Cooperation Office


-----

**Chapter 4** **[Strengthening of ]**
**the Japan-U.S. Alliance**


Based on the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty, the JapanU.S. Security Arrangements, together with Japan’s own
efforts, constitute the cornerstone for Japan’s security.
The Japan-U.S. Alliance centered on bilateral security
arrangements functions as public goods that contribute
to the stability and prosperity, not only of Japan but also
of the Asia-Pacifi c region and the world at large. As
the security environment surrounding Japan becomes
increasingly severe, and the United States, at the same
time, maintains and strengthens its engagement and
presence in the Asia-Pacifi c region, it has become more
important than ever to strengthen the Japan-U.S. Alliance
for the security of Japan.
The military presence of U.S. Forces in Japan not
only contributes to the defense of Japan, but also functions
as deterrence and response capabilities to address
contingencies in the Asia-Pacifi c region, and serves as a
core element of the Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements.
On the other hand, since the stationing of U.S. Forces in

**Section 1** **Signifi cance of the Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements**

**1 Maintenance of Japan’s Peace and Security**


In the current international community, a watertight
defense system capable of responding to every
contingency, ranging from all types of armed attacks
including the use of nuclear weapons to coercion or
intimidation by military power, is necessary to secure
the peace, security, and sovereignty of the nation. It
is diffi cult even for the United States to guarantee its
security on its own. Much more than that, it would be
diffi cult for Japan to ensure its national security solely
through its unilateral efforts given its population, land,
and economy. Moreover, such a strategy would not
necessarily contribute to regional stability.
Consequently, Japan has maintained its peace and
security, centered on the Security Arrangements with the
world’s dominant military power, the United States, with
which it shares basic values such as democracy, the rule of
law respect for human rights and a capitalist economy as


Prime Minister Abe and U.S. President Obama shaking hands at the APEC Summit Meeting
(November 2015) [Photo courtesy of the Cabinet Secretariat Public Relations Offi ce]

Japan impacts the living environment of local residents,
efforts that correspond to the actual situation of each
region must be made to mitigate the impact on regions
such as Okinawa.


well as an interest in maintaining the peace and security
of the world, and has strong economic ties.
Specifi cally, Japan and the United States will
take bilateral action in the event of an armed attack
against Japan, based on Article 5 of the Japan-U.S.
Security Treaty, and Japan will provide facilities and
areas for the U.S. Forces, based on Article 6 of the
treaty. If a nation plans to attack Japan, the attacker
must be prepared to confront not only the defense
capability of the Self-Defense Forces (SDF), but also
the overwhelming military strength of the United States,
due to the U.S. obligation to defend Japan in the event of
an armed attack. As a result, the opposing nation clearly
recognizes that it will suffer grievously if it carries out
an invasion, and such desires will be abandoned at the
planning stage. In other words, this serves as deterrence
against attacks


-----

Japan intends to create a seamless posture and deterrence capabilities of the U.S. military as well as
secure its peace and security by effectively utilizing the maintaining its own adequate defense capability.


**2 Maintenance of Peace and Stability in the Region Surrounding Japan**


Article 6 of the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty states that
contributing to the security of Japan and the maintenance
of international peace and security in the Far East is the
purpose of the use of facilities and areas by the U.S.
Forces in Japan. This provision is based on the recognition
that the security of Japan is closely tied to the peace and
security of the Far East region to which Japan belongs.
In the regions surrounding Japan, there are many
states and the like with massive military power,
including some states that retain nuclear weapons or
continue nuclear development. In addition to issues
or tension caused by changes in the balance of power,
situations that we call “gray zones” over sovereignty of
the territory or vested interests are likely to arise, and
this risks further aggravation of the situation. In such a

**3 Further Stabilization of the International Security Environment**


The Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements are the foundation
for a comprehensive and friendly cooperative relationship
between Japan and the United States, not only in defense
but also in a wide range of areas, including politics,
economy, and society. The Japan-U.S. Alliance, with
these security arrangements at its core, also forms the
axis of Japan’s foreign policy. It contributes to Japan’s
ability to implement positive efforts to maintain the peace
and security of the international community, including
promotion of multinational security dialogue and
cooperation, and cooperation with the United Nations.
Currently, we are confronted with global security
challenges that are extremely diffi cult for any single
country to tackle alone, including the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles,
international terrorism, and acts of piracy, as well as
new risks concerning stable use of the seas, outer space
and cyberspace, and it is important for countries to
work together from peacetime. The strong bonds forged


security environment, the military presence of the U.S.
Forces in Japan provides deterrence against unexpected
contingencies caused by various security issues or unstable
factors, providing a great sense of security to the nations
in the region and thus fulfi lling a role as public goods.
Also, the close bonds of cooperation based on the JapanU.S. Security Arrangements constitute the foundation of
the United States’ commitment to the peace and stability
of the region surrounding Japan. These arrangements,
complemented by the alliances established between the
United States and other countries in the region such as
South Korea, Australia, Thailand and the Philippines
and also by the friendly relations developed with other
countries, play an indispensable role in maintaining the
peace and stability of the Asia-Pacifi c region.

between Japan and the United States are also playing an
important role in the efforts implemented by Japan to
effectively respond to such challenges.
In particular, under the Japan-U.S. Security
Arrangements, the SDF and the U.S. Forces are working
together in peacetime in a variety of areas to strengthen their
cooperation. This close coordination lays the foundation
for various forms of international collaboration such as
antipiracy, undertaken by the SDF and the U.S. Forces, and
leads to enhancement of the operational effectiveness of
the Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements.
The peace and prosperity of the international
community are closely linked to those of Japan.
Accordingly, by cooperating with the United States,
which possesses preeminent international operational
capabilities, Japan is able to advance measures to further
stabilize the global security environment. This in turn is
enhancing the security and prosperity of Japan.


-----

**Section 2** **Overview of the Revision of the 1997 Guidelines**


It is necessary for both Japan and the United States to discuss
and decide the roles each will fulfi ll in case of an armed
attack against Japan or other situation in advance, with a
view to responding rapidly to such an event. The Guidelines
for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation (Guidelines) and the
various policies for ensuring their effectiveness provide
a framework pertaining to role-sharing between Japan

**1 Background to the Revision of the Guidelines**


- 1  Background to the Formulation of the Guidelines


and the United States. Based on that framework and the
changing security environment surrounding Japan, both
Japan and the United States continuously studied bilateral
cooperation plans for the two countries, held consultations
on them, and worked on the revision of the Guidelines to
adapt to the current situations.

at the Japan-U.S. Summit held in February 2013, Prime
Minister Abe stated to U.S. President Obama that, “in
response to the changing security environment, Japan
would like to start reviewing the Guidelines through
discussions on the two countries’ views of the roles,
missions and capabilities (RMC).”


The 1978 Guidelines were formulated with a focus on
an armed attack on Japan against the backdrop of the
Cold War, which was still ongoing then. The subsequent
Guidelines were developed in 1997 in light of changes
in the security environment, such as the end of the
Cold War. The 1997 Guidelines expanded cooperation
to responses in situations in areas surrounding Japan.
The 1997 Guidelines defi ne the roles of Japan and the
United States, and the cooperation of the two countries
under three categories: (1) under normal circumstances,
(2) in response to an armed attack against Japan, and
(3) in situations in areas surrounding Japan. They also
stipulated that they would review the Guidelines in a
timely and appropriate manner.

- 2  Background to the Revision



- 3  The Direction of the Revision

Against the background described above, at the JapanU.S. Security Consultative Committee (SCC or “2+2”
Meeting) in October 2013, the Ministers directed the
Subcommittee for Defense Cooperation (SDC) to draft
recommended changes to the 1997 Guidelines, and this
task was to be completed by the end of 2014.
The Joint Statement of the “2+2” Meeting
identified the following seven objectives of the review
of the 1997 Guidelines:
(1) Ensuring the Alliance’s capacity to respond to
an armed attack against Japan, as a core aspect of
Japan-U.S. defense cooperation;
(2) Expanding the scope of cooperation, to refl ect the global
nature of the Japan-U.S. Alliance, encompassing such
areas as counterterrorism, counter-piracy, peacekeeping,
capacity building, humanitarian assistance/disaster
relief, and equipment and technology enhancement;
(3) Promoting deeper security cooperation with other
regional partners to advance shared objectives
and values;
(4) Enhancing Alliance mechanisms for consultation
and coordination to make them more fl exible, timely,
and responsive and to enable seamless bilateral
cooperation in all situations;
(5) Describing appropriate role-sharing of bilateral
defense cooperation based on the enhancement of
mutual capabilities;


Since the formulation of the 1997 Guidelines, various
issues and destabilizing factors have emerged, and
become more visible and aggravated in the security
environment surrounding Japan; such as more active
military activities of neighboring countries, new threats
including international terrorist organizations and risks
against the stable use of global commons such as oceans,
outer space and cyberspace. In addition, the activities of
the SDF have expanded to a global scale, as exemplifi ed
by antipiracy activities, PKO, and international disaster
relief activities. As a result, it had become necessary
for the manner of Japan-U.S. defense cooperation to be
adapted to these changes in the security environment and
the expansion of the SDF’s activities and missions.
Against the backdrop of these changes in the security
environment, Prime Minister Abe directed then Minister
of Defense Onodera at the end of 2012 to work on the
revision of the Guidelines and other matters In addition


-----

(6) Evaluating the concepts that guide bilateral
defense cooperation in contingencies to ensure
effective, effi cient, and seamless Alliance response
in a dynamic security environment that includes
challenges in emerging strategic domains such as
space and cyberspace; and
(7) Exploring additional ways in which we can strengthen
the Alliance in the future to meet shared objectives.
Based on the Joint Statement of the “2+2” Meeting
in October 2013 and in line with approaches indicated in
the 2013 National Defense Program Guidelines (NDPG)
and the Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) of the
United States, Japan and the United States conducted

**2 Content of the New Guidelines**


As a result of the intensive bilateral work on the revision
of the Guidelines, the Japan-U.S. Security Consultative
Committee (SCC) approved the new Guidelines
recommended by the Subcommittee for Defense
Cooperation (SDC) at the “2+2” Meeting held on April
27, 2015, thereby accomplishing the objectives outlined by
the Ministers in October 2013. The new Guidelines, which
replace the 1997 Guidelines, update the general framework
and policy direction for the roles and missions of the two
countries and manifest a strategic vision for a more robust
Alliance and greater shared responsibilities by modernizing
the Alliance and enhancing its deterrence and response
capabilities in all phases, from peacetime to contingencies.

See>> Reference 27 (Joint Statement of the Security Consultative Committee
(April 27, 2015)); Reference 28 (The Guidelines for Japan-U.S.
Defense Cooperation (April 27, 2015))


extensive work on the revision of the 1997 Guidelines.
On October 8, 2014, based on the agreement reached at
the Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting held on July
11, 2014, the two governments announced “The Interim
Report on the Revision of the Guidelines for JapanU.S. Defense Cooperation.” In addition, on December
19, 2014, the Security Consultative Committee (SCC)
(“2+2” Meeting), recognizing the signifi cance of ensuring
consistency between the revision of the Guidelines and
Japan’s legislative process, decided to further deepen
the discussions to work toward fi nalizing the revision of
the Guidelines during the fi rst half of 2015, taking into
account the progress of Japan’s legislative process.

❍ The two governments will maintain their individual
defense postures based on their national security
policies. The United States will continue to extend
deterrence to Japan through the full range of
capabilities, including U.S. nuclear forces. The United
States also will continue to forward deploy combatready forces in the Asia-Pacifi c region and maintain
the ability to reinforce those forces rapidly.
❍ The Guidelines provide the general framework and
policy direction for the roles and missions of Japan and
the United States, as well as ways of cooperation and
coordination.
❍ The Guidelines promote domestic and international
understanding of the signifi cance of the Japan-U.S.
Alliance.



- 2  Basic Premises and Principles

The basic premises and principles maintain the approaches
of the 1997 Guidelines as described below:
❍ The rights and obligations under the Japan-U.S.
Security Treaty and its related arrangements will
remain unchanged.
❍ All actions and activities undertaken under the
Guidelines will be consistent with international law.
❍ All actions and activities undertaken by Japan and
the United States will be in accordance with their
respective constitutions, laws and regulations then in
effect, and basic positions on national security policy.
Japan will conduct actions and activities in accordance
with its basic positions, such as the maintenance of its
exclusively national defense-oriented policy and its
three non-nuclear principles.
❍ The Guidelines do not obligate either government to
take legislative budgetary administrative or other



- 1  Defense Cooperation and the Aim of the Guidelines

The new Guidelines newly specifi ed the matters to be
emphasized in security and defense cooperation. The
objectives of the new Guidelines are retained in line with
the approach of the 1997 Guidelines.
❍ In order to ensure Japan’s peace and security under
any circumstances, from peacetime to contingencies,
and to promote a stable, peaceful, and prosperous
Asia-Pacifi c region and beyond, bilateral security and
defense cooperation will emphasize:
– seamless, robust, fl exible, and effective bilateral
responses;
– synergy across the two governments’ national
security policies;
– a whole-of-government Alliance approach;
– cooperation with regional and other partners, as
well as international organizations; and
the global nature of the Japan U S Alliance


-----

measures, nor do the Guidelines create legal rights
or obligations for either government. Since the
objective of the Guidelines, however, is to establish an
effective framework for bilateral cooperation, the two
governments are expected to reflect in an appropriate
way the results of these efforts, based on their own
judgment, in their specific policies and measures.



- 4  Seamlessly Ensuring Japan’s Peace and Security

This section presents the direction of achieving seamless
cooperation, from peacetime to contingencies, in order to
ensure Japan’s peace and security, the core of the Guidelines.
❍ The two governments will take measures to seamlessly
ensure Japan’s peace and security in all phases from
peacetime to contingencies, including situations when
an armed attack against Japan is not involved. In this
context, the two governments also will promote further
cooperation with partners.
❍ The two governments will utilize the Alliance
Coordination Mechanism as appropriate, for assessment
of the situation, sharing of information, as well as
flexible deterrent options and actions aimed at deescalation. The two governments also will coordinate
strategic messaging through appropriate channels.



- 3  Strengthened Alliance Coordination

Effective bilateral cooperation under the Guidelines will
require the two governments to conduct close, consultative
dialogue and sound policy and operational coordination
from peacetime to contingencies. For this purpose,
the two governments will establish a new, standing
Alliance Coordination Mechanism, enhance operational
coordination, and strengthen bilateral planning.


**(1) Alliance Coordination Mechanism**
In order to address seamlessly and effectively any
situation that affects Japan’s peace and security or any
other situation that may require an Alliance response, the
two governments will utilize the Alliance Coordination
Mechanism, and will strengthen policy and operational
coordination related to activities conducted by the SDF
and the United States Armed Forces in all phases from
peacetime to contingencies. The two governments
will establish necessary procedures and infrastructure
(including facilities as well as information and
communication systems) and conduct regular training
and exercises.

**(2) Enhanced Operational Coordination**
The two governments recognize the importance of
collocating operational coordination functions. The
SDF and the United States Armed Forces will exchange
personnel to ensure robust information sharing, to facilitate
coordination and to support international activities.


**(1) Cooperative Measures from Peacetime**
As described below, this section specifies ways of
cooperation from peacetime to strengthen the deterrence
and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance.
❍ The two governments will promote cooperation across
a wide range of areas, to strengthen the deterrence and
capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance.
❍ The SDF and the United States Armed Forces will
enhance interoperability, readiness, and vigilance to
prepare for all possible situations. To these ends, the
two governments will take measures, including, but
not limited to, the following:
a. Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces will
conduct intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
(ISR) activities based on the capabilities and availability
of their respective assets. This will include conducting
bilateral ISR activities in a mutually supportive manner
to ensure persistent coverage of developments that could
affect Japan’s peace and security.
b. Air and Missile Defense
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces will maintain
and strengthen deterrence and their defense postures
against ballistic missile launches and aerial incursions.
The two governments will cooperate to expand early
warning capabilities, interoperability, network coverage,
and real-time information exchange and to pursue the
comprehensive improvement of capabilities to respond
to the threat of ballistic missiles, and will also closely
coordinate in responding to provocative missile launches
and other aerial activities.
c. Maritime Security
The two governments will cooperate closely with
each other on measures to maintain maritime order


**(3) Bilateral Planning**
In peacetime, the two governments will develop and update
bilateral plans through Bilateral Planning Mechanism.
Bilateral plans are to be reflected appropriately in the
plans of both governments.


-----

based upon international law, including freedom of
navigation. The SDF and the United States Armed
Forces will cooperate, as appropriate, on various efforts
such as maintaining and enhancing a bilateral presence
in the maritime domain through ISR and training and
exercises, while further developing and enhancing
shared maritime domain awareness.
d. Asset Protection
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces will provide
mutual protection of each other’s assets, as appropriate,
if engaged in activities that contribute to the defense of
Japan in a cooperative manner, including during training
and exercises.
e. Training and Exercises
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces will conduct
effective bilateral and multilateral training and exercises
both inside and outside of Japan in order to strengthen
interoperability, sustainability, and readiness. Timely and
realistic training and exercises will enhance deterrence.
f. Logistic Support
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces will provide
mutual logistic support where appropriate, including
supply, maintenance, transportation, engineering, and
medical services, for such activities as set forth in the
Japan-U.S. Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement
and its related arrangements.
g. Use of Facilities
The two governments will enhance joint/shared use of
facilities and areas in order to expand interoperability
and improve flexibility and resiliency of the SDF and the
United States Armed Forces. The two governments also
will cooperate in conducting site surveys on facilities,
including civilian airports and seaports.

**(2) Responses to Emerging Threats to Japan’s Peace**
**and Security**

As set forth below, this section describes measures to
respond to emerging threats to Japan’s peace and security.
❍ The Alliance will respond to situations that will have
an important influence on Japan’s peace and security.
Such situations cannot be defined geographically. The
measures described in this section include those that
may be taken, in accordance with the two countries’
respective laws and regulations, in circumstances that
have not yet amounted to such a situation.
❍ In addition to continuing cooperative measures
from peacetime, the two governments will pursue
all avenues. Utilizing the Alliance Coordination
Mechanism, the two governments will take additional
measures, based on their own decisions, including, but
not limited to, those listed below.


a. Noncombatant Evacuation Operations
The two governments will coordinate in planning and
cooperate in carrying out evacuations of Japanese or U.S.
noncombatants. These evacuations will be carried out
using each country’s capabilities such as transportation
means and facilities in a mutually supplementary manner.
The two governments will enhance coordination in
noncombatant evacuation operations from peacetime,
including by conducting training and exercises.
b. Maritime Security
The two governments’ cooperative measures may include,
but are not limited to, information sharing and inspection
of ships based on a United Nations (U.N.) Security
Council resolution or other basis under international law.
c. Measures to Deal with Refugees
If a situation develops such that a flow of refugees
into Japan becomes likely or actually begins, the two
governments will cooperate to maintain Japan’s peace
and security.
d. Search and Rescue
The two governments will cooperate and provide mutual
support, as appropriate, in search and rescue operations.
The SDF will provide support to combat search and
rescue operations by the United States where appropriate,
subject to Japanese laws and regulations.
e. Protection of Facilities and Areas
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces are
responsible for protecting their own facilities and areas in
cooperation with relevant authorities. Upon request from
the United States, Japan will provide additional protection
for facilities and areas in Japan in close cooperation and
coordination with the United States Armed Forces.
f. Logistic Support
The two governments will enhance mutual logistic
support as appropriate, to enable effective and efficient
operations.
The Government of Japan will provide logistic or
other associated support where appropriate, subject to
Japanese laws and regulations.
g. Use of Facilities
The Government of Japan will provide, as needed,
temporary use of facilities, including civilian airports
and seaports, in accordance with the Japan-U.S. Security
Treaty and its related arrangements.

**(3) Actions in Response to an Armed Attack against Japan**
The new Guidelines state that bilateral actions in
response to an armed attack against Japan remain a core
aspect of Japan-U.S. security and defense cooperation.
While maintaining the basic principles of bilateral
responses to an armed attack against Japan described in
the 1997 Guidelines the content of the new Guidelines


-----

have been enhanced in view of the expansion and
diversification of cooperation between Japan and the
United States.
a. When an Armed Attack against Japan is Anticipated
The two governments will take measures to deter an
armed attack and to de-escalate the situation, while
making preparations necessary for the defense of Japan.
b. When an Armed Attack against Japan Occurs
(a) Principles for Coordinated Actions

-  Japan and the United States will take appropriate and

coordinated actions to promptly repel the attack and
deter any further attacks.

-  The SDF will have primary responsibility to conduct

defensive operations, and the United States Armed
Forces will support and supplement the SDF.
(b) Concept of Operations
(1) Operations to Defend Airspace
The SDF will have primary responsibility for
conducting air defense operations while ensuring
air superiority. For this purpose, the SDF will
take necessary actions, including, but not limited
to, defense against attacks by aircraft and cruise
missiles.

The United States Armed Forces will
conduct operations to support and supplement
SDF operations.
(2) Operations to Counter Ballistic Missile Attacks
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces
will exchange real-time information for early
detection of ballistic missile launches. When
there is an indication of a ballistic missile attack,
they will maintain an effective posture to defend
against ballistic missile attacks heading for Japan
and to protect forces participating in ballistic
missile defense operations.

The SDF will have primary responsibility for
conducting ballistic missile defense operations.

The United States Armed Forces will
conduct operations to support and supplement
SDF operations.
(3) Operations to Defend Maritime Areas
The SDF will have primary responsibility for the
protection of major ports and straits in Japan and
of ships and vessels in waters surrounding Japan
and for other associated operations.

The United States Armed Forces will
conduct operations to support and supplement
SDF operations.

The SDF and the United States Armed Forces
will cooperate in the interdiction of shipping
activities providing support to adversaries
involved in the armed attack


(4) Operations to Counter Ground Attacks
The SDF will have primary responsibility to
prevent and repel ground attacks, including those
against islands. If the need arises, the SDF will
conduct operations to retake an island.

The SDF, in cooperation with relevant
agencies, also will have primary responsibility for
defeating attacks by special operations forces or
any other unconventional attacks.

The United States Armed Forces will
conduct operations to support and supplement
SDF operations.
(5) Cross-Domain Operations
Examples of cooperation across domains include
the actions described below.

The SDF and the United States Armed
Forces, in cooperation with relevant agencies, as
appropriate, will strengthen their respective ISR
postures, enhance the sharing of intelligence, and
provide protection for each other’s ISR assets.

The United States Armed Forces may
conduct operations involving the use of strike
power, to support and supplement the SDF.
When the United States Armed Forces conduct
such operations, the SDF may provide support,
as necessary. These operations will be based on
close bilateral coordination, as appropriate.
(c) Operational Support Activities
(1) Communications and Electronics
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces
will ensure effective communication between the
two forces and maintain a common operational
picture for bilateral operations under common
situational awareness.
(2) Search and Rescue
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces, in
cooperation with relevant agencies, will cooperate
and provide mutual support in search and rescue
operations, including combat search and rescue,
as appropriate.
(3) Logistic Support
When operations require supplementing their
respective logistics resources, the SDF and the
United States Armed Forces will provide flexible
and timely mutual logistic support, based on their
respective capabilities and availability.
(4) Use of Facilities
The Government of Japan will provide, as needed,
additional facilities in accordance with the JapanU.S. Security Treaty and its related arrangements.
The two governments will enhance cooperation in
joint/shared use of facilities and areas


-----

(5) Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear
(CBRN) Protection

At Japan’s request, the United States will support
Japan in CBRN incident or attack prevention and
response-related activities in an effort to ensure
the protection of Japan, as appropriate.

**(4) Actions in Response to an Armed Attack against a**
**Country other than Japan**

When Japan and the United States each decides to take
actions involving the use of force in accordance with
international law, including full respect for sovereignty,
and with their respective Constitutions and laws to
respond to an armed attack against the United States or
a third country, and Japan has not come under an armed
attack, they will cooperate closely to respond to the armed
attack and to deter further attacks. Bilateral responses
will be coordinated through the whole-of-government
Alliance Coordination Mechanism.
Japan and the United States will cooperate as
appropriate with other countries taking action in response
to the armed attack.
The SDF will conduct appropriate operations
involving the use of force to respond to situations where
an armed attack against a foreign country that is in a close
relationship with Japan occurs and as a result, threatens
Japan’s survival and poses a clear danger to overturn
fundamentally its people’s right to life, liberty, and
pursuit of happiness, to ensure Japan’s survival, and to
protect its people.
Examples of cooperative operations are outlined below.
a. Asset Protection
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces will
cooperate in asset protection, as appropriate. Such
cooperation will include, but not be limited to,
protection of assets that are engaged in operations such
as Noncombatant Evacuation Operations or Ballistic
Missile Defense.
b. Search and Rescue
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces, in
cooperation with relevant agencies, will cooperate and
provide support in search and rescue operations, including
combat search and rescue, as appropriate.
c. Maritime Operations
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces will
cooperate in minesweeping, as appropriate, including to
secure the safety of sea lines of communication.
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces, in
cooperation with relevant agencies, will cooperate in escort
operations to protect ships and vessels, as appropriate.
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces, in
cooperation with relevant agencies will cooperate in the


interdiction of shipping activities providing support to
adversaries involved in the armed attack, as appropriate.
d. Operations to Counter Ballistic Missile Attacks
The SDF and the United States Armed Forces will
cooperate in intercepting ballistic missiles, as appropriate,
in accordance with their respective capabilities. The two
governments will exchange information to ensure early
detection of ballistic missile launches.
e. Logistics Support
When operations require supplementing their respective
logistics resources, the SDF and the United States
Armed Forces will provide flexible and timely mutual
logistic support, based on their respective capabilities
and availability.
The two governments will make appropriate
use of the authorities and assets of central and local
government agencies, as well as private sector assets, to
provide support.

**(5) Cooperation in Response to a Large-scale Disaster**
**in Japan**

In light of the experience of the Great East Japan
Earthquake, the new Guidelines now include the following.
❍ When a large-scale disaster takes place in Japan,
Japan will have primary responsibility for responding
to the disaster. The SDF, in cooperation with relevant
agencies, local governments, and private actors, will
conduct disaster relief operations. The United States,
in accordance with its own criteria, will provide
appropriate support for Japan’s activities. The two
governments will coordinate activities through the
Alliance Coordination Mechanism, as appropriate.
❍ The two governments will work together closely,
including through information sharing. The United
States Armed Forces may participate in disaster-related
drills, which will increase mutual understanding in
responding to large-scale disasters.



- 5  Cooperation for Regional and Global Peace
**and Security**

The new Guidelines stipulate specific ways of JapanU.S. cooperation for regional and global peace
and security, based on experiences from previous
international activities.
❍ In an increasingly interconnected world, Japan and the
United States will take a leading role in cooperation
with partners to provide a foundation for peace,
security, stability, and economic prosperity in the AsiaPacific region and beyond.
❍ When each of the two governments decides to participate
in international activities the two governments will


-----

cooperate closely with each other and with partners, as
appropriate, such as in the activities described below.

**(1) Cooperation in International Activities**
The two governments will participate in international
activities, based on their own judgment. When working
together, the SDF and the United States Armed Forces
will cooperate to the maximum extent practicable.
Common areas for cooperation by the two
governments will include the following.
a. Peacekeeping Operations
The two governments will cooperate, as appropriate,
to maximize interoperability between the SDF and the
United States Armed Forces. The two governments also
may cooperate in providing logistic support for and
protecting U.N. and other personnel who participate in
the same mission, as appropriate.
b. International Humanitarian Assistance/Disaster Relief
The two governments will cooperate closely to
provide mutual support, as appropriate, maximizing
interoperability between participating SDF and United
States Armed Forces. Examples of cooperative activities
may include mutual logistic support and operational
coordination, planning, and execution.
c. Maritime Security
The two governments will cooperate closely, as appropriate.
Examples of cooperative activities may include efforts
for: safe and secure sea lines of communication such
as counter-piracy and minesweeping; non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction; and counterterrorism
activities.
d. Partner Capacity Building
The two governments will cooperate in capacity building
activities, as appropriate, by making the best use of
their capabilities and experience, with the objective of
strengthening the capability of partners. Examples of
cooperative activities may include maritime security,
military medicine, defense institution building, and
improved force readiness for humanitarian assistance/
disaster relief (HA/DR) or peacekeeping operations.
e. Noncombatant Evacuation Operations
In circumstances when international action is required for
the evacuation of noncombatants, the two governments
will utilize, as appropriate, all possible avenues including
diplomatic efforts to ensure the safety of noncombatants,
including those who are Japanese or U.S. nationals.
f. Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance
When the two governments participate in international
activities, the SDF and the United States Armed Forces
will cooperate in ISR activities, as appropriate, based on
the respective capabilities and availability of their assets.


g. Training and Exercises
In order to enhance the effectiveness of international
activities, the SDF and the United States Armed Forces
will conduct and participate in joint training and exercises,
as appropriate. The two governments also will continue
to pursue opportunities to work with partners in training
and exercises.
h. Logistic support
When participating in international activities, the
two governments will cooperate to provide mutual
logistic support.
The Government of Japan will provide logistic support
where appropriate, subject to Japanese laws and regulations.

**(2) Trilateral and Multilateral Cooperation**
The two governments will promote and improve trilateral
and multilateral security and defense cooperation.
The two governments also will work together to
strengthen regional and international institutions with a
view to promoting cooperation based upon international
law and standards.



- 6  Space and Cyberspace Cooperation

The new Guidelines now incorporate cooperation in
emerging strategic domains such as outer space and
cyberspace.


**(1) Cooperation on Space**
❍ The two governments will maintain and strengthen
their partnership to secure the responsible, peaceful,
and safe use of space.
❍ The two governments will ensure the resiliency of
their space systems and enhance space situational
awareness cooperation.
❍ The SDF and the United States Armed Forces will
continue to cooperate in such areas as early-warning,
ISR, positioning, navigation and timing, space
situational awareness, meteorological observation,
command, control, and communications.

**(2) Cooperation on Cyberspace**
❍ The two governments will share information on
threats and vulnerabilities in cyberspace in a timely
and appropriate manner. The two governments will
cooperate to protect critical infrastructure and the
services upon which the SDF and the United States
Armed Forces depend to accomplish their missions.
❍ The SDF and the United States Armed Forces
will maintain a posture to monitor their respective
networks and systems, conduct educational exchanges,
ensure the resiliency of their respective networks and


-----

systems, contribute to whole-of-government efforts,
and conduct bilateral exercises.
❍ In the event of cyber incidents against Japan, Japan will
have primary responsibility to respond, and the United
States will provide appropriate support to Japan. In the
event of serious cyber incidents that affect the security
of Japan, the two governments will consult closely and
take appropriate cooperative actions to respond.

- 7  Bilateral Enterprise


further the effectiveness of bilateral cooperation.
(1) Defense Equipment and Technology Cooperation
(2) Intelligence Cooperation and Information Security
(3) Educational and Research Exchanges

- 8  Procedures for Review


The two governments will regularly evaluate whether
the Guidelines remain adequate in light of the evolving
circumstances, and will update the Guidelines in a timely
and appropriate manner if deemed necessary. The new
Guidelines newly incorporate the implementation of the
regular evaluation while maintaining the approach of the
1997 Guidelines.


The new Guidelines state that the two governments will
develop and enhance the following areas as a foundation
of security and defense cooperation, in order to improve


-----

**Initiatives to Build the Foundation for Strengthening**
**Section 3**
**the Alliance**


**1 Background to the Strengthening of the Alliance**


Since the conclusion of the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty
in 1960, Japan and the United States have built a robust
alliance based on democratic ideals, respect for human
rights, the rule of law and common interests. During the
Cold War era, the Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements
ensured the safety of Japan as a country with a liberal
ideology and also contributed to the peace and stability in
the region, including the formulation of the Guidelines for
Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation (“Guidelines”) in 1978
with a focus on responses to an armed attack on Japan.
Following the end of the Cold War, the leaders of
Japan and the United States announced the Japan-U.S.
Joint Declaration on Security in 1996, reaffi rming the
importance of the Japan-U.S. Alliance in light of the
state of affairs in the Asia-Pacifi c region following the
Cold War. Upon the Declaration, the fi nal report was
compiled at the Special Action Committee on Okinawa
(SACO) at the end of that year. As part of the promotion
of cooperative relations presented in the Declaration, the
Japan-United States Security Consultative Committee
(SCC) (“2+2” Meeting) held in the following year (1997)
approved the aforementioned 1997 Guidelines and
expanded cooperation to responses in situations in areas
surrounding Japan in light of changes in the security
environment, such as the end of the Cold War.
Afterwards, in light of further changes to the
security environment due to the 9/11 terrorist attacks
in 2001 and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, following the “2+2” Meeting in December
2002, Japan and the United States held working-level and
other consultations as part of bilateral strategic dialogue
on security from the perspective of how to make the
Japan-U.S. Alliance’s capacity more effective to adapt
to the changing times. As a result of a number of these
Japan-U.S. consultations, the direction of the Japan-U.S.
Alliance was arranged in three stages. These stages are:
confi rmation of common strategic objectives to both
countries, including enhancing peace and stability in the
Asia-Pacifi c region (fi rst stage) in February 2005; the
announcement of the results of the examination of the
roles, missions, and capabilities of Japan and the United
States for accomplishing the common strategic objectives
(second stage) in October 2005; and the formulation
of the United States-Japan Roadmap for Realignment
Implementation a program for implementing specific


measures for the realignment of the U.S. Forces in Japan,
(third stage) in May 2006.
Japan and the United States at the “2+2” Meeting
in May 2007 reconfi rmed and updated their common
strategic objectives. In February 2009, the two countries
signed the Agreement between the Government of Japan
and the Government of the United States of America
Concerning the Implementation of the Relocation
of III Marine Expeditionary Force Personnel and
Their Dependents from Okinawa to Guam (the Guam
International Agreement), which entered into force in
May 2009.
At the “2+2” Meeting in June 2011, the two
countries reviewed and revalidated their common
strategic objectives set forth in the Joint Statements of
the previous “2+2” Meetings, including maintenance of
maritime security domain by defending the principle
of freedom of navigation and maintenance of bilateral
cooperation with respect to protection of and access
to outer space and cyberspace, and discussed a diverse
range of areas, including an expansion of information
sharing and joint ISR activities.
In the Joint Statement of the “2+2” Meeting in
April 2012, Japan and the United States announced that
they decided to adjust the plans outlined in the United
States-Japan Roadmap for Realignment Implementation
(Realignment Roadmap) of May 2006, considering
signifi cant progress on the realignment of the U.S.
Forces stationed in Japan since the “2+2” Meeting in
June 2011 as well as the security environment in the
Asia-Pacifi c region.
The major accomplishments at the “2+2” Meeting in
October 2013 are as follows:
(1) Agreed to complete work on the revision of the 1997
Guidelines before the end of 2014
(2) Agreed to further expand and deepen bilateral
cooperation in security and defense, including
cyberspace and outer space, and strengthen
cooperation in the region, including trilateral
cooperation among Japan, the United States and
Australia as well as among Japan, the United States
and the ROK.
(3) Regarding the Realignment of the U.S. Forces in
Japan, Japan and the United States renewed their
strong determination to complete the relocation


-----

|1958 1960 Revision of Japan-U.S. Security Treaty and the new Japan-U.S. Security Treaty|Fujiyama-Dulles Talks (agreement on the revision of the treaty) The new Japan-U.S. Security Treaty is signed and enters into force|
|---|---|
|1968 1969 1972 1976 Formulation of the 1978 Guidelines|(Ogasawara Islands are returned to Japan) Sato-Nixon Talks (agreement on the renewal of the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty and the return of Okinawa to Japan) (Okinawa is returned to Japan) (Agreement on the establishment of Sub-Committee for U.S.-Japan Defense Cooperation)|
|1978 and expanding Japan-U.S. defense cooperation|Formulation of the 1978 Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation (1978 Guidelines)|
|1991 1996 End of the Cold War and the establishment of the 1997 Guidelines 1997 2001 2003 Japan-U.S. relations since the 9/11 2006 terrorist attacks in the United States|(Collapse of USSR and end of the Cold War) Japan-U.S. Joint Declaration on Security (Hashimoto-Clinton Talks) SACO Final Report Formulation of the 1997 Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation (1997 Guidelines) 9/11 terrorist attacks in the U.S. The Japan-U.S. Alliance in the global context (Koizumi-Bush Talks) Formulation of the United States-Japan Roadmap for Realignment Implementation|

|Fig. II-4-3-2|Overview of Japan-U.S. Consultations|
|---|---|

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|SS|ttaa|ggeess oo|ff JJaa|ppaa|nn--|UU..SS.. CCoo|nnssuu|llttaa|ttiioo|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|

|Consultation|SSttaaggeess ooff JJaappaann--UU..SS.. CCoonnssuullttaattiioonnss|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|Col11|Col12|Col13|Col14|Col15|Col16|Col17|Col18|Col19|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||First stage||||||Second stage|||||Third stage|||||||
|December 2002|The two coun|||||||||||eld of security|||||||
||||||||Joint Statement at the “2+2” Meeting tries agreed to further bilateral consultations in the general fi||||||||||||
|February 2005 October 2005|||||||||||||||||||
||Confirmation of Common Strategic Objectives (at the first stage)||||||Joint Statement at the “2+2” Meeting Roles, Missions, and Capabilities of Japan and the U.S. (at the second stage)||||||Force posture realignment (realignment of U.S. Force structure in Japan) (at the third stage)||||||
||||||Japan-U.S. Alliance||: Transformation and Realignment for the Future S Summary of studies on roles, missions, and capabilities (at the second stage)|||||tudy Recommendation on realignment|||||||
|May 2006||||||||||||Maintenance of deterrence and capabilities|||Mitigate impact on local communities||||
||||||||Japan-U.S. Roadmap for||Realig|nment Implementation||Finalization of realignment initiatives (at the third stage)|||||||
||||||||||||||||||||
|May 2007|||||||||||||||||||
||Reconfirm|||ation|J /renewal Ad mmon Strategic Objectives||oint Statement at the “2+2”||Meetin|g, “Alliance Transformati||on: ion” Implementation of the realignment roadmap|||||||
||||||||vancing Japan-United States||Secur|ity and Defense Cooperat|||||||||
|||||Co|mmon Strategic Objectives|||Roles, Missio|ns, and|Capabilities|||Implementation of the realignment roadmap||||||
|||Reconfirm||ation|/renewal|||||||Com||||plem|ent||
|June 2011|||||B mon Strategic Objectives||Joint Statement at the “2+2”||Meeti|ng, “Toward a Deeper an||d 2+2 Document “Progress on the Realignment ip” of U.S. Forces in Japan” Continued progress toward r Realignment Roadmap’s Obj|||||ng es||
||||||||roader U.S.-Japan Alliance: B||uilding|on 50 Years of Partnersh|||||||||
||||||||Strengthening o Defens|||ce Security and eration|||||||||
|||||Com|mon Strategic Objectives|||Strengthening o Defens|f Allian e Coop|ce Security and eration|||Continued progress toward r Realignment Roadmap’s Obj|||ealizi ectiv|ng es||
||||||||||||||||||||
||||||||||||||||||||
|April 2012|||||||||||||||||||
||||||||Joint Statement||of the|“2+2” Meeting|||Decision to adjust the plans o in the Roadmap|||utlin|ed||
||||||||||||||||||||
||||||||||||||||||||
|October 2013|||||||||||||||||||
||Stra in||||Joint Statement at the||“2+2” Meeting, “Toward a M||ore Ro|bust Alliance and Greater||Shared Responsibilities”|||||easures ding ies||
||||Stra in|tegic form|concept and recognition of local ation of the Japan-U.S. Alliance||Strengthening of bila cooperation includin||teral s g revie|ecurity and defense w of the guidelines||Welcomed the progress in realignme for the U.S. Forces and the USFJ mitigating impact on local com|Welcomed the progress in realignme for the U.S. Forces and the USFJ mitigating impact on local com|||nt m inclu munit|easures ding ies||
||||||||||||||||||||
||||||||||||||||||||
|April 2015|||||||||||||||||||
||Joint Statement a Reconfirmed the Alliance’s commitment||||||t the “2+2” Meeting, “A Stronger Alliance for a Dynamic Sec|||||urity Environment” Reaffirmed the two governments’ continued commitment to the realignment of U.S. Forces in Japan|||||||
||||||||Enhanced bilateral security and defense cooperation (e.g. release of the new Guidelines)||||||||||||
||||||||||||||||||||


Fig. II-4-3-1 Major Milestones in Security Cooperation Between Japan and the United States

1951 The former Japan-U.S. Security Treaty is signed

1952 Years of the former Japan-U.S. Security Treaty The treaty enters into force

1958 Fujiyama-Dulles Talks (agreement on the revision of the treaty)

Revision of Japan-U.S. Security Treaty

1960 The new Japan-U.S. Security Treaty is signed and enters into force

and the new Japan-U.S. Security Treaty

1968 (Ogasawara Islands are returned to Japan)

1969 Sato-Nixon Talks (agreement on the renewal of the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty and the return

of Okinawa to Japan)

1972 (Okinawa is returned to Japan)

1976 Formulation of the 1978 Guidelines (Agreement on the establishment of Sub-Committee for U.S.-Japan Defense Cooperation)

1978 and expanding Japan-U.S. defense cooperation Formulation of the 1978 Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation (1978 Guidelines)

1991 (Collapse of USSR and end of the Cold War)

1996 End of the Cold War Japan-U.S. Joint Declaration on Security (Hashimoto-Clinton Talks)

and the establishment of the 1997 Guidelines SACO Final Report

1997 Formulation of the 1997 Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation (1997 Guidelines)

2001 9/11 terrorist attacks in the U.S.

2003 The Japan-U.S. Alliance in the global context (Koizumi-Bush Talks)

Japan-U.S. relations since the 9/11

2006 Formulation of the United States-Japan Roadmap for Realignment Implementation

terrorist attacks in the United States

The Japan-U.S. Alliance of the New Century (Koizumi-Bush Talks)

The Japan-U.S. Alliance for the World and Asia (Abe-Bush Talks)

2007 Irreplaceable Japan-U.S. Alliance (Abe-Bush Talks)

2010 50th anniversary of the conclusion of the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty

2012 Japan-U.S. Joint Statement: A Shared Vision For the Future (Noda-Obama Talks)

2013 Agreement on the revision of the 1997 Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation

(1997 Guidelines)

2014 The United States and Japan: Shaping the Future of the Asia-Pacific and Beyond

(Abe-Obama Talks)

2015 New security environment U.S.-Japan Joint Vision Statement (Abe-Obama Talks)

and the establishment of the new Guidelines Formulation of the New Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation (New Guidelines)


Stages of Japan-U.S. Consultations

Consultation
First stage Second stage Third stage

December 2002 Joint Statement at the “2+2” Meeting

The two countries agreed to further bilateral consultations in the general field of security

February 2005 Confirmation of Common Strategic Roles, Missions, and Capabilities of Japan Joint Statement at the “2+2” Meeting Force posture realignment (realignment of U.S. Force structure in Japan)

Objectives (at the first stage) and the U.S. (at the second stage) (at the third stage)

Japan-U.S. Alliance: Transformation and Realignment for the Future Study

October 2005 Summary of studies on roles, missions, and capabilities (at the second stage) Recommendation on realignment

Maintenance of deterrence Mitigate impact on
and capabilities local communities

May 2006 Finalization of realignment

Japan-U.S. Roadmap for Realignment Implementation initiatives (at the third stage)

Joint Statement at the “2+2” Meeting, “Alliance Transformation:

Reconfirmation/renewal

Advancing Japan-United States Security and Defense Cooperation”

May 2007 Implementation of the

Common Strategic Objectives Roles, Missions, and Capabilities realignment roadmap

Reconfirmation/renewal Complement

Joint Statement at the “2+2” Meeting, “Toward a Deeper and 2+2 Document “Progress

on the Realignment

Broader U.S.-Japan Alliance: Building on 50 Years of Partnership” of U.S. Forces in Japan”

June 2011

Common Strategic Objectives Strengthening of Alliance Security and Continued progress toward realizing

Defense Cooperation Realignment Roadmap’s Objectives

April 2012 Joint Statement of the “2+2” Meeting Decision to adjust the plans outlinedin the Roadmap

Joint Statement at the “2+2” Meeting, “Toward a More Robust Alliance and Greater Shared Responsibilities”

October 2013 Strategic concept and recognition of local information of the Japan-U.S. Alliance Strengthening of bilateral security and defensecooperation including review of the guidelines Welcomed the progress in realignment measures for the U.S. Forces and the USFJ including mitigating impact on local communities

Joint Statement at the “2+2” Meeting, “A Stronger Alliance for a Dynamic Security Environment”

April 2015 Reconfirmed the Alliance’s commitment cooperation (e.g. release of the new Guidelines)Enhanced bilateral security and defense realignment of U.S. Forces in JapanReaffirmed the two governments’ continued commitment to the


-----

of MCAS Futenma to Camp Schwab, and agreed
to continue to consult on other possible measures
while implementing the previous agreements as
early as possible and steadily from the perspective
of mitigating the impact on Okinawa.
The “2+2” Meeting, held in the milestone year marking
the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II, took place
ahead of the Japan-U.S. Summit Meeting. The major
accomplishments of the “2+2” Meeting are as follows:
(1) Under the U.S. policy of rebalance and Japan’s
policy of “Proactive Contribution to Peace,” the
Ministers reaffi rmed the Alliance’s commitment
to maintaining the security of Japan as well as the
peace and security of the international community
and also reconfi rmed the U.S. commitment to the
Senkaku Islands under Article 5 of the Japan-U.S.
Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security.
(2) The Ministers approved the new Guidelines, and
confi rmed their intent to enhance the Japan-U.S.

**2 Policy Consultations between Japan and the United States**


- 1  Various Policy Consultations


Alliance’s deterrence and response capabilities
under the new Guidelines.
(3) The Ministers noted with satisfaction the progress
in initiatives for bilateral security and defense
cooperation to strengthen the Alliance’s deterrence
and response capabilities.
(4) The Ministers underscored the recent progress in
regional and international cooperation.
(5) The Ministers reaffi rmed the two governments’
continued commitment to the realignment of the
U.S. Forces in Japan.
For the content of the new Guidelines, see Part III,
Chapter 4, Section 2-2 (Content of the New Guidelines).

See>> Reference 29 (United States–Japan Roadmap for Realignment
Implementation); Reference 30 (Joint Statement of the Security
Consultative Committee (April 27, 2012)); Reference 27 (Joint
Statement of the Security Consultative Committee (April 27, 2015));
Reference 28 (The Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation
(April 27, 2015)); Fig. II-4-3-1 (Major Milestones in Security
Cooperation Between Japan and the United States); Fig. II-4-3-2
(Overview of Japan-U.S. Consultations)

for Defense Cooperation (SDC). As the framework for
ministerial consultations among the top offi cials in charge
of defense and foreign affairs of the two countries, the
Security Consultative Committee (SCC) (“2+2” Meeting)
represents such policy consultations. The SCC functions as
an important consultative panel to discuss issues related to
Japan-U.S. cooperation in the area of security.
In addition, the MOD organizes Japan-U.S. defense
ministerial meetings between the Japanese Minister of
Defense and the U.S. Secretary of Defense as necessary
where discussions are made with a focus on the defense
policies of the respective governments and defense
cooperation. Furthermore, the Japanese State Minister of
Defense and the U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense work
together, and MOD offi cials, including the Administrative
Vice-Minister of Defense, the Chief of Staff of the Joint
Staff, the Vice-Minister of Defense for International
Affairs, and the Chiefs of Staff of the SDF, have workinglevel meetings when necessary and exchange information
with the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) and others
under the Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements.
The sharing of information and views at every
opportunity and level between Japan and the United
States is undoubtedly conducive to the increased
credibility of the Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements,
and results in the further enhancement of close
collaboration between the two countries. Therefore, the
MOD is proactively engaging in these initiatives


Japan and the United States have maintained close
coordination at multiple levels, including the summitlevel and ministerial level, and have continually
strengthened and expanded cooperative relations for
the peace, stability and prosperity of not only the two
countries but also the entire international community,
including the Asia-Pacifi c region.
Close policy consultations on security are conducted
through diplomatic channels as well as between offi cials
in charge of defense and foreign affairs at multiple levels
in the Governments of Japan and the United States
through meetings such as the Japan-United States Security
Consultative Committee (SCC) (“2+2” Meeting), the
Security Subcommittee (SSC) and the Subcommittee

Admiral Kawano, Chief of the Joint Staff, receiving a courtesy call from General Dunford,


-----

|Participants|Purpose|Legal Basis|
|---|---|---|
|Japanese Side U.S. Side|||
|U.S. Secretary of State, ster for Foreign Affairs, U.S. Secretary of Minister of Defense Defense1|Study of matters which would promote understanding between the Japanese and U.S. Governments and contribute to the strengthening of cooperative relations in the areas of security, which form the basis of security and are related to security|Established on the basis of letters exchanged between the Prime Minister of Japan and the U.S. Secretary of State on January 19, 1960, in accordance with Article IV of the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty|
|Participants are not pants are not specified2 specified2|Exchange of views on security issues of mutual concern to Japan and the United States|Article IV of the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty and others|
|Assistant Secretary General of North American of State, Assistant au, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Secretary of Defense, eneral of Bureau of Defense Representative from: y, Ministry of Defense; U.S. Embassy in Japan, entative from Joint Staff USFJ, Joint Staff, PACOM|Study and consideration of consultative measures to Japan and the United States including guidelines to ensure consistent joint responses covering the activities of the SDF and USFJ in emergencies|Established on July 8, 1976, as a subentry under the Japan-U.S. Security Consultative Committee in its 16th meeting Reorganized at the Japan-U.S. vice-ministerial consultation on June 28, 1996|
|eral of North American Affairs Deputy Commander Ministry of Foreign Affairs; of USFJ, Minister at General of Bureau of Local the U.S. Embassy, and Ministry of Defense; and others others|Consultation concerning implementation of the Status of Forces Agreement|Article XXV of the Status of Forces Agreement|


Fig. II-4-3-3 Major Consultations on Policies Held between Japanese and U.S. Government Officials concerning Japan-U.S. Security Issues

**Consultative** **Participants**

**Purpose** **Legal Basis**

**Forum** **Japanese Side** **U.S. Side**

Study of matters which would Established on the basis of
promote understanding between letters exchanged between the

Security Consultative U.S. Secretary of State, the Japanese and U.S. Governments Prime Minister of Japan and

Minister for Foreign Affairs,

Committee (SCC) U.S. Secretary of and contribute to the strengthening the U.S. Secretary of State on

Minister of Defense

(“2+2” Meeting) Defense[1] of cooperative relations in the areas January 19, 1960, in accordance

of security, which form the basis of with Article IV of the Japan-U.S.
security and are related to security Security Treaty

Security Exchange of views on security Article IV of the Japan-U.S.
Participants are not
Subcommittee Participants are not specified[2] issues of mutual concern to Japan Security Treaty and others
specified[2]
(SSC) and the United States

Assistant Secretary Study and consideration of Established on July 8, 1976, as

Director-General of North American of State, Assistant consultative measures to Japan a subentry under the Japan-U.S.

Subcommittee for Affairs Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Secretary of Defense, and the United States including Security Consultative Committee
Defense Cooperation Director General of Bureau of Defense Representative from: guidelines to ensure consistent joint in its 16th meeting Reorganized
(SDC)[3] Policy, Ministry of Defense; U.S. Embassy in Japan, responses covering the activities of at the Japan-U.S. vice-ministerial

Representative from Joint Staff USFJ, Joint Staff, the SDF and USFJ in emergencies consultation on June 28, 1996

PACOM

Director-General of North American Affairs Deputy Commander Consultation concerning Article XXV of the Status of

Japan-U.S. Joint Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; of USFJ, Minister at implementation of the Status of Forces Agreement
Committee Director General of Bureau of Local the U.S. Embassy, and Forces Agreement

Cooperation, Ministry of Defense; and others others

Notes: 1. The U.S. side was headed by the U.S. Ambassador to Japan and the Commander-in-Chief of the U.S. Pacific Command before December 26, 1990.
2. Meetings are held from time to time between working-level officials of the two Governments, such as officials corresponding in rank to vice-minister or assistant secretary.

3. A Council of Deputies consisting of Deputy-Director General and Deputy Assistant Secretaries was established when the SDC was recognized on June 28, 1996.


to closely cooperate on the matter. Furthermore, the
Ministers agreed to enhance trilateral defense cooperation
with countries including the Republic of Korea (ROK),
Australia, India, and the Philippines in the future.
b. Legislation for Peace and Security and Efforts to Ensure
the Effectiveness of the New Guidelines
Defense Minister Nakatani explained that the Legislation
for Peace and Security was enacted recently and stated
that Japan intends to further enhance the Japan-U.S.
Alliance’s deterrence and response capabilities under this
legislation. Secretary Carter, for his part, stated that the
United States supports and welcomes the enactment of
the Legislation for Peace and Security.
The Ministers welcomed the establishment of
the new Alliance Coordination Mechanism (ACM)
and the Bilateral Planning Mechanism (BPM) as an
important step in efforts to ensure the effectiveness of
the new Guidelines. The Ministers confirmed that they
would continue to steadily undertake efforts to ensure
the effectiveness of the new Guidelines, including
the enhancement of cooperation in outer space and
cyberspace.
c. Realignment of U.S. Forces in Japan
Defense Minister Nakatani explained that Japan has been
making utmost efforts to realize the return of Marine
Corps Air Station (MCAS) Futenma and the relocation
of MCAS Futenma to Camp Schwab as soon as possible.
The Ministers reaffirmed that the relocation to Camp
Schwab is the only solution to avoid the continued use of


See>> Reference 31 (Japan-U.S. (Minister-Level) Consultations (Since
2013)); Fig. II-4-3-3 (Major Consultations on Policies Held between
Japanese and U.S. Government Officials concerning Japan-U.S.
Security Issues)

- 2  Recent Major Policy Consultations, etc


**(1) Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting**
**(November 3, 2015)**

Minister of Defense Nakatani and U.S. Secretary of
Defense Carter took the opportunity of the ASEAN
Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM Plus) to
hold the Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting in
Kuala Lumpur.
a. Overview and Regional Situation
The Ministers exchanged views on the increasingly
severe security environment in the Asia-Pacific region.
The Ministers agreed that they oppose any attempt to
change the status quo by force in the East China Sea
and the South China Sea and also confirmed that Japan
and the United States will conduct maritime activities
in accordance with international law. Defense Minister
Nakatani expressed his support for the operations of the
U.S. Forces in the South China Sea, and the Ministers
agreed to explore joint exercises and efforts to further
strengthen cooperation with Southeast Asian nations in
areas such as capacity building and maritime security. In
light of North Korea’s stance of continuing with activities
to launch extended range ballistic missiles, the Ministers
confirmed that Japan and the United States will continue


-----

MCAS Futenma. Defense Minister Nakatani explained
the importance of mitigating the impact on Okinawa,
including the implementation of such measures as the
relocation of U.S. Marine Corps personnel from Okinawa
to Guam and the relocation of training to locations
outside of Okinawa, and sought cooperation from the
United States. Secretary Carter stated that the United
States would continue to cooperate.
In addition, Defense Minister Nakatani requested
U.S. cooperation in minimizing the impact of the
operations of the U.S. Forces on the local community
and the U.S. Forces’ extra consideration for safety. In
response, Secretary Carter stated that the United States
would constantly seek to ensure the maximum safety of
the local community and U.S. Forces personnel.
d. Host Nation Support (HNS)
The Ministers agreed that both the Japanese and U.S.
governments would continue to hold consultations and to
make efforts to reach an early agreement.
e. Defense Equipment and Technology Cooperation
In light of the establishment of the Acquisition
Technology & Logistics Agency, the Ministers agreed
to further deepen bilateral cooperation for equipment
and technology. The Ministers also confirmed that the
recent decision of the U.S. Government concerning
maintenance of U.S. Marine Corps Ospreys would
lead to the reinforcement of the basis for repair and
maintenance of common equipment, which is set forth
in the new Guidelines.

**(2) Japan-U.S. Summit Meeting (November 19, 2015)**
Prime Minister Abe held a Japan-U.S. Summit Meeting
with President Obama during his visit to Manila. An
outline of their discussions on security issues is as follows:
a. Opening Remarks
Prime Minister Abe stated that he affirmed the robust
Japan-U.S. relations during his visit to the United States in
April. Prime Minister Abe also mentioned the collaboration
of Japan’s Proactive Contribution to Peace and the United
States’ rebalance policy, and stated that he intends to
make this meeting a prelude to a new phase of Japan-U.S.
cooperation that utilizes the robust Japan-U.S. Alliance to
realize peace, stability and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific
region as well as the international community.
President Obama, for his part, stated that the JapanU.S. Alliance is the cornerstone of the security of the United
States. President Obama offered his congratulations on
the enactment of the Legislation for Peace and Security,
stating that the Legislation would help enhance Japan’s
defense capabilities and enabled Japan and the United
States to further broaden their collaboration in the AsiaPacific region as well as in the world


b. Japan-U.S. relations
(a) Overview
Prime Minister Abe stated that in further advancing JapanU.S. cooperation, collaboration with countries that share
the fundamental values such as freedom, democracy, and
the rule of law, is essential, and he intends, together with
the United States, to build a network to realize peace and
prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region, with the Japan-U.S.
Alliance as the linchpin.
President Obama responded by pointing out that the
enactment of the Legislation for Peace and Security is
a historic achievement, and that Japan and the United
States need to work together in order to establish the
rule of law and international norm—including the Law
of the Sea—in the region. President Obama then stated
that he supports Prime Minister Abe’s idea of building
the network.
(b) Japan-U.S. Security
Prime Minister Abe stated that he intends to crystalize
Japan-U.S. defense cooperation under the new Guidelines,
advance with strong determination the relocation of
MCAS Futenma to Henoko, which he described as the
only solution, and work together on mitigating the impact
on Okinawa for the purpose of the stable presence of the
U.S. Forces.
In response, President Obama expressed his gratitude
to Prime Minister Abe for his efforts on the relocation
of MCAS Futenma, and stated that the United States
will also cooperate to mitigate the impact on Okinawa.
President Obama also commented on the revision of the
Agreement on Host Nation Support (HNS), and Prime
Minister Abe responded by stating that Japan intends
to continue discussions in order to make the new HNS
agreement appropriate.
c. Situations in East Asia
President Obama stated that he was encouraged by the
discussions between Japan and China and the ROK, and
the United States extends its support. In response, Prime
Minister Abe expressed his gratitude.
(a) China
Prime Minister Abe stated that he will continue to promote
the “Mutually Beneficial Relationship Based on Common
Strategic Interests,” and mentioned that in the East China
Sea, intrusions into Japan’s territorial sea by Chinese vessels
and unilateral resource development are continuing, and
incidents have occurred in which Chinese naval vessels
approached the waters surrounding the Senkaku Islands,
adding that he is concerned about further escalation.
President Obama stated that regarding cyber issues,
the United States and China agreed not to engage in
cyber theft in commercial relationships, but added that
implementation is important


-----

(b) South China Sea
Prime Minister Abe stated that Japan supports the
“Freedom of Navigation” operations by the U. S. Navy
in the South China Sea, and he explained Japan’s existing
stance regarding the activities of the Self-Defense Forces
in the South China Sea, stating that such activities will
be examined while taking into consideration the impact
the situation in the South China Sea will have on the
security of Japan. Prime Minister Abe added that Japan
will provide support to relevant countries through
a combination of ODA, capacity-building support
by the Self-Defense Forces, and defense equipment
cooperation. Furthermore, Prime Minister Abe stated
that he opposes any unilateral action that would change
the status quo and heighten tensions. In response,
President Obama commented that the United States will
continue implementing the “Freedom of Navigation”
operations routinely.
(c) Republic of Korea
Prime Minister Abe explained that in the Japan-ROK
Summit Meeting, he engaged in a frank and constructive
exchange of opinions with President Park Geun-hye,
and commented that the ROK is Japan’s most important
partner in building cooperative relationships in the region,
with the Japan-U.S. Alliance as the linchpin. President
Obama responded that he strongly supports Prime
Minister Abe’s dialogues with President Park Geun-hye.
(d) North Korea
Prime Minister Abe stated that Japan-U.S. and JapanU.S.-ROK security cooperation is important given
North Korea’s nuclear and missile issues, and it is also
important for the security of Japan. Prime Minister Abe
also mentioned that he would strengthen Japan-U.S.
and Japan-U.S.-ROK cooperation, and strongly urge
North Korea to refrain from acts of provocation, and
that Japan hopes to receive continued understanding
and cooperation from the United States regarding the
abductions issue. President Obama stated that JapanU.S.-ROK cooperation is essential in the context of
addressing the issues regarding North Korea.
d. Japan-U.S. Cooperation in the Region
Prime Minister Abe stated that collaboration with
ASEAN is essential and relations with Australia and
India are strategically important, adding that he intends
to further deepen Japan-U.S.-India collaboration. Prime
Minister Abe also commented that Japan intends to
collaborate with the United States in order to strengthen
the mechanisms of the East Asia Summit (EAS) and to
make the EAS the region’s premier forum in both name
and reality.
President Obama stated that he supports and will
cooperate with Prime Minister Abe’s idea of building


networks in the region with the Japan-U.S. Alliance as the
linchpin, in order to realize peace and prosperity, and that
he intends to advance discussions regarding cooperation
with ASEAN as well. President Obama added that he
also supports the idea of moving forward with strategic
dialogues with India and Australia.
e. Syria
Prime Minister Abe commented that resolving the crisis in
Syria is important from the viewpoint of counterterrorism
as well and that he has a strong interest in the political
process for peace and would like to actively contribute
to it, including in the field of humanitarian assistance.
In response, President Obama stated that the process
has developed regarding Syria, but more efforts are still
needed in order to resolve the crisis.
f. Cooperation in the International Arena
(a) Cyberspace
President Obama stated that cyber issues were included
in the G20 Leaders’ Communique and he intends to
continue promoting cyber norms. In response, Prime
Minister Abe commented that addressing cyber attacks is
an important issue in terms of national security and crisis
management, and he intends to continue cooperating
closely with the United States and deliver strong messages
through various opportunities.
(b) Nuclear Security Summit
President Obama stated that 2016 will be the last year of
the Nuclear Security Summit, that Japan has continued
to be an excellent partner throughout the summit, and
that he intends to cooperate with Prime Minister Abe
in order to achieve results. In response, Prime Minister
Abe stated that Japan intends to cooperate closely with
the United States.

**(3) Japan-U.S. Summit Meeting (April 1, 2016)**
Prime Minister Abe held the Japan-U.S. Summit
Meeting with President Obama during his visit to
Washington, D.C.
In connection with the Japan-U.S. Security
Arrangements, concerning the lawsuits on the Henoko
landfill permit, Prime Minister Abe explained that
Japan’s position remains unwavering that the relocation
of MCAS Futenma to Henoko is the only solution and he
has decided to accept a court-suggested settlement under
the philosophy of “haste makes waste.” Prime Minister
Abe also stated that he would like to realize the return of
MCAS Futenma through the completion of the relocation
to Henoko at the earliest possible time and would like to
continue joint efforts with the United States to mitigate the
impact on Okinawa.
In response, President Obama stated that he
understands the court suggested settlement on the


-----

relocation of MCAS Futenma to Henoko as Prime
Minister Abe’s strategic decision, and said that the United
States would like to continue its own efforts through close
cooperation with Japan.

**(4) Japan-U.S. Summit Meeting (May 25, 2016)**
Prime Minister Abe held a Japan-U.S. Summit Meeting
with President Obama, who was visiting Japan for the
G7 Ise-Shima Summit. An outline of their discussions on
security issues is as follows:
a. Small Group Meeting
(a) At the small meeting, the entire time was spent
discussing the incident that occurred in Okinawa in April
2016. Prime Minister Abe stated to President Obama
that: (1) he felt strong indignation over the incident,
which was a self-centered and absolutely despicable
crime, and lodged a strong protest as Prime Minister of
Japan; (2) the incident caused a huge shock not only to
Okinawa but to the entire nation, and he hoped President
Obama would take these feelings of Japanese citizens
seriously; (3) he has a responsibility to protect the lives
and property of Japanese citizens; and (4) he seeks strict
actions, including the full implementation of effective
measures to prevent recurrences.
(b) In response, President Obama stated that: (1) he
expresses his sincerest condolences and deepest regrets
and profoundly understands his responsibility concerning
the crime committed by a person related to the U.S.
Forces; and (2) the United States will cooperate fully
with Japan’s investigation, and will spare no effort to
cooperate in every way to achieve justice.
(c) The two leaders shared the view that Japan and the
United States would hold thorough consultations in order
to pursue effective measures to prevent recurrence, and
Japan and the United States would work together to
regain the lost confidence and would make every effort to
mitigate the impact on Okinawa.
b. Expanded Meeting
(a) Opening Remarks
At the beginning of the expanded meeting, Prime
Minister Abe expressed his sincere gratitude for the
heartfelt sympathy from the United States and prompt
and powerful assistance in response to the Kumamoto
Earthquake. Prime Minister Abe also sincerely welcomed
President Obama’s historic decision to visit Hiroshima,
and the two leaders shared their intention to deliver a
powerful message on a world free of nuclear weapons.
(b) North Korea
Prime Minister Abe stated that it was important for the
G7 to issue a clear message that it could not tolerate the
possession of nuclear weapons by North Korea becoming
established as a fait accompli and the two leaders once


again shared the recognition that coordination between
Japan, the United States, and the Republic of Korea was
important. With regard to the abduction issue, Prime
Minister Abe expressed his gratitude for U.S. cooperation,
and stated that Japan would like to seek the continued
understanding and cooperation of the United States.
(c) East Asia Situation
Prime Minister Abe stated that he hoped to further strengthen
the network of peace and prosperity that was founded
on the U.S.-Japan Alliance, and expressed the view that
strengthening cooperation with ASEAN members such as
Vietnam and the Philippines, which President Obama just
visited, was a pressing issue. Regarding the importance of
the rule of law at sea, the two leaders confirmed that Japan
and the United States will solidly fulfill their roles within
the international community.

**(5) U.S. President Obama’s Visit to Hiroshima (May 27, 2016)**
President Obama, who visited Japan to attend the G7 IseShima Summit, paid a visit to Hiroshima Peace Memorial
Park, the first such visit by an incumbent U.S. President,
together with Prime Minister Abe. The two leaders also
visited Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum, laid wreaths
at the Cenotaph for the Atomic Bomb Victims and
delivered their respective statements, and President Obama
then exchanged words with atomic bomb survivors. Later,
the two leaders visited the Atomic Bomb Dome.
President Obama’s visit to Hiroshima was an
extremely important historical event in terms of
commemorating the war dead and revitalizing
international momentum for realizing a world free of
nuclear weapons. At the same time, the visit symbolized
the strength of the U.S.-Japan Alliance, an “Alliance of
Hope,” which has been built up over the more than 70
years since the war.


**(6) Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting (June 4, 2016)**
Minister of Defense Nakatani and U.S. Secretary of
Defense Carter took the opportunity of the Shangri-La
Dialogue to hold the Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial
Meeting in Singapore.
a. Arrest of a member of the civilian component in Okinawa
Minister of Defense Nakatani and U.S. Secretary of
Defense Carter confirmed their intent to continue to work
closely together to devise a set of effective prevention
measures against similar incidents and accidents. The
Ministers shared an understanding that these measures
would include: (1) review SOFA implementation practices
related to U.S. personnel with SOFA status, including
the civilian component; (2) strengthen monitoring of
U.S. personnel with SOFA status, including the civilian
component; and (3) enhance education and training of


-----

new missions. Secretary Carter welcomed these efforts by
Japan and expressed his support for them. The Ministers
also confirmed that the ACM is functioning effectively in
dealing with a spate of provocative acts by North Korea
and the earthquakes in Kumamoto Prefecture, and agreed
to further enhance the ACM. Furthermore, the Ministers
affirmed their intent to further strengthen the deterrence and
response capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance under the
Legislation for Peace and Security and to continue efforts to
ensure the effectiveness of the new Guidelines.
d. Defense Equipment and Technical Cooperation
The Ministers welcomed the signing of the Memorandum
of Understanding on the Reciprocal Defense Procurement
(RDP-MOU),[1] and agreed to further deepen bilateral
cooperation for equipment and technology based on the
RDP-MOU. Minister Nakatani explained Japan’s plan to
realize concrete cooperative efforts, such as the transfer
of MSDF trainer aircraft TC-90s to the Philippines to
enhance the capabilities for maritime security. Secretary
Carter welcomed those initiatives, and stated his hope
for close bilateral coordination between Japan and the
United States in capacity building support and defense
equipment cooperation with the Philippines.
In addition, the Ministers confirmed that the
MOD and the DOD will discuss defense and technical
strategies, including the DOD’s Third Offset Strategy,
looking towards the future security environment.
e. USFJ Realignment, etc.
Minister Nakatani explained the recent court-mediated
settlement of lawsuits over the landfill approval off
Henoko, and stated that the Government of Japan’s
position remains unchanged that construction of the
Futenma Replacement Facility at Henoko is the only
solution that allows the return of Marine Corps Air Station
Futenma. Secretary Carter stated that he appreciates the
Government of Japan’s position and that the United
States will maintain close cooperation with Japan in
implementing the shared plans for the realignment of
U.S. Forces in Japan. Minister Nakatani asked for U.S.
cooperation for the mitigation of the impact on Okinawa,
including training relocation to locations outside of
Okinawa Prefecture. Secretary Carter stated that the
United States will continue to cooperate with Japan.
The Ministers agreed to address the early return of the
facilities and areas south of Kadena Air Base as well as
over a half of the Northern Training Area.


Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting held in Singapore (June 2016)

U.S. personnel with SOFA status, including the civilian
component. Sharing a sense of urgency, Minister Nakatani
and Secretary Carter confirmed their intent to accelerate
work at the highest levels of the defense and foreign
policy authorities of both countries and to develop these
measures at the earliest possible occasion.
b. Regional Situations
The Ministers agreed that they oppose unilateral attempts
to change the status quo by force in the East China Sea
and the South China Sea. They also agreed that the
building of outposts and the use of these outposts for
military purposes in the South China Sea in particular are
unilateral actions that increase tensions in the region and
are a source of concern for the international community.
The Ministers pledged to continue to conduct joint
exercises in the South China Sea as well as to further
strengthen bilateral coordination in cooperating with
Southeast Asian nations in areas such as support for
capacity building and maritime security, increasing the
presence of the Japan-U.S. Alliance in this maritime
area. In light of North Korea’s stance of continuing its
nuclear tests and ballistic missile launches, the Ministers
agreed to maintain close cooperation, including the
utilization of the ACM. Furthermore, Minister Nakatani
and Secretary Carter affirmed their intention to reinforce
trilateral defense cooperation among Japan, the United
States and the Republic of Korea, among Japan, the
United States and Australia, and among Japan, the
United States and India.
c. Peace and Security Legislation and the Initiatives to
Ensure the Effectiveness of New Guidelines
Minister Nakatani explained that the Legislation for Peace
and Security was recently enforced and that the Government
of Japan is proceeding with the preparations to carry out the


The official title is the Memorandum of Understanding between the Department of Defense of the United States of America and the Ministry of Defense of Japan concerning Reciprocal Defense Procurement.
The Memorandum is designed to promote measures based on the principle of reciprocity (the provision of information to companies of the partner country necessary for making bids, safeguarding of corporate
information submitted and exemption of companies of the partner country from restrictions on entry, etc.) with regard to the procurement of defense equipment by the defense authorities of Japan and the


-----

**3 Major Initiatives for Strengthening the Alliance**


The new Guidelines defi ne that the two countries will
work on a variety of measures, including ISR activities,
air and missile defense, maritime security, and joint
training and exercises, and cooperate in response to a
large-scale disaster in Japan in order to “seamlessly
ensure Japan’s peace and security.” The Guidelines
also require both countries to work on “Cooperation
for Regional and Global Peace and Security,” through
cooperation in international activities and trilateral
and multilateral cooperation; to cooperate for Space
and Cyberspace Cooperation which are emerging as
new strategic domains; and to develop and enhance
“Bilateral Enterprise” through defense equipment
and technology cooperation for further improving the
effectiveness of bilateral cooperation. Many of these
items are incorporated into the National Defense Program
Guidelines to “strengthen the Alliance’s deterrence and
response capabilities” and to “strengthen and expand
cooperation in a variety of areas.” For the content of
the new Guidelines, see Part II, Chapter 4, Section 2-2
(Content of the New Guidelines).

See>> Reference 28 (The Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation
(April 27, 2015))

- 1  Strengthened Coordination within the Alliance


as to the development and maintenance of common
situational awareness.
The characteristics of the mechanism include that
(1) it is the standing mechanism utilizable from peacetime;
(2) it can be utilized for large-scale natural disasters in
Japan as well as for regional and global cooperation;
and (3) it enables whole-of-government coordination
while ensuring the involvement of relevant Japanese
and U.S. organizations. These characteristics enable the
Japanese and U.S. governments to respond appropriately
and promptly when the need for coordination arises. For
example, in the event of a large-scale natural disaster in
Japan, it would require a diversity of coordination in the
policy and operational aspects related to activities of the
Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed Forces.
The utilization of this mechanism makes it possible to
conduct close and appropriate coordination with the
involvement of relevant Japanese and U.S. organizations
at various levels.

See>> Fig. II-4-3-4 (The Situation Where the Alliance Coordination Mechanism
Is Utilized (Image)); Fig. II-4-3-5 (The Framework of Alliance
Coordination Mechanism (ACM))

**(2) Enhanced Operational Coordination**
Based on the new Guidelines, the Japanese and U.S.
governments recognize the importance of collocating
operational coordination functions. The Self-Defense
Forces and the United States Armed Forces will exchange
personnel to ensure robust information sharing, to facilitate
coordination and to support international activities.

**(3) Establishment of the Bilateral Planning Mechanism**
Based on the new Guidelines, the Japanese and
U.S. governments established the Bilateral Planning
Mechanism (BPM) in November 2015 for the purpose
of implementing the development of bilateral plans in
peacetime in line with the new Guidelines in order to
enable effective bilateral responses to contingencies
related to Japan’s peace and security.


**(1) Establishment of the Alliance Coordination Mechanism**
In November 2015, the Japanese and U.S. governments
established the ACM in order to address seamlessly
and effectively any situation that affects Japan’s peace
and security or any other situation that may require an
Alliance response.
Based on the framework shown in Fig. II-4-3-5, this
mechanism coordinates policy and operational aspects
related to activities conducted by the Self-Defense
Forces and the United States Armed Forces in all phases
from peacetime to contingencies. This mechanism
also contributes to timely information sharing as well


Fig. II-4-3-4 The Situation Where the Alliance Coordination Mechanism Is Utilized (Image)

Situations in areas An armed attack
surrounding Japan against Japan

97 Guidelines Bilateral Coordination Mechanism

All phases from peacetime to contingencies

New Guidelines Alliance Coordination Mechanism


-----

|Joint Committee (JC)|Col2|
|---|---|
|Japan Side Director-General of North American Affairs Bureau of Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Representative)|U.S. Side Deputy Commander of USFJ (Representative)|
|Policy coordination on all matters requiring mutual consultation regarding the implementation of Japan-U.S. Status of Forces Agreement||

|Alliance Coordination Group (ACG)|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Director General-level|Japan Side Representatives from Cabinet Secretariat (including National Security Secretariat), Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Defense/Self-Defense Forces (SDF), and other relevant ministries, departments, and agencies* *Representatives may participate as needed|U.S. Side Representatives from National Security Council,* Department of State,* American Embassy in Japan, Office of Secretary of Defense,* Joint Staff,* United States Pacific Command (USPACOM),* U.S. Forces in Japan (USFJ), and other relevant ministries, departments, and agencies* *Representatives may participate as needed|
|Director-level|||
|Action Officer level|||
|Policy coordination on all matters requiring coordination in relation to activities of SDF and U.S. Armed Forces To ensure seamless responses, ACG will closely coordinate with JC.|||

|Mutual coordination and information exchange|Col2|
|---|---|
|Bilateral Operations Coordination Center (BOCC)||
|Japan Side Representatives from Joint Staff and Staff Offices of each SDF service|U.S. Side Representatives from USPACOM and USFJ|
|Primary element responsible for conducting operational coordination related to activities of SDF and U.S. Armed Forces||

|Mutual coordination and information exchange|Col2|
|---|---|
|Component Coordination Centers (CCCs)||
|Japan Side Representatives from each component of SDF|U.S. Side Representatives from each component of U.S. Armed Forces|
|CCCs will facilitate component-level bilateral coordination. As appropriate, if either Japan or the U.S., or both, establish Joint Task Forces (JTFs), JTFs may further establish CCCs.||

|Security Consultative Committee (SCC) “2+2”|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Foreign Minister|Security Consultative Committee (SCC)|State Secretary|
|Defense Minister||Defense Secretary|

|Sub Committee for Defense Cooperation (SDC)|Col2|
|---|---|
|Japan DG: North American Affairs Bureau MOFA, Defense Policy Bureau MOD Joint Staff|U.S. Assistant Secretary of State, Assistant Secretary of Defense U.S. Embassy JP, USFJ, JS, PACOM|
|Assist SCC develop planning guidance in close coordination with BPC; advise SCC throughout the bilateral planning; coordinate the actions of all the elements of BPM; discuss procedures and means for effective policy consultations, coordination and other relevant matters||

|Interagency Coordination Forum (IACF)|Col2|
|---|---|
|Japan Representatives of Cabinet Secretariat, NSS, MOFA, MOD|U.S. Representatives of U.S. Embassy JP, PACOM, USFJ|
|Coordination among relevant ministries and agencies (RMAs) of both countries, explanation provided by RMAs, provision of additional information etc.||

|Bilateral Planning Committee (BPC)|Col2|
|---|---|
|Japan Representatives of JSDF|U.S. Representatives of PACOM, USFJ|
|Conduct Bilateral Planning||

|Fig. II-4-3-6|The Framework of the Bilateral Planning Mechanism (BPM)|
|---|---|
|Prime Minister President Bilateral Planning Mechanism Security Consultative Committee (SCC) “2+2” Foreign Minister State Secretary Security Consultative Committee (SCC) Defense Minister Defense Secretary Interagency Coordination as necessary Sub Committee for Defense Cooperation (SDC) Japan U.S. Interagency Coordination Forum (IACF) DG: North American Affairs Bureau Assistant Secretary of State, Assistant MOFA, Defense Policy Bureau MOD Secretary of Defense Japan U.S. Joint Staff U.S. Embassy JP, USFJ, JS, PACOM Representatives of Representatives of Cabinet Secretariat, U.S. Embassy JP, Assist SCC develop planning guidance in close coordination with BPC; advise SCC throughout NSS, MOFA, MOD PACOM, USFJ the bilateral planning; coordinate the actions of all the elements of BPM; discuss procedures and means for effective policy consultations, coordination and other relevant matters Coordination among relevant ministries and agencies (RMAs) of both countries, explanation provided by Bilateral Planning Committee (BPC) RMAs, provision of additional information etc. Japan U.S. Representatives of JSDF Representatives of PACOM, USFJ Conduct Bilateral Planning Coordination Command under the BPM JSDF/USF chain of command||


Fig. II-4-3-5 The Framework of Alliance Coordination Mechanism (ACM)

Higher levels between the two nations including Minister/Secretary level

As needed

Joint Committee (JC) Alliance Coordination Group (ACG)

Japan Side U.S. Side Director Japan Side U.S. Side
Director-General of Deputy Commander General-level Representatives from Cabinet Secretariat Representatives from National Security
North American Affairs of USFJ (including National Security Secretariat), Council,* Department of State,* American
Bureau of Ministry of (Representative) Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Embassy in Japan, Office of Secretary of
Foreign Affairs Director-level Defense/Self-Defense Forces (SDF), and Defense,* Joint Staff,* United States
(Representative) other relevant ministries, departments, Pacific Command (USPACOM),* U.S.

and agencies* Forces in Japan (USFJ), and other relevant

Action Officer *Representatives may participate as needed ministries, departments, and agencies*
level *Representatives may participate as needed

Policy coordination on all matters requiring mutual

Policy coordination on all matters requiring coordination in relation to activities of SDF and U.S. Armed Forces

consultation regarding the implementation of

To ensure seamless responses, ACG will closely coordinate with JC.

Japan-U.S. Status of Forces Agreement

Mutual coordination and information exchange

Bilateral Operations Coordination Center (BOCC)

Japan Side U.S. Side
Representatives from Joint Staff and Staff Offices of Representatives from USPACOM and USFJ
each SDF service

Primary element responsible for conducting operational coordination related to activities of SDF and U.S. Armed Forces

Mutual coordination and information exchange

Component Coordination Centers (CCCs)

Japan Side U.S. Side
Representatives from each component of SDF Representatives from each component of U.S. Armed Forces

CCCs will facilitate component-level bilateral coordination.
As appropriate, if either Japan or the U.S., or both, establish Joint Task Forces (JTFs), JTFs may further establish CCCs.


-----

In the development of bilateral plans, this mechanism
performs the functions of ensuring Ministerial-level
directions and supervision and the involvement of
relevant government ministries and agencies, as well as
conducting coordination for various forms of Japan-U.S.
cooperation conducive to the development of bilateral
plans. The two governments will conduct bilateral
planning through this mechanism.

See>> Fig. II-4-3-6 (The Framework of the Bilateral Planning Mechanism
(BPM))

- 2  Cooperative Measures to Seamlessly Ensure
**Japan’s Peace and Security**


U.S. Air Force’s Global Hawk in flight


**1) Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR)**
**Activities**

With regard to joint ISR activities, from the perspective
that it is important to implement ISR activities in a broad
Asia-Pacific region in cooperation between Japan and the
United States to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness
of the activities of both countries, the two countries set
up the Defense ISR Working Group in February 2013
consisting of director-level defense officials from Japan
and the United States, which is further deepening the
cooperation between the two countries.
The expansion of these ISR activities will
function as deterrence capabilities, and will also ensure
information superiority over other nations and enable the
establishment of a seamless cooperation structure in all
phases from peacetime to contingencies.

**(2) Missile Defense**
Regarding the response to ballistic missiles, bilateral
response capabilities have improved, through such
measures as operational information sharing and the
establishment of the guidelines for responding to an
attack. Accordingly, Japan and the United States closely
cooperated and coordinated in responding to the missile
launches carried out by North Korea respectively in
April 2009, and April and December 2012, and also
coordinated their responses to the launch of a ballistic
missile, which was purported to be an “artificial satellite,”
by North Korea in February 2016 by utilizing the ACM.
Also, in the systems and technology field, the cooperative
development of a new ballistic missile defense (BMD)
interceptor with enhanced capabilities (SM-3 Block IIA)
is steadily in progress.


USS Ronald Reagan (CVN-76), JS Izumo, and JS Teruzuki sailing after the SDF Fleet Review

where appropriate for the maintenance and enhancement
of the presence of Japan and the United States through
ISR as well as training and exercises. The Maritime SelfDefense Force and the United States Navy plan to maintain
and enhance both countries’ presence in the Western
Pacific through multiple joint training and exercises.


**(4) Joint Training and Exercises**
Joint training and exercises in peacetime not only
contribute greatly to maintaining and enhancing the
Japan-U.S. joint response capabilities by improving
interoperability through the deepening of mutual
understanding of tactics and other aspects and the
enhancement of mutual communication, but also
are useful in improving tactical skills on each side.
In particular, the knowledge and techniques that the
Japanese side can learn from the U.S. Forces, which
have vast experience in actual fighting, are invaluable
and greatly contribute to improving SDF capabilities. In
addition, holding bilateral exercises at effective times,
places, and scales demonstrates the unified commitment
and capabilities of Japan and the United States, which has
a deterrent effect. In light of these perspectives, the MOD/
SDF is continuing its initiatives to enrich the contents of
bilateral training and exercises.
Joint training and exercises have been expanded
not only within Japan but also to the United States by
dispatching SDF units including field training exercises


**(3) Maritime Security**
The new Guidelines will allow Japan and the United
States to develop and enhance the sharing of maritime
surveillance information from peacetime and to cooperate


-----

the Japan-U.S. Bilateral Regional Army command post
exercises, special anti-submarine exercises, and JapanU.S. Bilateral Fighter combat training.
Since FY1985, mostly on an annual basis, command
post exercises and field training exercises have been
conducted alternately as the Japan-U.S. Bilateral Joint
Exercise, and command post exercises were carried
out in January 2016. In recent years, U.S. Forces Japan
have also participated in disaster drills organized by
local governments, thereby deepening cooperation with
relevant institutions and local governments.

See>> Reference 32 (Record of Japan-U.S. Bilateral Exercises in FY2015)

**(5) Logistics support**
Japan-U.S. cooperation is also being steadily promoted
through logistical support based on the Acquisition and
Cross-Servicing Agreement (ACSA)[2] signed in 1996,
as a result of increased opportunities for cooperation
between the two countries. The Agreement is designed to
positively contribute to the smooth and effective operation
under the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty and to initiatives
for international peace taken under the leadership of the
United Nations. Its scope of application includes various
occasions such as bilateral training and exercises in
peacetime, disaster relief activities, U.N. peacekeeping
operations, international disaster relief activities,
situations in areas surrounding Japan, and armed attack
situations. If either the SDF or the U.S. Forces request the
other party to provide supplies or services, the Agreement,
in principle, allows the requested party to do so.[3]

In addition, at the “2+2” Meeting in April 2015,
the two countries confirmed that they will expeditiously
work on negotiations on the Acquisition and CrossServicing Agreement to operationalize the mutual
logistics cooperation envisioned by the new Guidelines.
The negotiations are currently underway between the
two countries.

See>> Fig. II-4-3-7 (Scope of the Japan-U.S. Acquisition and CrossServicing Agreement (ACSA))


SDF personnel on guard during a joint field exercise (Orient Shield) with the U.S. Army

A fleet of Japanese and American naval ships engaged in joint training during an MSDF exercise
(field exercise)


Japanese and American aircraft flying in formation during a Japan-U.S.-Australia joint training
exercise (Cope North Guam)

with the U.S. Army (Arctic Aurora) conducted in the
U.S. State of Alaska from August 2015, and continuous
efforts are being made to improve interoperability and
bilateral response capabilities at the military service and
unit levels, including participation in such exercises as


**(6) Joint/Shared Use**
The expansion of joint/shared use of facilities and areas
increases bases for the SDF’s activities such as maneuver
areas, ports, and airfields, which in turn enhances the
diversity and efficiency of Japan-U.S. bilateral training
and expands the scope and raises the frequency of such
activities as ISR. The SDF has only a limited number


The official title is the Agreement between the Government of Japan and the Government of the United States of America Concerning Reciprocal Provision of Logistic Support, Supplies and Services between
the Self-Defense Forces of Japan and the Armed Forces of the United States of America

The categories of supplies and services as provided under the Agreement include: food; water; billeting; transportation (including airlift); petroleum, oils, and lubricants; clothing; communications; medical
services; base support; storage; use of facilities; training services; spare parts and components; repair and maintenance; airport and seaport services; and ammunition (only in armed attack situations and


-----

Fig. II-4-3-7 Scope of the Japan-U.S. Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement (ACSA)

Significance of reciprocal provision of supplies and services

In general, supplies and services necessary for unit operations are replenished by the units themselves. However, in such cases where
units of allied nations are operating together, the reciprocal provision of supplies and services on site would enhance the flexibility of
the operations.

**Scope of the Japan-U.S. Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement (ACSA)**

Japan-U.S. bilateral training Training, communication and other daily activities

Transportation of Japanese International disaster

PKO, etc. Disaster relief

nationals overseas relief activities

Situations in Areas

Armed attack situations and situations in which armed attack is anticipated

Surrounding Japan

Added as a result of the 2004 revision.
Added as a result of the 2012 revision.


of facilities in Okinawa, including Naha Air Base, and
most of them are located in urban areas, which results in
operational limitations. The joint/shared use of facilities
and areas of the U.S. Forces in Japan in Okinawa will
greatly improve the SDF’s training environment in
Okinawa, and facilitate implementation of joint exercises
and interoperability between the SDF and the U.S.
Forces. It will also improve readiness and contribute to
ensuring the safety of local people in the case of a disaster.
Thus, while taking the SDF defense posture in the
regions, including the Southwestern Islands, and relations
with local communities into account, Japan and the
United States are proactively engaged in consultations,
and specific initiatives are steadily progressing. For
example, the GSDF has been using Camp Hansen since
March 2008 for exercises. Moreover, the relocation of the
ASDF Air Defense Command to Yokota in April 2012
and the relocation of the GSDF Central Readiness Force
Headquarters to Zama in March 2013 were carried out. In
addition, in December 2013 and between June and July
2014, the MSDF conducted the training on the sea and
training utilizing facilities in Guam and its surrounding
area in cooperation with the U.S. Navy. The development
of training ranges in Guam and the Northern Mariana
Islands (Tinian Island, Pagan Island, etc.) for shared use
by the SDF and the U.S. Forces is under consideration.

- 3  Cooperation in Response to a Large-scale
**Disaster in Japan**


SDF singer performing to the music played by a U.S. military band at the “Commemorative
Ceremony for the fifth Anniversary of Operation Tomodachi” held at the U.S. Pentagon

Bilateral Training and Exercises over many years, and
will lead to the Alliance being deepened further in the
future. “Operation Tomodachi” involved the deployment
of a large-scale force at its peak, including troops of
approximately 16,000 personnel, around 15 ships, and
around 140 aircraft, resulting in relief activities that
were unprecedented in scale and contributing greatly to
Japan’s restoration and reconstruction. Not only those
affected but numerous Japanese at large were filled with
a deepened sense of appreciation and trust for the U.S.
Forces in Japan.
On the other hand, some issues have emerged,
such as clarifying the roles, missions and capabilities
of Japan and the United States in the event of a disaster
within Japan, as well as stipulating more concrete joint
guidelines to facilitate greater participation by the U.S.
Forces in disaster prevention drills, and examining
mechanisms for the sharing of information and more
effective coordination mechanism.
In light of these issues, the December 2013 Response
Plan for a Massive Earthquake in the Nankai Trough listed
the Japan-U.S. Joint Response Plan and the two countries
conducted a bilateral joint comprehensive disaster


In the aftermath of the Great East Japan Earthquake
in 2011, the SDF and the U.S. Forces demonstrated
their high joint response capabilities based on the
strong ties they had developed. The success of the joint
response between the U.S. Forces and the SDF through
“Operation Tomodachi” was the result of Japan U S


-----

prevention training in Kochi Prefecture in February 2014
based on the scenario of the occurrence of an earthquake
in the Nankai Trough. The U.S. Forces in Japan (USFJ)
also participated in the Wakayama Prefecture Tsunami
Disaster Readiness Practical Training (October 2014) and
“Michinoku ALERT 2014” (November 2014), a disaster
relief exercise by the GSDF Northeastern Army. This
shows how the SDF and USFJ have been enhancing their
cooperation for disaster readiness at home and abroad.
In response to the Kumamoto Earthquake in April
2016, cases of Japan-U.S. cooperation included the
transportation of daily necessities by the MV-22 Osprey
aircraft and the transportation of SDF personnel by C-130
transport aircraft. In this instance, the ACM was utilized,
including the Japan-U.S. Joint Coordination Office
locally established by the joint task force organized for
the earthquake response.

- 4  Cooperation for Regional and Global Peace
**and Security**


October 2014, and the PSI Maritime Interdiction Training
hosted by New Zealand in November 2015.

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 2 (Ensuring Maritime Security); Part III,
Chapter 2, Section 4-2 (International Initiatives Aimed at Nonproliferation
of Weapons of Mass Destruction)

**(2) Trilateral and Multilateral Training and Exercises**
The new Guidelines will enable Japan and the Unites
States to promote and enhance trilateral and multilateral
security and defense cooperation. Thus, the SDF is
participating in trilateral (e.g. Japan-U.S.-Australia,
Japan-U.S.-India, and Japan-U.S.-ROK) and multilateral
training, in addition to bilateral training and exercises
between Japan and the United States.

- 5  Cooperation on Space and Cyberspace


**(1) Cooperation on Space**
With regard to cooperation on space, based on the
agreement at the Japan-U.S. Summit Meeting in
November 2009 to promote cooperation in areas of
space security as part of initiatives to deepen the JapanU.S. Alliance, the two countries have periodically been
working together to discuss how they should cooperate
in the future, such as the holding of the 1st Japan-U.S.
Space Security Dialogue in September 2010 with the
participation of relevant ministries and agencies.
Furthermore, the Japan-U.S. Summit Meeting in
April 2012 decided to deepen the space-based partnership
for civil and security purposes and to create a whole-ofgovernment comprehensive dialogue on space, enabling
relevant ministries and agencies to hold the 1st wholeof-government Japan-U.S. Comprehensive Dialogue
on Space in March 2013. The two countries have been
sharing information on their respective space policies and
discussing plans for future cooperation on a regular basis.
Moreover, based on the instructions given by the
Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting of April 2015, the
two countries established the Space Cooperation Working
Group (SCWG) to further promote the cooperation
among bilateral defense authorities in the area of space.
The SCWG held its first meeting in October 2015 and its
second meeting in February 2016. Going forward, Japan
and the United States will leverage this working group to
deepen discussions in a wide variety of areas, including
(1) promoting space policy dialogue, (2) reinforcing
information sharing, (3) working together to develop and
secure experts, and (4) implementing tabletop exercises.

**(2) Cooperation on Cyberspace**
Concerning cooperation on cyberspace, the Cyber
Defense Policy Working Group (CDPWG) was
established in October 2013 as a framework between the


**(1) Cooperation in International Activities**
The SDF is conducting activities in close cooperation
with the United States and other participating countries
through activities pursuant to the former Anti-Terrorism
Special Measures Act, international disaster relief
activities and international peacekeeping operations in
the Philippines and Haiti, and anti-piracy operations
off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden. Japan
and the United States worked closely together at local
multilateral coordination centers to respond to the
typhoon disaster that hit the Philippines in November
2013. To respond to the outbreak of Ebola virus disease,
Japan started to dispatch liaison officers to the U.S.
Africa Command in October 2014 for close cooperation,
coordinating efforts and collecting information with
related countries including the United States.
As for maritime security, both Japan and the
United States are making efforts as maritime nations
to maintain and develop “the open and stable ocean”
based on fundamental rules such as the freedom of
navigation, ensured safety, and the rule of law (e.g.
peaceful dispute resolution based on international laws).
The two countries have been working closely together
on various multilateral maritime security cooperation
initiatives supported by such countries as those around
sea lanes, including participation in the Combined Task
Force (CTF) 151 for responding to pirates since July
2013, the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) Maritime
Interdiction Training hosted by the United States in
August 2014, the International Minesweeping Exercise
in the Persian Gulf hosted by the United States from


-----

MOD and DoD to discuss a broad range of professional
and concrete issues, including the sharing of information
at the policy level, human resources development, and
technical cooperation.
The new Guidelines released in April 2015 and the
CDPWG Joint Statement published in May 2015 cited the
prompt and appropriate development of an information
sharing structure and the protection of the critical
infrastructure upon which the SDF and the United States
Armed Forces depend to accomplish their missions as
examples of cooperation between the Japanese and U.S.
governments. In addition, as part of cooperation between
the SDF and the United States Armed Forces, the securing
of the resiliency of their respective networks and systems
and the implementation of educational exchanges and
joint exercises were also cited. Going forward, Japan and
the United States will further accelerate bilateral cyber
defense cooperation in line with the direction presented
by the new Guidelines and the CDPWG Joint Statement.

- 6  Initiatives for Further Enhancing the Effectiveness
**of Cooperation**


A group of U.S. military personnel visiting the ASDF Staff College

to joint technological research on BMD. Japan and the
United States consult with each other at forums such as
the Systems and Technology Forum (S&TF) and conduct
cooperative research and development regarding the
specific projects agreed upon at these forums.
Part III, Chapter 3, Section 3-2 (Deepening
Relationships with the United States regarding Defense
Equipment and Technology Cooperation) explains
initiatives for the common maintenance infrastructure
for the 24 Ospreys deployed by the U.S. Marine Corps
at MCAS Futenma and the Ospreys planned to be
deployed by the GSDF[6] as well as initiatives for the onsite maintenance locations (regional depots) in the AsiaPacific region for F-35 aircraft.

See>> Reference 33 (Japan-U.S. Joint Research and Development Projects)


**(1) Defense Equipment and Technology Cooperation**
Japan proactively promotes cooperation in defense
equipment and technology while bearing in mind the
maintenance of the technological and production bases
and the mutual cooperation principle based on the
Japan-U.S. Security Treaty and the Mutual Defense
Assistance Agreement between Japan and the United
States of America.
In view of the progress in technology cooperation
between Japan and the United States, the improvement
of technological level, and other factors, Japan decided
to transfer its military technology to the United States
regardless of the Three Principles on Arms Exports
and related guidelines. In 1983, Japan established the
Exchange of Notes concerning the Transfer of Military
Technologies to the United States of America.[4] In 2006,
the Exchange of Notes concerning the Transfer of Arms
and Military Technologies to the United States of America[5]
was established to replace the foregoing Exchange of
Notes. Under these frameworks, Japan decided to provide
the United States with 20 items of arms and military
technologies, including military technologies related


**(2) Education and Research Exchange**
The new Guidelines recognize the importance of
intellectual cooperation relating to security and defense,
and the two governments will deepen exchanges between
members of relevant organizations, and strengthen
communication between each side’s research and
educational institutions. To this end, the MOD/SDF has
been working on education and research exchanges by
accepting students from abroad and holding Japan-U.S.
bilateral or multilateral seminars that include the United
States so that security and defense personnel can share
knowledge and enhance cooperation.

See>> Reference 49 (Exchange Student Acceptance Record (Number of
Newly Accepted Students in FY2015)); Reference 50 (Multilateral
Security Dialogues Hosted by the Ministry of Defense); Reference 51
(Other Multilateral Security Dialogues)


The official title is the Exchange of Notes concerning the Transfer of Military Technologies to the United States of America under the Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement between Japan and the United States
of America

The official title is the Exchange of Notes concerning the Transfer of Arms and Military Technologies to the United States of America under the Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement between Japan and the
United States of America


-----

**Section 4** **Stationing of the U.S. Forces in Japan**


Measures such as realignment of the U.S. Forces in
Japan are extremely important in mitigating the impact
on local communities, such as those in Okinawa, while
maintaining the deterrence capabilities of the U.S. Forces.

**1 Stationing of the U.S. Forces in Japan**


- 1  Signifi cance of the Presence of the U.S. Forces
**in Japan**


The MOD will advance the U.S. Forces realignment and
other initiatives while making continuous efforts to gain
the understanding and cooperation of local communities
accommodating USFJ facilities and areas.

In addition, while Article 5 of the Japan-U.S. Security
Treaty stipulates the obligation of the United States to
defend Japan, Article 6 allows for the use by the United
States of facilities and areas in Japan for maintaining the
security of Japan and international peace and security in
the Far East, and overall Japan-U.S. obligations are kept
in balance.

See>> Fig. II-4-4-1 (Deployment Map of the U.S. Forces in Japan)


As the security environment surrounding Japan is
becoming increasingly severe, for the Japan-U.S.
Alliance, which is based on the Japan-U.S. Security
Arrangements, to adequately function as a deterrence
that contributes to Japan’s defense as well as the peace
and stability in the Asia-Pacifi c region, it is necessary to
secure the presence of the U.S. military in Japan and to
maintain a posture in Japan and the surrounding areas
from peacetime that enables the U.S. Forces in Japan to
respond swiftly and expeditiously to emergencies.
For this purpose, based on the Japan-U.S. Security
Treaty, Japan allows the stationing of the U.S. Forces in
Japan, which is a core part of the Japan-U.S. Security
Arrangements.
Further, the realization of a stable U.S. military
presence is necessary for a swift Japan-U.S. joint response
based on Article 5 of the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty in
the event of an armed attack on Japan. Additionally, the
actions of the U.S. Forces in Japan in the defense of Japan
will be assisted by the timely reinforcement of other U.S.
Forces, and the U.S. Forces in Japan will serve as the
basis of such support.
In order for the U.S. Forces in Japan to carry out the
abovementioned role, it is essential that all the services of
the U.S. Forces, including those in Japan, are functionally
integrated. For instance, the U.S. Forces hold a primarily
offensive power as a “spear” when responding to armed
aggression to Japan in cooperation with the SDF. When
the U.S. Forces function as an offensive power, it can
be expected that the U.S. Navy, Air Force, and Marines
stationed in Japan work in an integrated manner to fully
exert their functions.



- 2  Measures to Ensure the Smooth Stationing of
**the U.S. Forces in Japan**

The Status of Forces Agreement[1] (SOFA) stipulates
matters pertaining to USFJ facilities and areas and the
status of the U.S. Forces in Japan, including provisions
of facilities and areas for use by the U.S. Forces (USFJ
facilities and areas), and satisfying the labor requirements
of the U.S. Forces in Japan.


**(1) Provision of USFJ Facilities and Areas**
Japan provides USFJ facilities and areas for the U.S.
Forces under the provisions of the SOFA, in accordance
with agreements reached through the Joint Committee
between the Governments of Japan and the United States.
The Government of Japan has entered into agreements
and concluded lease contracts with owners of private and
public lands on which USFJ facilities and areas exist in
order to ensure the stable use of these facilities and areas.
However, should the government be unable to obtain the
approval of landowners, it will acquire title under the
Act on Special Measures for USFJ Land Release,[2] while
compensating the landowners for any loss they may have
suffered in the process.[3]


The offi cial title is the Agreement Under Article VI of the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security Between Japan and the United States of America, Regarding Facilities and Areas and the Status of United
States Armed Forces in Japan.

The offi cial title is the Act on Special Measures for USFJ Land Release, Incidental to the Agreement Under Article VI of the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security Between Japan and the United States of
America, Regarding Facilities and Areas and the Status of United States Armed Forces in Japan.i


-----

Fig. II-4-4-1 Deployment Map of the U.S. Forces in Japan

Misawa

Kyogamisaki Shariki

U.S. Air Force: 35th Fighter Wing, F-16 fighters

U.S. Army: TPY-2 (so-called U.S. Army: TPY-2 (so-called X-Band Radar System)

U.S. Navy: P-3C antisubmarine patrol aircraft and others

X-Band Radar System)

Atsugi Yokota

U.S. Navy: Headquarters, U.S. Forces, Japan
F/A-18 strike fighters and others U.S. Air Force:

Iwakuni (Carrier-based aircraft) Headquarters, Fifth Air Force

U.S. Marine Corps: Shariki Misawa 374th Airlift Wing
Marine Aircraft Group 12 C-130 transport aircraft
F/A-18 strike fighter C-12 transport aircraft
AV-8 attackers UH-1 helicopters and others
EA-6 electronic warfare aircraft Plan to deploy CV22 Osprey
C-12 transport aircraft

Zama

KC-130 tankers and others

Headquarters, U.S. Army, Japan

Sasebo U.S. Army: 1st Corps (Forward)

Yokota

U.S. Navy: Fleet Activities Sasebo Kyogamisaki Atsugi Yokosuka

Amphibious assault ships Iwakuni Yokosuka Headquarters, U.S. Naval Forces, Japan
Minesweeping ships Sasebo U.S. Navy: Fleet Activities Yokosuka
Transport ships

Aircraft carrier
Cruisers

Torii U.S. Marine Corps facilities and areas such as Camp Courtney Destroyers

U.S. Army: 1st Battalion, 1st Special U.S. Marine Corps: 3rd Marine Expeditionary Force HQ Amphibious command ship
Forces Group (Airborne)/10th Support Group Kadena

Schwab

U.S. Air Force: 18th Wing

U.S. Marine Corps:

F-15 fighters

Futenma 4th Marine Regiment (infantry)

KC-135 tankers

U.S. Marine Corps: HH-60 helicopters
Marine Aircraft Group 36 E-3 airborne warning and control system
CH-53 helicopters Hansen (AWACS) aircraft
AH-1 helicopters White Beach Area U.S. Marine Corps: U.S. Navy: P-3C, P-8A patrol aircraft and others
UH-1 helicopters U.S. Navy: 12th Marine Regiment (artillery) U.S. Army: 1-1 Air Defense Artillery
MV-22 Osprey and others Port facility, POL depot 31st Marine Expeditionary Unit Patriot Advanced Capability-3 (PAC-3)


**(2) Satisfying Labor Requirements of the USFJ**
The USFJ require manpower (labor) to maintain its
forces, and the SOFA stipulates that the requirements
of the USFJ shall be satisfied with the assistance of the
Government of Japan.
As of the end of FY2015, 25,319 USFJ local
employees (hereinafter referred to as the “employees”)
work at USFJ facilities and areas throughout Japan,
working as office workers at headquarters, engineers
at maintenance/ supply facilities, members of security
guards and fire departments on base, and sales staff at
welfare/recreational facilities. They perform functions
essential for the smooth operations of the USFJ, and
support its activities.
The Government of Japan hires these employees
in accordance with the provisions of the SOFA. The
MOD supports the stationing of the U.S. Forces in
Japan by performing administrative work for personnel
management, payment of wages, health care, and
welfare, etc.

- 3  Costs Associated with the U.S. Forces Stationed
**in Japan**


Action Committee on Okinawa (SACO) Final Report
for mitigating the impact on the people of Okinawa,
as well as costs for implementing measures that will
contribute to mitigating the impact on local communities
associated with the initiatives for the realignment of the
U.S. Armed Forces.

See>> Fig. II-4-4-2 (U.S. Forces Japan-related Costs (Budget for FY2016))

- 4  Host Nation Support (HNS)


Host Nation Support (HNS) plays an important role
to ensure the smooth and effective implementation of
the Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements. Due to soaring
prices and wages in Japan since the mid-1970s, and
changes in the international economic situation, the
Government of Japan began to bear labor costs such
as welfare costs in FY1978. Then in FY1979, Japan
began to bear costs for the Facilities Improvement
Program (FIP).
Furthermore, as labor costs soared due to changes
in economic conditions that affected both countries, the
employment stability of the employees was adversely
influenced, and there was even concern that it would
affect the activities of the U.S. Forces in Japan. Therefore
in 1987, the governments of Japan and the United States
concluded an agreement that sets forth special measures
regarding Article 24 of the SOFA (the Special Measures


Various costs associated with the U.S. Forces in Japan
include the costs of stationing the U.S. Forces in Japan,
costs for implementing the stipulations of the Special


-----

|Burden fro|m|t|he Special Measures Agreement (¥15|2.1 billion)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||


Fig. II-4-4-2 U.S. Forces Japan-related Costs (Budget for FY2016)

Costs for Stationing of USFJ SACO-related costs Realignment-related
(MOD-Related Budget: ¥377.2 billion (1)+(2)) (¥2.8 billion) costs (¥176.6 billion)

Cost sharing for the stationing of USFJ -  Projects for land returns -  Relocation of the U.S. Marines in

¥0.7 billion Okinawa to Guam ¥14.0 billion

(¥192.0 billion (1)) -  Projects for training improvement -  Projects for realignment in Okinawa

¥0.1 billion ¥69.0 billion

-  Costs for taking measures to improve

-  Projects for noise reduction -  Projects related to the reform of U.S.

the living environment in areas -  Costs for Facility Improvement Program ¥0.8 billion Army Headquarters ¥10 million
surrounding the USFJ facilities ¥20.6 billion -  Projects for the relocation of Carrier
¥57.0 billion -  Labor costs (welfare costs, etc.) Air Wing ¥72.4 billion

-  Rent for facilities ¥98.8 billion ¥26.4 billion -  Projects for training relocation

-  Relocation, etc ¥3.8 billion

(Local task force-related cost) ¥20 million

-  Other costs (compensation for

-  Projects for facilitating realignment

fishery, etc.) ¥25.6 billion

initiatives ¥15.2 billion

**Total: ¥185.2 billion (2)** **Total: ¥47.0 billion** **Total: ¥1.6 billion** **Total: ¥170.7 billion**

-  Non MOD-related budget Burden from the Special Measures Agreement (¥152.1 billion)

-  Expenditures borne by other
ministries (base subsidy, etc.) -  Labor costs (basic salary, etc.) -  Training relocation costs: ¥1.2 billion -  Training relocation costs

-  Estimated costs of government ¥119.4 billion (one of the projects aimed at ¥5.9 billion
owned land provided for use as Utilities costs ¥24.9 billion enhancing training)
USFJ facilities[3] -  Training relocation costs (NLP) -  Artillery live-fire training over -  Aviation training relocation

¥0.7 billion Highway 104 as part of realignment
**Total: ¥145.0 billion** -  Parachute training initiatives

Notes: 1. Training relocation costs under the Special Measures Agreement extend either into the cost sharing for the stationing of USFJ or the SACO-related costs and the

realignment-related costs.

2. The SACO-related costs refer to the cost for implementing the contents of the SACO Final Report to reduce the impact on people in Okinawa, while the

realignment-related costs refers to the cost relating to a step to contribute to reducing the impact on local communities as part of the realignment initiatives. Since the
cost-sharing for the stationing of USFJ is Japan’s voluntary effort to bear some costs in light of the importance of ensuring the smooth and effective implementation of the
Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements, its nature is different from the SACO-related costs and the realignment-related costs, and is categorized separately.

3. The costs related to the stationing of USFJ include the MOD-related budget, other ministry-related budgets (base subsidy, etc.: ¥38.8 billion, FY2015 Budget) and the

estimated costs of government-owned land provided for use as USFJ facilities (¥165.8 billion, FY2015 Estimated Costs).

4. Numbers may not add up due to rounding.


**(1) Labor costs**
The upper limit of the number of workers at welfare,
recreation, and morale facilities to be funded by Japan
will be reduced from 4,408 to 3,893, while the upper
limit of the number of workers engaged in activities such
as maintenance of assets and administrative works to be
funded by Japan, will be increased from 18,217 to 19,285.
As a result, the upper limit of the number of workers to
be funded by Japan will be increased from the current
22,625 to 23,178. These adjustments will be phased in
over the new SMA period from FY2016 to FY2020.

**(2) Utilities costs**
Over the new SMA period, the share of utilities costs
to be borne by Japan for each fiscal year is reduced
from the current 72% to 61%, with the upper limit for
utilities costs to be funded by Japan set at approximately
24.9 billion yen.


Agreement)[4] as exceptional, limited and provisional
measures under the cost principle in the SOFA.
Based on this agreement, the Government of Japan
started to bear labor costs of eight categories such as the
adjustment allowance (currently replaced by the regional
allowance). As the Special Measures Agreement (SMA)
was revised later on, the costs borne by the Government of
Japan expanded to cover labor costs for base pay, etc., and
utilities costs from FY1991. The financial responsibility
of the Japanese Government was further expanded to
cover training relocation costs from FY1996.
The Government of Japan has been reviewing
HNS while paying full attention to its tight fiscal
conditions, and as a result, HNS has been on the steady
decline after peaking out in the FY1999 budget on an
expenditure basis.
With the SMA due to expire in March 2016, the “2+2”
Meeting held in April 2015 agreed to “start consultations
on future arrangements to provide an appropriate level
of host nation support.” Following this agreement, Japan
and the United States held consultations on a new SMA,
and in December 2015, the Governments of Japan and
the United States reached agreement as follows:


**(3) Costs for Facilities Improvement Program**
The amount of costs for the Facilities Improvement
Program will not fall below 20.6 billion yen in each fiscal
year during the new SMA period. For the period of the
previous SMA, any amount of reductions in the labor


The official title is the Agreement between Japan and the United States of America concerning Special Measures relating to Article XXIV of the Agreement under Article VI of the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation


-----

costs and the utilities costs was to be appropriated for an
increase in costs for the Facilities Improvement Program.
But such appropriation will not be made during the new
SMA period.

**(4) Scale of Host Nation Support**
The amount of HNS in FY2020, the fi nal fi scal year of
the new SMA period, will be approximately 189.9 billion
yen, with the average amount for each fi scal year during
the same period coming to approximately 189.3 billion
yen (any change in wages based on recommendations
by the National Personnel Authority will be refl ected
appropriately in labor costs for each fi scal year).


to be funded by Japan will be increased gradually from
the current 22,625 to 23,178.
❍ Over the new SMA period, the share of utilities costs
to be borne by Japan for each fi scal year will be
reduced from the current 72% to 61%, with the upper
limit for utilities costs to be funded by Japan set at
approximately 24.9 billion yen.
(3) Cost-saving efforts: It is clearly stipulated that the
United States will make further efforts to economize
the above-mentioned expenditures.

See>> Reference 34 (Outline of Cost Sharing of the Stationing of the USFJ)

- 6 **USFJ Facilities and Areas and the Local Communities**


The social conditions surrounding USFJ facilities and
areas have changed signifi cantly, including, for example,
through urbanization over the past several decades. For
USFJ facilities and areas to fully exert their capabilities
and be genuinely accepted by the Japanese citizens, it is
vital to reduce the impact of the facilities and areas as much
as possible and secure the understanding and cooperation
of the local communities in light of such changes. Japan’s
national land is narrow with limited plains, and there are
many cases where USFJ facilities and areas are located
close to urban and business areas. In such areas, factors
including the existence of those facilities and areas, and
the takeoffs and landings of the U.S. Forces aircraft have
considerable impact on the residents’ living environment
and local development. It is therefore necessary to make
efforts to mitigate the impact in a way that is responsive
to the circumstances of each area.

**2 Progress of the Realignment of the U.S. Forces in Japan**


announced as part of the Joint Statements of the “2+2”
Meeting and through other means.



- 5  New Special Measures Agreement

The Governments of Japan and the United States signed
the new Special Measures Agreement (SMA) in January
2016. Following approval by the Diet, the new SMA took
effect in April 2016.
The key points of the new SMA are as follows:
(1) Effective period: Five years (from FY2016 through
FY2020).
(2) Cost sharing: Japan shall bear all or part of labor
costs, utilities costs, and the costs incurred in training
relocation.
The Exchange of Notes concerning the Operational
Guidelines of the SMA stipulated the following policies
for the calculations of the number of workers and
utilities costs:
❍ Labor costs: The upper limit of the number of workers


As for the realignment of the U.S. Forces in Japan,
“the United States-Japan Roadmap for Realignment
Implementation” (Roadmap) was set forth in May
2006. Subsequently, the Governments of Japan
and the United States have conducted full-fledged
bilateral discussions concerning coordination of the
plan for the realignment, in view of factors including
the following: 1) The necessity of implementing
measures to promptly and steadily enable the visible
mitigation of the impact on Okinawa; 2) The necessity
of coordinating strategic rebalance to the Asia-Pacific
region and the realignment package, which was set
out in the U.S. Defense Strategic Guidance released
in January 2012; and 3) The fact that a reduction in
the cost associated with the relocation of the U.S.
Marine Corps to Guam has been demanded by the
U S Congress The achievements thereof have been



- 1  Achievements at the “2+2” Meeting (April 27, 2012)

The 2006 Roadmap stated that, among the III Marine
Expeditionary Force (III MEF) stationed in Okinawa,
the main focus of the relocation to Guam would be the
command elements, but the United States decided to
alter the composition of the units. As a result, the U.S.
government decided to deploy the Marine Air-Ground
Task Force (MAGTF)—consisting of command, ground,
aviation and logistic support elements—in Japan, Guam,
and Hawaii, as well as in Australia as a rotational unit. In
addition, the Governments of Japan and the United States
decided to delink both the relocation of U.S. Marine
Corps personnel from Okinawa to Guam and resulting


-----

land returns south of Kadena Air Base from the progress
on the Futenma Replacement Facility (FRF).

- 2  Achievements at the “2+2” Meeting (April 27, 2015)


commitment to maintaining a robust and fl exible force
posture that enhances deterrence by strengthening the
capacity to respond effectively to future challenges and
threat, while also mitigating the impact of US Forces on
local communities.

See>> Reference 30 (Joint Statement of the Security Consultative Committee
(April 27, 2012)); Reference 27 (Joint Statement of the Security
Consultative Committee (April 27, 2015)); Fig. II-4-4-3 (Progress of
the Realignment of Force Structure of USFJ and the SDF Described
in “Japan-U.S. Roadmap for Realignment Implementation”)

**3 Stationing of the U.S. Forces in Okinawa**


See>> Fig. II-4-4-4 (The Geopolitical Positioning of Okinawa and the
Signifi cance of the U.S. Marine Corps Stationed in Okinawa)


The Ministers reaffi rmed the two governments’ continued
commitment to implement the existing arrangements as
soon as possible, while ensuring operational capability,
including training capability, throughout the process of
the USFJ realignment. The Ministers underscored their

**3 Stationing of the U.S. Forces in Okinawa**

In comparison to areas such as the U.S. mainland, Hawaii,
and Guam, Okinawa is located closer to potential confl ict
areas that could affect Japan’s peace and security, including
the Korean Peninsula and the Taiwan Strait, but at the
same time has the advantage of having a certain distance
from these areas that would not heighten military tension
there unnecessarily. In addition, Okinawa, comprising a
large number of small islands, is located roughly in the
center of the Southwestern Islands having a total length
of some 1,200 km and close to key sea lanes for Japan,
which depends on marine transportation for over 99% of
its overall international trade. Furthermore, its location
is extremely important from the perspective of security,
as Okinawa serves as a strategically important target for
neighboring countries in both making access to the Pacifi c
from the continent and rejecting access from the Pacifi c
to the continent. Thus, the stationing of the U.S. Forces
in Okinawa—including the U.S. Marine Corps, which is
in charge of fi rst response for a variety of contingencies
and capable of high mobility and rapid response, and
also has readiness for wide-ranging missions—with the
above-mentioned geographical characteristics, further
ensures the effectiveness of the Japan-U.S. Alliance,
strengthens deterrence, and contributes greatly not only
to the security of Japan but also to the peace and stability
of the Asia-Pacifi c region.
On the other hand, Okinawa has many USFJ
facilities and areas such as airbases, exercise fi elds,
logistics facilities. As of January 2016, approximately
74% of USFJ facilities and areas (for exclusive use)
are concentrated in Okinawa Prefecture, occupying
approximately 10% of the land area of the prefecture
and 18% of the main island of Okinawa. Therefore, it is
necessary to make utmost efforts to mitigate the impact
on Okinawa, while also considering the above-mentioned
security standpoints.



- 1  Initiatives for Realignment, Consolidation, and
**Reduction of USFJ Facilities and Areas in Okinawa**

When Okinawa was returned to Japan in 1972, the
Government of Japan provided 83 facilities and areas
covering approximately 278 km[2] for exclusive use by
the U.S. Forces under the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty.
However, their concentration in Okinawa has led to
strong calls for their realignment, consolidation and
reduction on the grounds that they seriously affect the
lives of people in Okinawa Prefecture.
Both countries have continued their initiatives to
realign, consolidate, and reduce USFJ facilities and areas,
centering on those subject to the strong local requests,
and, in relation to the so-called 23 issues, it was agreed
in 1990 that both sides would proceed with the required
adjustments and procedures for the return of land.
Moreover, it was agreed in 1995 that initiatives would
also be made to resolve the so-called Three Okinawa
Issues, including the return of Naha Port (Naha City).[5]

Subsequently, in response to an unfortunate incident
that occurred in 1995, as well as the refusal of the
then Governor of Okinawa to sign land lease renewal
documents under the Act on Special Measures for
USFJ Land Release, the Government of Japan decided
to devote even greater initiatives towards realignment,
consolidation, and reduction, believing that the impact
should be shared by the whole nation. In order to hold
consultations on issues related to USFJ facilities and
areas in Okinawa, the Government of Japan established
the Okinawa Action Council between the central
government and Okinawa Prefecture, and the Special
Action Committee on Okinawa (SACO) between Japan


-----

Fig. II-4-4-3 Progress of the Realignment of Force Structure of USFJ and the SDF Described in “Japan-U.S. Roadmap for Realignment Implementation”

**1. Realignment in the Kanto Area1. Realignment in the Kanto Area**

[Yokota related] [Relocation of the JASDF Air Defense Command]

Relocation of the Air Defense Command and

Establishment of the bilateral joint operations coordination relevant units (Completed on March 26, 2012)
center (BJOCC) at Yokota Air Base
Partial return of airspace, (returned on September 25, 2008)
and placing the JASDF air traffic controllers besides the Tokyo
Yokota RAPCON facility (started on May 18, 2007), etc. Yokota

Fuchu

Deliberation on civilian-military dual-use of Yokota Air Base [Camp Zama]
(specific conditions and modalities are considered between Sagamihara Reorganization of the headquarters, U.S. Army,
Japan and the U.S.) Japan (Reorganized at the end of September 2008)

Relocation of the headquarters of the JGSDF Central

Zama Readiness Force (Completed on March 26, 2013)

[U.S. Forces Sagami General Depot]

Joint/shared use of heliport （Joint use started on

Establishment of facilities due to the realignment of U.S. Kanagawa March 26, 2013)
Army Japan Headquarters

Release of portions (5.4 ha) of housing area and others

(Facilities including the Training Center)

(Land return completed on February 29, 2016)

(Operations of the Training Center started in August 2011.
Development of the Training Assistance Center completed.)
Return of part of the land in front of JR Sagamihara Station
(approx. 15 ha)
Joint use of West Open-air Storage Area (approx. 35 ha) Legend:
(Joint use started on December 2, 2015) Implemented Continuing

**2. Realignment in Okinawa**

MCAS Futenma (total return, about 481 ha)

[Joint/Shared Use]

[Relocation within Okinawa Prefecture]
Transport capabilities using helicopters

Camp Hansen is used for JGSDF training

Replacement facilities constructed in Camp Schwab

-  Implemented on March 17, 2008

Henokosaki and adjacent water areas

JASDF uses Kadena Air Base for bilateral [Relocation of operations outside Okinawa Prefecture]
training with U.S. Forces, while taking into
account the noise impact on local communities Operations of air-refueling aircraft → MCAS Iwakuni

-  Relocation to MCAS Iwakuni completed on August 26, 2014

Contingency use → Tsuiki/Nyutabaru Air Base, etc.

[Land Returns]
Formulated a detailed plan (Consolidation Plan)
for returning of significant land area south of Camp Schwab
Kadena Air Base by consolidating the remaining
facilities and areas in Okinawa Replacement SDF bases in mainland, etc.

-  Announced the Consolidation Plan on April 5, 2013 Camp Hansen Facility

Army POL Depot Kuwae Tank Camp Courtney
Farm No. 1
(total return, about 16 ha) Kadena Air Base [Relocation of U.S. Marine Corps]

Replacement III Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF),
Facility about 8,000 personnel and about 9,000 of

Makiminato Service Area their dependents will relocate to Guam
(Camp Kinser) (total return, To Guam, etc. -  “2+2” Joint Statement of April 27, 2012 states
about 274 ha) that about 9,000 personnel and their dependents

Naha would be relocated outside of Japan and the

-  Return of north access road Camp Kuwae (Lester) authorized strength of U.S. Marine Corps in Guam
(about 1 ha) on August 31, 2013 (total return, about 68 ha) will be about 5,000.

Naha Port
(total return, about 56 ha)

Legend:

A replacement facility will be constructed in the Urasoe- Camp Zukeran (Camp Foster) (partial return, about 153 ha+  ) Implemented Continuing Six candidate facilities for land return located south of Kadena Air Base
Pier district under the Naha -  Return of West Futenma Housing Area (Areas indicated are based on the consolidation plan. See Fig.II-4-4-8 for the current status on the
Port and Harbor Plan (approx. 51 ha) on March 31, 2015 returning of land south of Kadena Air Base)


-----

**3. Relocation of Aircraft, etc.** TPY-2 Rader: deployment of so-called

“X-band Radar System”)
(Deployment completed in June 2006)

**The relocation of flight training activities**
**from Kadena, Misawa and Iwakuni to ASDF** Chitose
**bases, Chitose, Misawa, Hyakuri, Komatsu,**
**Tsuiki and Nyutabaru, as well as to Guam.**
*The relocation to Guam, etc. was agreed Misawa
upon at the Japan-U.S. Joint Committee in SharikiShariki
January 2011.

Legend:

Deployment of a TPY-2 radar

Implemented

Relocation of carrier-based aircraft (Deployment completed in December 2014)
squadrons to Iwakuni

Continuing

KomatsuKomatsu
HyakuriHyakuri

AtsugiAtsugi

KyogamisakiKyogamisaki

Iwakuni

Tsuiki

Nyutabaru Relocation of MSDF E/O/UP-3 squadrons

and other units from Iwakuni to Atsugi
(“2+2” Joint Statement in 2013
confirmed the continued deployment of
these units in Iwakuni Air Base)

KanoyaKanoya

Kadena

Relocation of the KC-130 squadron
to Iwakuni Futenma
(Recolation completed in August 2014) The KC-130 squadron will deploy on a rotational

basis to MSDF Kanoya Base and Guam

Relocation of the functions of aircraft for
contingency use to Tsuiki and Nyutabaru

Mariana
Islands

Part of future civilian aviation facilities were
established within MCAS Iwakuni Relocation of the CH-53D squadron to Guam
(Civil Airport opened 2012) (Japan and the United States confirmed that

the CH-530 squadron will be relocated to
the U.S. mainland and then to Guam.) Saipan

Guam

*JC: Joint Committee: Japan-U.S. Joint Committee


-----

Fig. II-4-4-4 The Geopolitical Positioning of Okinawa and the Significance of the U.S. Marine Corps Stationed in Okinawa

**Okinawa holds a position of great**
**strategic importance**

**1. Geographical Advantage of Okinawa**

The main island of Okinawa is located roughly in the center of
the Southwestern Islands and also close to key sea lanes for

Beijing Seoul Japan, and thus its location is extremely important from the

perspective of Japan’s security.

Access from continental Okinawa is located close (but not overly so) to potential conflict
→Expected that passage would beAsia to the Pacific Tokyo areas that could affect Japan’s peace and security, including the ⇒ Okinawa is located at a distance that makes it possible to
through waters surrounding Okinawa

Izu Islands expeditiously send units to potential conflict areas and at the

same time has sufficient distance so as not to heighten military

Shanghai tension unnecessarily and is not overly close in terms of

protecting units.

2,000km 1,000km Okinawa Adjacent to sea lanes In the eyes of neighboring countries, Okinawa’s location is strategically important in both enabling access to the Pacific from

the continent and rejecting access from the Pacific to the continent.

Ogasawara

Center of Islands

Hong Kong Taipei the Southwest Islands **2. The Significance & Roles of the U.S. Marine Corps**

**in Okinawa**

It is essential to maintain defense capabilities for the area of the

Japan’s sea lanes Southwestern Islands in the main island of Okinawa, which is

Okinotorishima

Japan is dependent upon marine important as a strategic location for Japan, for the security of
transportation for at least 99% of Japan. The stationing of the U.S. Marine Corps, which is capable
the total volume of its trade. of rapid response and high mobility and also has readiness for a

wide variety of missions, ranging from armed conflicts to natural

Saipan

Manila disasters, in Okinawa, which features such geographical
Guam advantages, plays an important role in ensuring not only the

security of Japan but also the peace and safety of East Asia.

-  The Marine Corps constantly utilizes all combat elements (land, sea and air) during its drills and deployments,
so it is suited to providing a rapid response in the event of all kinds of situations.


and the United States, and the so-called SACO Final
Report was compiled in 1996.
Following these developments, most recently,
approximately 55 ha out of approximately 162 ha of
Camp Hansen (Nago City, Onna Village, Ginoza Village
and Kin Town) (part of a slope at the East China Sea side)
were returned in June 2014.

See>> Reference 35 (Outline of 23 Issues)

- 2  SACO Final Report and Progress



- 3  History and Progress of the U.S. Forces
**Realignment in Okinawa**

As for initiatives relating to the realignment of the U.S.
Forces based on the Roadmap, measures have been taken
to mitigate the impact on the local communities in Okinawa
Prefecture while maintaining deterrence capabilities.


**(1) Relocation and Return of MCAS Futenma**
The Government of Japan believes that it is imperative
not to allow MCAS Futenma to remain indefinitely at
its current location, which is in the vicinity of houses
and schools in the center of Ginowan City, Okinawa
Prefecture. This is a fundamental idea shared between the
Government of Japan and the people of Okinawa.
As for the relocation of MCAS Futenma, the
Government of Japan has not changed its stance that
the current plan to construct the FRF at the Camp
Schwab Henokosaki area (Nago City) and adjacent
waters is the only solution to avoid the continued use
of MCAS Futenma.
The Government of Japan plans to make further
efforts to achieve the replacement and return of MCAS
Futenma as early as possible and to mitigate the impact
on Okinawa in a speedy manner. The return of MCAS
Futenma is expected to eliminate danger in the area
and to contribute to the further growth of Okinawa


The SACO Final Report stipulates the return of land, the
adjustment of training and operational procedures, the
implementation of noise abatement initiatives, and the
improvement of operational procedures regarding the
Status of Forces Agreement, and also refers to the related
facilities and areas covered. The land to be returned based
on the SACO Final Report represents approximately 21%
(about 50 km[2]) of USFJ facilities and areas in Okinawa
at that time, exceeding the amount of land returned
during the period between the reversion of Okinawa and
the implementation of the SACO Final Report, which is
roughly 43 km[2].

See>> Reference 36 (The SACO Final Report); Reference 37 (State of
Progress of the SACO Final Report); Fig. II-4-4-5 (Facilities and Areas
Related to the SACO Final Report); Fig. II-4-4-6 (Changes in Number
and Area of the USFJ Facilities and Areas (Exclusive Use) in Okinawa)


-----

the SACO Final Report in 1996, enabling a vast majority
of fixed-wing aircraft located in MCAS Futenma to be
moved outside Okinawa Prefecture. This move also led
to the relocation of approximately 870 USFJ personnel,
civilian employees, and dependents. The function of
providing a base for accepting a large number of external
aircraft in cases of emergency will also be transferred to
mainland Japan.
(b) Land-fill Area
The area required for the land reclamation to build
the FRF is less than one-third of MCAS Futenma and
the new facility will be equipped with significantly
shorter runways.
(c) Flight Routes
Two runways will be constructed in a V-shape, which
enables the flight path for both takeoff and landing to
be located over the sea, in line with the requests of the
local community. In MCAS Futenma, flight paths used
daily for training and other purposes are located over
residential areas, whereas flight paths in the FRF will be
changed to over the sea, thereby reducing noise and risks.
For example, there will be zero households requiring
such insulation around the FRF, while more than 10,000
households are located in areas requiring housing noise
insulation near MCAS Futenma. This means that the
noise levels experienced by all households will comply
with the environment criteria applied to exclusive
housing areas. In the case that an aircraft encounters
any contingency, safety on the ground can be ensured by
diverting the aircraft offshore.
b. The Necessity of Relocating the Futenma Replacement
Facility within Okinawa Prefecture
The U.S. Marine Corps in Okinawa consists of
air, ground, logistics, and command elements. The
interaction of those elements in highly mobile and
responsive operations of the U.S. Marine Corps is
indispensable, so it has been determined that the FRF
needs to be located within Okinawa Prefecture so that
rotary-wing aircraft stationed at MCAS Futenma will be
located near the elements with which they train, operate,
or otherwise work on a regular basis.
c. Background Concerning the Futenma Replacement Facility
Considering the occurrence of the U.S. Forces helicopter
crash in Ginowan City in August 2004, bilateral
discussions on the realignment have been made toward
realizing the relocation and return of MCAS Futenma at
the earliest possible date in order to resolve the unease of
the residents living in the vicinity.
In the SCC document compiled in October 2005,
the initiative to “locate the FRF in an ‘L’-shaped
configuration that combines the shoreline areas of Camp
Schwab and adjacent water areas of Oura Bay” was

|353|Area (km2)|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||Facilities/Areas||
|278 249 242|||
|226|||
|144|||
|83|||
|46 43|||
|31|||

|Fig. II-4-4-6|Changes in Number and Area of the USFJ Facilities and Areas (Exclusive Use) in Okinawa|
|---|---|
|400 353 350 Area (km2) Facilities/Areas 300 278 249 242 250 226 200 144 150 100 83 46 43 50 31 0 Right before May 1972 End of End of As of the returning (On return) FY1980 FY1990 January 2016 of Okinawa||


Facilities and Areas Related to the SACO
Fig. II-4-4-5
Final Report

Ie Jima Auxiliary Airfield

Northern Training Area

Camp Hansen

Aha Training Area

Senaha Communication
Station

Sobe Communication
Site Offshore Camp Schwab

Yomitan Auxiliary
Airfield Gimbaru Training Area

Torii Communication Kin Blue Beach Training Area
Station

Camp Zukeran

Kadena Air Base

Camp Kuwae MCAS Futenma

Makiminato
Service Area : Facilities and areas involved in land return

: Facilities and areas involved in land return

Naha Port Facility (Cancellation of joint use)

: Destination sites of other facilities relocation
programs


including Ginowan City, through the reuse of the area
(approximately 481 ha with a land area 100 times larger
than Tokyo Dome).
a. Relocation of MCAS Futenma and Mitigation of the
Impact on Okinawa
The relocation of MCAS Futenma holds more significance
than merely moving the facility from one location to
another. Rather, it also contributes greatly to mitigating
the impact on Okinawa. As such, the Government will
work as one to implement this initiative.
(a) Distribution of Functions Offered by MCAS Futenma
MCAS Futenma fulfills the following functions relating
to the aviation capabilities of the U.S. Marine Corps
stationed in Okinawa: (1) Operation of the Osprey and
other aircraft (2) Operation of air refueling aircraft
(3) Accepting a large number of transient aircraft in cases
of emergency. Of these three functions, only “operation
of the Osprey and other aircraft” will be relocated to
Camp Schwab. All 15 KC-130 air refueling aircraft were
relocated to MCAS Iwakuni (in Iwakuni City, Yamaguchi
Prefecture) in August 2014. This marked the completion
of a task that has remained unresolved for 18 years since


-----

the settlement recommendation, and in March 2016, the
Government of Japan and Okinawa Prefecture reached
a settlement agreement.
At the “2+2” Meetings in October 2013 and April
2015, which followed the “2+2” Meeting of April
2012, the Governments of Japan and the United States
also confirmed that the plan to construct the FRF at
Camp Schwab Henokosaki area and adjacent waters
is the only solution that avoids the continued use of
MCAS Futenma.

See>> Reference 38 (Background of the Futenma Replacement Facility);
Reference 39 (Estimated Timelines for the Return of Facilities and
Areas South of Kadena)

d. Completion of Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures
After the MOD sent the environmental impact assessment
scoping document in 2007 to the Governor of Okinawa
Prefecture and other parties, the MOD worked on revising
the document based on the opinions provided by the
governor. Finally, the MOD completed the environmental
impact assessment procedures by sending the revised
assessment document to related parties including the
governor in December 2012, while making the assessment
document publicly viewable. Throughout these procedures,
the MOD received a total of 1,561 opinions from the
Governor of Okinawa Prefecture on six occasions, made
all the required revisions, and reflected them in the content
of the environmental assessment. In this way, the MOD had
taken steps to comply with relevant laws, asked opinions
and ideas from Okinawa Prefecture over a sufficient period
of time, and reflected them in the assessment.
e. Promotion of the Futenma Replacement Facility
Construction Project
The Director-General of the Okinawa Defense Bureau
submitted the land-fill request on public waters to
Okinawa Prefecture in March 2013, and then Governor
of Okinawa Nakaima approved this in December 2013.
In the meantime, then Governor Nakaima sent a total of
260 questions to the Okinawa Defense Bureau on four
occasions and the Okinawa Defense Bureau responded
appropriately to these questions and spent sufficient time
working on the procedures. The offshore boring survey
started in August 2014 and construction work on the
facility commenced in October 2015.
However, current Governor of Okinawa Onaga
revoked the land-fill permit by former Governor of
Okinawa Nakaima in October 2015, leading to the filing
of three suits over the revocation of the land-fill permit[6]
between the Government of Japan and Okinawa Prefecture.


Aerial of the construction site of Futenma Replacement Facility

approved. Then, based on negotiation and agreement
with the local municipalities including Nago City, it
was decided to stipulate in the Roadmap that the FRF
be located in a configuration that “combines Henokosaki
and adjacent water areas of Oura and Henoko Bays.” In
regard to construction of this replacement facility, “a
Memorandum of Basic Understanding” was exchanged
between the Governor of Okinawa Prefecture and the
then Minister of State for Defense in May 2006.
After the change of government in September 2009,
the Exploratory Committee for Okinawa Base Issues was
established. After reviews conducted by the Committee,
both Governments, at the “2+2” Meeting held in May
2010, confirmed the intention to locate the FRF in the
Camp Schwab Henokosaki area and the adjacent waters,
and also agreed to take concrete measures to mitigate the
impact on Okinawa.
Subsequently, at the “2+2” Meeting held in June
2011, it was decided that the runway would take a “V”
shape, and the Ministers confirmed their commitment to
complete the relocation project at the earliest possible date
after 2014 in order to avoid the indefinite use of MCAS
Futenma and to remove the risks as early as possible.
Under these circumstances, the court mediated a
settlement recommendation. The court suggested that
if the legal battles between the national Government
and Okinawa Prefecture persist endlessly, there
would only be a stalemate and this could result in the
indefinite use of MCAS Futenma, which is situated
in a densely populated area surrounded by houses
and schools at a city center, and the prolonging of the
current situation in Okinawa. Therefore, in line with
the opinion of the court that no one wishes to see that
happen, the Government of Japan has decided to accept


(1) The suit, filed by the Government of Japan as plaintiff based on Article 245-8 of the Local Autonomy Act, seeking a court ruling instructing a retraction of the revocation of the land-fill permit by current
Governor Onaga (the so-called administrative suit); (2) the suit, filed by Okinawa Prefecture based on Article 251-5 of the Local Autonomy Act, seeking to invalidate the decision to suspend the validity of the
revocation of the land-fill permit (the decision to suspend execution) by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism as the illegal “involvement of the state”; and (3) the suit, filed by Okinawa


-----

Under these circumstances, the court came up with
a settlement recommendation. The Government of Japan
considered that if the legal battles between the national
Government and Okinawa Prefecture unfold endlessly,
there would only be a stalemate and this could result in
the indefinite use of MCAS Futenma, which is situated
in a densely populated area surrounded by houses
and schools at a city center, and the prolonging of the
current situation in Okinawa. Therefore, in line with
the opinion of the court that no one wishes to see that
happen, the Government of Japan has decided to accept
the settlement recommendation, and in March 2016, the
Government of Japan and Okinawa Prefecture reached
a settlement agreement.
The key points of the settlement agreement are
that (1) the three suits pending will be integrated into
a single suit over the validity of the revocation of the
land-fill approval by current Governor Onaga; (2) the
Government of Japan will immediately suspend
reclamation work; (3) the Government of Japan and
Okinawa Prefecture will hold consultations to reach an
amicable settlement of the disputes over the return of
MCAS Futenma and the reclamation project until the
court hands down a judicial ruling; and (4) After the
court ruling is handed down, both the Government of
Japan and Okinawa Prefecture mutually make the firm
commitment that they shall abide by the ruling and take
steps in line with the spirit of the text of the ruling main
sentence and the reasons conducive to the text and work
together sincerely to respond to the ruling.
Following the settlement agreement, the DirectorGeneral of the Okinawa Defense Bureau immediately
suspended the landfill work. Pursuant to the settlement
agreement, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport
and Tourism issued a correction instruction to current
Governor Onaga to repeal the revocation of the land-fill
approval. In response, pursuant to procedures set forth
in the settlement agreement, Okinawa Prefecture applied
for a review by the Central and Local Government
Dispute Management Council, challenging the correction
instruction issued by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure,
Transport and Tourism.
The Government of Japan intends to deal with the
contents of the settlement in good faith and extend full
cooperation so that the Central and Local Government
Dispute Management Council and the court can review
and make a judicial ruling on the case promptly. At the
same time, the Government of Japan will proceed with
consultations with Okinawa Prefecture and make steady
efforts to gain the understanding on the part of Okinawa
Prefecture by carefully explaining the Government of
Japan’s stance on the removal of the dangers posed by


MCAS Futenma and its relocation to Henoko, as well as
on the Government of Japan’s initiatives to mitigate the
impact on Okinawa in a tangible manner.

**(2) Force Reductions and Relocation to Guam**
Since the Roadmap was announced in May 2006,
the Governments of Japan and the United States held
a series of consultations on the reduction of the U.S.
Forces in Okinawa.
a. Timing and Size of Relocation
The 2006 Roadmap stated that approximately 8,000
personnel of the III Marine Expeditionary Force (III
MEF) and approximately 9,000 dependents will be
relocated from Okinawa to Guam by 2014, but the “2+2”
Meeting in June 2011 and other agreements set the timing
of the relocation for the earliest possible date after 2014.
Subsequently, at the “2+2” Meeting held in April
2012, the Governments of Japan and the United States
decided to delink both the relocation of III MEF
personnel from Okinawa to Guam and the resulting land
return south of Kadena Air Base from the progress on the
Futenma Replacement Facility (FRF) and the United States
reviewed the composition of the units and the number of
personnel to be relocated to Guam. As a result, Marine
Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF) is to be stationed and
deployed in Guam, approximately 9,000 personnel are to
be relocated to locations outside of Japan, the authorized
strength of the U.S. Marine Corps forces in Guam is to
be approximately 5,000 personnel, and the end-state for
the presence of the U.S. Marine Corps in Okinawa is
to be consistent with the level of approximately 10,000
personnel envisioned in the Roadmap.
Accordingly, the “2+2” Meeting held in October
2013 agreed that, under the relocation plan described at
the 2012 “2+2” Meeting, the relocation of U.S. Marine
Corps units from Okinawa to Guam is to begin in the
first half of the 2020s. The plan is expected to promote
the implementation of the consolidation plan for facilities
and areas in Okinawa of April 2013.

See>> Fig. II-4-4-7 (Relocation of the U.S. Marine Corps in Okinawa to
Guam and Other Locations)

b. Costs of the Relocation
Under the Roadmap, the two sides reached an agreement
that, of the estimated $10.27 billion (in U.S. fiscal year
2008 dollars) cost of the facilities and infrastructure
development costs, Japan would provide $6.09 billion,
including $2.8 billion in direct cash contribution, while
the United States would fund the remaining $4.18 billion.
In February 2009, the Japanese Government and the
U.S. Government signed “the Agreement Between the
Government of Japan and the Government of the United
States of America Concerning the Implementation of


-----

Fig. II-4-4-7 Relocation of the U.S. Marine Corps in Okinawa to Guam and Other Locations

Approximately 5,000

Hawaii, etc.

Okinawa

Approximately 9,000 Marine Corps personnel
and their dependents Approximately 4,000

-  Approximately 10,000 Marine Corps Hawaii,
personnel to remain in Okinawa U.S. mainland, etc. Approximately 1,000

Guam

*The relocation is to begin in the first half of the 2020s
(The Joint Statement of the “2+2” Meeting in October 2013)


the Relocation of the III MEF Personnel and Their
Dependents from Okinawa to Guam” (the Guam
International Agreement). The Agreement legally
guarantees and ensures actions taken by Japan and the
United States, such as Japan’s long-term funding for
projects to which Japan provides direct cash contributions
(so-called Mamizu projects). As part of measures based
on this Agreement, the Japanese government has been
providing cash contributions to the U.S. Government in
relation to the Mamizu projects since FY2009.[7]

Subsequently, at the “2+2” Meeting held in April
2012, the unit composition and the number of personnel
to be relocated to Guam were revised and it was
agreed that the preliminary cost estimate by the U.S.
Government for the relocation was $8.6 billion (in U.S.
fiscal year 2012 dollars). With regard to Japan’s financial
commitment, it was reaffirmed that it was to be the direct
cash contribution of up to $2.8 billion (in U.S. fiscal
year 2008 dollars) as stipulated in Article 1 of the Guam
International Agreement. It was also confirmed that
Japan’s equity investment and loans for family housing
projects and infrastructure projects would not be utilized.
Moreover, it was stipulated that any funds that had already
been provided to the U.S. Government under the Guam
International Agreement would be counted as part of the
Japanese contribution. Furthermore, as a new initiative,
a portion of the direct cash contribution of $ 2.8 billion
mentioned above would be used to develop training areas
in Guam and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands as shared use facilities for Japan and the United
States. In addition, it was agreed that the remaining costs
and any additional costs would be borne by the United


States, and that the two governments were to complete a
bilateral cost breakdown.
At the “2+2” Meeting in October 2013, a Protocol
Amending the Guam International Agreement was signed
to add the stipulations concerning the development of
training areas in Guam and the Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands, and the use of these training
areas by the SDF. The limit on Japanese cash contributions
remains unchanged at $2.8 billion (in U.S. fiscal year
2008 dollars). Both countries also completed the process
of creating a detailed breakdown of required costs.
Furthermore, the National Defense Authorization
Act for U.S. Fiscal Year 2015 was enacted in December
2014, which lifted the freeze on the use of funds for the
relocation to Guam imposed by the U.S. Congress in U.S.
Fiscal Year 2012.
c. Completion of Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures
The Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement
(SEIS), conducted based on the revision of the project
due to the realignment plan adjustment, was completed in
August 2015, opening the way for full-scale construction
for the relocation in Guam going forward. As for the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands Joint
Military Training Environmental Impact Statement
(CJMT-EIS), it is planned to be completed in 2018.

See>> Reference 40 (Agreement between the Government of Japan and
the Government of the United States of America Concerning the
Implementation of the Relocation of III Marine Expeditionary Force
Personnel and Their Dependents from Okinawa to Guam); Reference
41 (Protocol amending the Agreement Between the Government
of Japan and the Government of the United States of America
Concerning the Implementation of the Relocation of III Marine
Expeditionary Force Personnel and Their Dependents from Okinawa
to Guam)


-----

**(3) Return of Land Areas South of Kadena Air Base**
The Roadmap stated that following the relocation to the
FRF, the return of MCAS Futenma, and the transfer of
III MEF personnel to Guam, the remaining facilities and
areas on Okinawa will be consolidated, thereby enabling
the return of signifi cant land areas south of Kadena
Air Base. At the “2+2” Meeting in April 2012, it was
decided to delink the progress on the FRF from both
the relocation of the III MEF personnel from Okinawa
to Guam, and resulting land returns south of Kadena.
In addition, with regard to the land to be returned, it
was agreed to conduct consultations focusing on three
categories, namely (1) land eligible for immediate
return; (2) land eligible for return once the relocation of
functions is completed; and (3) land eligible for return
after the relocation abroad. The return of all these types
of land will enable the return of approximately 70% of
USFJ facilities and areas located in densely populated
areas in the central and southern parts of the main island
of Okinawa.


Since the change of administration at the end of 2012,
Japan and the United States have continued consultation
under the basic policy of the Abe administration to
dedicate all its strength to mitigate the impact of the
U.S. Forces on Okinawa communities. Japan strongly
requested an early return of lands south of Kadena,
including Makiminato Service Area (Camp Kinser) in
Urasoe City. As a result of bilateral coordination, both
countries announced the consolidation plan in April
2013, which stipulated the return schedule, including the
specifi c years of return.
In the consolidation plan, both sides confi rmed that
they will implement the plan as early as possible. The
Government of Japan will continue to work with all its
strength so that lands south of Kadena would be returned
at the earliest possible date. Furthermore, following the
announcement of the consolidation plan, the consultations
have been held since April 2013, involving Ginowan
City, Ginowan City Military Land Owners Association,
Okinawa Prefecture, Okinawa Defense Bureau, and


**Commentary**

**Progress in Land Return (Okinawa)** **Column**

The number of tourists visiting Okinawa has continued to increase over the years, and reached approximately 7.76 million in 2015, a year-
on-year rise of 10%. Did you know that the popular tourist sites, such as shintoshin of Naha City, Zampa Cape Park in Yomitan Village, and a
large-scale shopping mall in Kitanakagusuku Village, all used to be U.S. facilities and areas?
Since the reversion of Okinawa to Japan in 1972, the Governments of Japan and the United States have been making ceaseless efforts
toward the realignment, consolidation and reduction of the U.S. facilities and areas, while maintaining Japan’s deterrence capabilities.
In April 2013, the Governments of Japan and the United States formulated a plan that specifi es the timing of the return of approximately
1,000 ha of U.S. facilities and areas south of Kadena Air Base. In accordance with this plan, approximately 51 ha of land of West Futenma
Housing Area in Ginowan City was returned in March 2015, and the local communities are currently discussing the use of the site for the
development of an international medical hub. In December 2015, the Governments of Japan and the United States confi rmed and announced
the early return of the land by partially front-loading this plan, as well as the signifi cance and urgency of the return of a major portion of Northern
Training Area.
With the progress in the return of land, including land returns described above, U.S. facilities and areas are expected to be roughly halved
from those immediately prior to the reversion of Okinawa Prefecture to Japan. The Governments of Japan and the United States will proceed
further with the return of land in Okinawa in order to contribute to the development of Okinawa as a whole through the utilization of the returned
U.S. facilities and areas.

Former Makiminato Residential Area (Naha City) Former Awase Meadows Golf Course (Kitanakagusuku Village)

[Photo courtesy of Kitanakagusuku Village Offi ce]


-----

Fig. II-4-4-8 Return of Land Areas South of Kadena Air Base

The 1st Kuwae Tank Farm of the Army Oil Storage Facility Camp Kuwae

FY2022 FY2025
16 ha 68 ha
or later or later

Camp Zukeran
(Lower Plaza Housing area)

Camp Zukeran (a portion of the warehouse area
of the Facilities and Engineering Compound) FY2024 23 ha

or later

FY2019 or later 10 ha

Camp Zukeran

-  JC reached Agreement of Return
on September 19, 2013 (a part of Kishaba Housing area)

FY2024

Camp Zukeran (industrial corridor, etc.) 5 ha

or later

FY2024 or later 62 ha

Camp Zukeran
(additional areas)

Makiminato Service Area
(the remainder) α ha[note3]

FY2024 or later 142 ha

Camp Zukeran (West

Futenma Air Base Futenma Housing area)

Makiminato Service Area Makiminato Service Area
(areas near Gate 5) (north access road) FY2022 or later 481 ha Returned on March 31, 2015

Returned on August 31, 2013 1 ha

FY2014 or later
2 ha

-  JC reached Makiminato Service Area
Agreement of Return (Area to include majority of storage areas)
on July 11, 2013

FY2025
or later 129 ha Legend

: Returned or prompt return (65 ha)

Naha Port facilities : Return after the relocation of functions within the prefecture (841 ha)

FY2028 56 ha : Return after the relocation of the Marine Corps outside Japan (142 ha +more)
or later Total: 1,048 ha + more

Notes: 1. The times and years are based on the best case scenario concerning the return of specific facilities/areas after the completion of necessary measures and procedures to be

taken by the Governments of Japan and the United States. The periods may become delayed due to such factors as the progress of the preparation for relocation in Okinawa
by the Government of Japan and the U.S. Government’s efforts for relocation of the U.S. Marine Corps to outside Japan. Furthermore, the times and fiscal years in parentheses
do not include the time necessary for relocation of the Marine Corps from Japan because, though the conditions for returning the areas include its relocation to outside of
Japan, the plan for the relocation is yet to be decided. Consequently, the times of return of these areas may be changed depending on the progress of the relocation of the
Marine Corps from Japan.

2. The area of each area is an approximate figure and may be slightly modified based on the results of future surveys, etc.
3. Studies will be made in the process of developing a master plan to determine the feasibility of additional land returns.
*JC: Japan-U.S. Joint Committee


Okinawa General Bureau[8] in a bid to contribute to the
promotion of the effective and appropriate use of West
Futenma Housing Area within Camp Zukeran, and the
MOD has also been providing necessary cooperation.
Efforts have been made to enable the early return of land
areas, including the land areas that are to be returned
as soon as required procedures are completed (shown
in red in Fig. II-4-4-8), since the announcement of the
consolidation plan in April 2013. These efforts resulted
in the realization of the return of the north entrance of
Makiminato Service Area (approximately 1 ha) in August
2013 and West Futenma Housing Area within Camp
Zukeran (approximately 51 ha) at the end of March 2015.
In December 2015, the Governments of Japan and
the United States also agreed on an early return of part
of the land of MCAS Futenma for use as land for a
municipal road, as well as on an early return of part of
the land of Makiminato Service Area for the purpose of
widening a national road.
All-out initiatives are being continuously made to
steadily implement the return of land areas south of Kadena


Air Base under the consolidation plan and mitigate the
impact on Okinawa as early as possible, and also to realize
the respective returns of land in the shortest possible time
for more visible mitigation of the impact on Okinawa.

See>> Reference 39 (Estimated Timelines for the Return of Facilities and
Areas South of Kadena); Fig. II-4-4-8 (Return of Land Areas South of
Kadena Air Base)

- 4  Osprey Deployment by the U.S. Forces in Japan


**(1) MV-22 Osprey Deployment in Okinawa**
The Osprey is an aircraft that combines the vertical
takeoff/landing and hovering functions of rotary-wing
aircraft on one hand and the speed and range of fixedwing aircraft on the other. As the primary air unit of the
U.S. Marine Corps, the MV-22 Osprey that has been
developed for the U.S. Marine Corps plays an important
role in engaging in a broad range of activities, including
transportation of personnel and goods.
The U.S. Marine Corps is in the process of replacing
aged rotary-wing airplanes (CH-46) with MV-22s, which
have superior basic performance. In September 2013,


-----

all the 24 CH-46s deployed at MCAS Futenma were
replaced by MV-22s.
The MV-22 is a highly capable aircraft compared
with the CH-46; it can fly faster, can carry more payload,
and has a longer range. Its deployment to Okinawa will
strengthen the deterrence of the U.S. Forces in Japan as
a whole and greatly contribute to the peace and stability
of the region.

**(2) CV-22 Osprey Deployment to Yokota Air Base**
In May 2015, the Government of the United States
announced that CV-22 Osprey aircraft, tailored to meet
the requirements of the U.S. Air Force, will be deployed
to Yokota Air Base (which encompasses Fussa City,
Tachikawa City, Akishima City, Musashi Murayama City,
Hamura City and Mizuho Town of Tokyo Prefecture),
with the first three aircraft to be deployed in the latter
half of 2017 for completion of the deployment of a total
of 10 aircraft by 2021.
The CV-22 aircraft deployed to Yokota Air Base
handles tasks for transporting personnel and supplies
for Special Operation Forces of the U.S. Forces to deal
with crises and emergencies in the Asia-Pacific region,
including humanitarian assistance and natural disasters.
As Japan faces increasingly tougher security
environments, the deployment of high-performance CV22 as part of the rebalancing strategy and enhancement
of readiness posture of the United States will enhance
the deterrence and response capabilities of the JapanU.S. Alliance and contribute to the stability of the AsiaPacific region.
The Government of Japan will continue to respond
to local communities in a careful and sincere manner in
order to obtain their understanding and cooperation.


CV-22 of the U.S. Forces in flight

22 operations in Japan. Following this agreement, the
flight operations of the MV-22 aircraft commenced in
Japan and safe operations have thus far been secured.
In addition, the Government of Japan has confirmed,
from information obtained from the United States, that
the CV-22 and the MV-22 offer the same propulsion
system and have a basically similar structure and that the
United States will ensure complete safety in operating the
CV-22 in Japan as in the case of the MV-22.
Furthermore, in order to ensure that full consideration
is given to local residents and that the Joint Committee
agreement is properly implemented for flight operations
of the MV-22 and the CV-22, the Government of Japan
has been continuously engaging with the U.S. side
through various opportunities, including the Japan-U.S.
Defense Ministerial Meetings.

See>> Reference 42 (Chronology of Osprey Deployment by the U.S. Forces)


**(4) Usability of Osprey Deployed by the U.S. Forces in**
**Case of Disaster**

In the aftermath of the devastating typhoon that hit the
central part of the Philippines in November 2013, 14
MV-22 aircraft, deployed in Okinawa, were dispatched
for humanitarian assistance and disaster relief activities
to support “Operation Damayan.” The MV-22s were
deployed promptly to affected areas that were difficult
to access, and they transported several hundred isolated
victims and about six tons of relief materials in a day.
In April 2014, the MV-22, deployed in Okinawa, was
dispatched for search and rescue activities in the wake of
an accidental sinking of a passenger ship off the coast of
Jindo in the Republic of Korea.
Furthermore, in response to the large earthquake that
hit Nepal in April 2015, four MV-22 aircraft, deployed
in Okinawa, were dispatched to the country to transport
personnel and supplies.
Meanwhile, the MV-22 was used in Japan to conduct
training for transporting victims to an MSDF escort vessel
and other locations on such occasions as “Wakayama


**(3) Safety of the Osprey**
Following the crash of an MV-22 in Morocco in April
2012 that occurred prior to the deployment of the MV22s to MCAS Futenma in September 2012, and the crash
of a CV-22 in Florida in June 2012, a Japanese analysis
and assessment team examined these accidents based on
Japan’s own viewpoints and knowledge and also looked
at the results of the investigations by the Government
of the United States, and confirmed that these accidents
were caused largely by human factors and that there were
no safety problems with the aircraft itself.
In relation to the flight operations of the MV-22,
the two governments confirmed at the Japan-U.S. Joint
Committee and on other occasions that measures have
been taken to address these human factors in light of
the lessons learned from the accidents and agreed to
implement specific measures to ensure the safety of MV


-----

|Maximum speed|Approximately 520 km/h Maximum speed Appr About twice|
|---|---|
|Cruising speed|Approximately 490 km/h Appr|
|Range|Approximately 3,900 km App|
|Radius of action|Approximately 600 km Radius of action App (With 24 troops on board) About four times (Wit|
|Number of troops carried|24|
|Number of crew|3–4|
|Cargo (inside)|Approximately 9,100 kg App|
|Cargo (outside)|Payload Approximately 5,700kg App About three times|
|Rotor diameter|Approximately 11.6 m Ap|
|Angle of flight|Approximately 7,500 m App|
|Own weight|Approximately 16,000 kg App|
|Measurement|MV-22 and CH-46 are not much different in size. 6.7 m 17.5 m 25|


Fig. II-4-4-9 Usability of Osprey Aircraft

4,000km

3,000km

MV-22 radius of action

North Korea Tokyo Approximately 1,100 km (1 aerial refueling)

Beijing South Korea

Osaka

Seoul

CH-46 radius of action Fukuoka 1,500km
Approximately 140 km

Kagoshima

MV-22 radius of action

China Okinawa Approximately 600 km (no refueling)

Shanghai

1,000km

MV-22 range Approximately 3,900 km

Taipei

CH-46 range Approximately 700 km

Saipan

Hong Kong

(1) All distances are in straight-line distance Manila Guam
(2) CH-46 has no aerial refueling function

Comparison of Basic Performance MV-22 CH-46

Maximum speed Approximately 520 km/h Maximum speed Approximately 270 km/h

About twice

Cruising speed Approximately 490 km/h Approximately 220 km/h

Range Approximately 3,900 km Approximately 700 km

Approximately 600 km Radius of action Approximately 140 km

Radius of action

(With 24 troops on board) About four times (With 12 troops on board)

Number of troops carried 24 12

Number of crew 3–4 3–5

Cargo (inside) Approximately 9,100 kg Approximately 2,300 kg

Payload

Cargo (outside) Approximately 5,700kg About three times Approximately 2,300 kg

Rotor diameter Approximately 11.6 m Approximately 15.5 m

Angle of flight Approximately 7,500 m Approximately 3,000 m

Own weight Approximately 16,000 kg Approximately 7,700 kg

MV-22 and CH-46 are not much different in size.

Measurement

6.7 m 5.1 m

17.5 m 25.7 m


Prefecture Tsunami Disaster Readiness Practical
Training” in October 2014 and “Michinoku ALERT
2014” in November 2014, a disaster relief exercise by the
GSDF Tohoku Headquarters.
In addition, when the Kumamoto Earthquake
occurred in April 2016, the MV-22 were dispatched to
transport daily necessities to the disaster stricken area.
Like the MV-22, the CV-22 can conduct humanitarian
assistance and disaster relief activities, including search
and rescue missions, both immediately and over a large
range, in the case of a large-scale disaster.
As such it is expected that the superior capabilities


of the Osprey deployed by the U.S. Forces can be
showcased in a variety of operations in the future as well.

See>> Fig. II-4-4-9 (Usability of Osprey Aircraft)

- 5  Consultation Structure for Mitigating the Impact
**on Okinawa**


Today, a number of USFJ facilities and areas still remain
in Okinawa because of the U.S. occupation of Okinawa
and the slower returning progress of USFJ facilities and
areas compared to other areas of Japan even after the
occupation ended In order to mitigate the concentrated


-----

impact on Okinawa, the Government of Japan has been
implementing initiatives toward the realization of the
SACO Final Report and the Roadmap. The MOD is
committed to further mitigating the impact on Okinawa
through the Okinawa Policy Council, its subcommittee
and other means,[9] while listening to the opinions of the
local residents.
At the Okinawa Policy Council Meeting in
December 2013, the Governor of Okinawa presented
several requests, including cessation of the operation of
MCAS Futenma within fi ve years and its early return,
the re-deployment of about 12 MV-22s to bases outside
of Okinawa, and the total return of Makiminato Service
Area within seven years.
The Japanese government as a whole is addressing
the mitigation of the impact on Okinawa by establishing
the Council for Promoting the Mitigation of the Impact
of MCAS Futenma on Okinawa, consisting of the Chief
Cabinet Secretary, the Minister of State for Okinawa, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Defense,
the Governor of Okinawa and the Mayor of Ginowan.
The MOD also created the Committee for Promoting
the Mitigation of the Impact of Bases on Okinawa
headed by the State Minister of Defense in January
2014 to continually work on the reduction of the impact
on Okinawa.
The Government of Japan is steadily promoting
the relocation of MV-22 training to locations outside
of Okinawa Prefecture, taking advantage of such
opportunities as Japan-U.S. joint exercises. In October
2015, Japan decided to implement regular MV-22
maintenance at GSDF Camp Kisarazu (Kisarazu City,
Chiba Prefecture).
In January 2016, the Consultation between the
Central Government and Okinawa Prefecture, consisting
of the Chief Cabinet Secretary, the Minister of State for
Okinawa, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister
of Defense, the Deputy Chief Cabinet Secretary and
the Governor and Vice Governor of Okinawa, held its
fi rst meeting and confi rmed that both sides would hold

**4 Stationing of the U.S. Forces in Regions Other than Okinawa**


In regions other than Okinawa, the MOD is implementing
measures to secure the stable presence of the U.S. Forces
by maintaining its deterrence and trying to mitigate the
impact on local communities.


consultations on measures for the mitigation of the impact
of bases on Okinawa and the prefecture’s development.
At the Council’s second meeting held in March
2016, discussions centered on such subjects as the
suspension of the operation of MCAS Futenma within
fi ve years, the continued existence of the Council for
Promoting the Mitigation of the Impact of MCAS
Futenma on Okinawa and the early return of over half
of Northern Training Area.

See>> Part II, Chapter 4, Section 4-6 (Measures to Mitigate the Impacts of
USFJ Facilities and Areas)

- 6  Initiatives for the Use of Lands Previously
**Provided for Use by the Stationed Forces**


For the return of lands in Okinawa provided for use
by the USFJ (hereinafter, “USFJ Land”), the “Act on
Special Measures Concerning Promotion of Effective
and Appropriate Use of the Lands in Okinawa Prefecture
Previously Provided for Use by the Stationed Forces”
stipulates various measures concerning the USFJ Land
agreed to be returned. The MOD mainly conducts the
following initiatives, and will continue its initiatives to
promote the effective and appropriate use of returned lands
by coordinating and cooperating with related ministries,
the prefectural government and local municipalities.
The MOD:
(1) conducts mediation in relation to access for
surveys, etc., to be implemented by the prefectural
government and local municipalities on the USFJ
Land which are agreed to be returned;
(2) conducts measures applying to all the returned
lands to remove impediments for use such as soil
contamination and unexploded ordnance, not only
those caused by the activities of the stationed forces,
before handing over the land to the owners of former
USFJ Land; and
(3) provides fi nancial benefi ts to alleviate the impact on
the owners of the returned lands and to promote use
of the land.

- 1  Realignment of USFJ Facilities and Areas in
**Kanagawa Prefecture**


Due to the strong desire from local public bodies and
other organizations, the Japanese and U.S. Governments,
after bilateral consultations, agreed on the return


-----

of six facilities and areas in Yokohama City and on
the construction of housing units for dependents of
members of the U.S. Forces in the Yokohama area of the
“Ikego Housing Area and Navy Annex.” Of the area of
approximately 41.9 ha to be returned, approximately 37.5
ha consisting of four facilities and areas, including Kami
Seya Communication Station, have to date been returned.

See>> Fig. II-4-4-10 (Reorganization of the USFJ Facilities and Areas in
Kanagawa Prefecture)

- 2  Current Situation Regarding the Realignment of the
**U.S. Forces in Japan as Stipulated in the Roadmap**


(approximately 5.4 ha) at Camp Zama was realized and
Zama General Hospital was established on the returned
site in April 2016. In addition, in December 2015, the
shared use of a portion of land at SGD (approximately 35
ha) with Sagamihara City was realized. In other areas, the
realignment projects associated with the improvement of
U.S. Army Japan command and control capability have
been undertaken as shown in Fig. II-4-4-11.

See>> Fig. II-4-4-11 (Initiatives for Improvement of U.S. Army Japan
Command and Control Capability)

**(2) Yokota Air Base and Airspace**
a. Commencement of the Operation of the Bilateral
Joint Operations Coordination Center (BJOCC) and the
Relocation of ASDF Air Defense Command HQ
Enhancement of coordination between the headquarters
of both countries, combined with the transition to joint
operational posture, is highly important to ensure a
response of flexibility and readiness of the SDF and
the U.S. Forces. Therefore, at the end of FY2011, the
Bilateral Joint Operations Coordination Center (BJOCC)[10]
commenced its operations at Yokota Air Base and the
ASDF Air Defense Command HQ and its relevant units
were relocated to Yokota Air Base. These arrangements
have made it possible to enhance coordination between the
headquarters of the SDF and the U.S. Forces, including the
sharing of information concerning air defense and BMD.
b. Yokota Airspace
To facilitate the operations of civilian airplanes in
Yokota airspace, where the U.S. Forces conduct radar
approach control, measures have been taken since 2006
to temporarily transfer the responsibility for air traffic
control of portions of Yokota airspace to the Japanese


**(1) Improvement of U.S. Army Japan Command and**
**Control Capability**

To have enhanced mobility and readiness as well as to
enable joint missions, the headquarters of U.S. Army
Japan (USARJ) at Camp Zama (Sagamihara City and
Zama City in Kanagawa Prefecture) was reorganized into
the headquarters of the USARJ&I Corps (Forward) in
December 2007 and the reorganization took place at the
end of September 2008.
With the aim of strengthening coordination with the
reorganized USARJ headquarters so as to enable rapid
responses to various contingencies, the GSDF Central
Readiness Force Headquarters was relocated from
GSDF Camp Asaka (Asaka City, Wako City and Niiza
City in Saitama Prefecture and Nerima Ward, Tokyo)
to Camp Zama, where the headquarters of U.S. Army
Japan (USARJ) are located, at the end of FY2012. In
addition, for more effective and efficient use of Camp
Zama and the Sagami General Depot (SGD), measures
were taken for the partial return of respective facilities
and areas. In February 2016, the partial release of land

|Location|Area (ha)|Plan for Land Return, etc.|
|---|---|---|
|Seya-ku and Asahi-ku, Yokohama City Area|About 242 ha|Land return completed at the end of June 2015|
|Izumi-ku, Yokohama City Area|About 77 ha|Land return completed in June 2014|
|Naka-ku, Minami-ku and Isogo ku, Yokohama City Area|About 43 ha|To be returned upon completion of construction of dependent housing in|
|Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama City Area|About 3 ha|Land return completed in May 2009|
|Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama City Area|About 53 ha|Land return completed in December 2005|
|Yokohama City Area|About 37 ha|Agreed in 2014 to change the number of housing units to be constructed from about 400, as initially planned, to 171|
|Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama City Area|About 1 ha|Return procedures to begin upon completion of the current use|


Fig. II-4-4-10 Reorganization of the USFJ Facilities and Areas in Kanagawa Prefecture

Location Name Location Area (ha) Plan for Land Return, etc.

Kamiseya Seya-ku and Asahi-ku, Land return completed at the end of

About 242 ha

**Yokohama City,** Communication Station Yokohama City Area June 2015
**Kanagawa** Fukaya Izumi-ku,
**Prefecture** Communication Site Yokohama City Area About 77 ha Land return completed in June 2014

**Asahi-kuAsahi-ku** Negishi Naka-ku, Minami-ku To be returned upon completion of

**Seya-ku** Dependent Housing Area and Isogo ku, About 43 ha construction of dependent housing in

Yokohama City Area

**Izumi-kuIzumi-ku** **Minami-kuMinami-ku** **Naka-kuNaka-ku** Tomioka Storage Area Yokohama City AreaKanazawa-ku, About 3 ha Land return completed in May 2009

**Totsuka-kuTotsuka-ku** **Isogo-kuIsogo-ku** Koshiba POL Depot Yokohama City AreaKanazawa-ku, About 53 ha Land return completed in December 2005

Agreed in 2014 to change the number

Ikego Housing Area

Yokohama City Area About 37 ha of housing units to be constructed from

**Kanazawa-Kanazawa-** and Navy Annex about 400, as initially planned, to 171
**kuku**

Detached part Kanazawa-ku, Return procedures to begin upon completion
of Yokohama City Area About 1 ha of the current use

: Implemented : Currently under implementation or scheduled for implementation


10 The BJOCC functions to contribute to providing a joint response for Japan’s defense. To that end, it works to enhance information sharing, close coordination, and interoperability between the Japanese and


-----

|Time|Improvement|
|---|---|
|December 2007|Reorganized into the headquarters of the USARJ&I Corps (Forward) at Camp Zama|
|June 2008|Agreed on the partial return of land (approximately 17 ha) at Sagami General Depot|
|September 2008|Reorganization of the headquarters of the USARJ&I Corps (Forward)|
|August 2011|The operation of the Mission Command Training Center commenced|
|October 2011|Agreed on the partial return of land (approximately 5.4 ha) at Camp Zama|
|June 2012|Agreed on the shared use of a portion of land at Sagami General Depot (approximately 35 ha) with Sagamihara City|
|March 2013|The GSDF Central Readiness Force Headquarters was relocated from GSDF Camp to Camp Zama|
|September 2014|Partial return of land (approximately 17 Ha) at Sagami General Depot|
|December 2015|The shared use of a portion of land at Sagami General Depot (approximately 35 ha) commenced|
|February 2016|Partial return of land (approximately 5.4 ha) at Camp Zama|


Fig. II-4-4-11 Initiatives for Improvement of U.S. Army Japan Command and Control Capability

**Time** **Improvement**

December 2007 Reorganized into the headquarters of the USARJ&I Corps (Forward) at Camp Zama

June 2008 Agreed on the partial return of land (approximately 17 ha) at Sagami General Depot

September 2008 Reorganization of the headquarters of the USARJ&I Corps (Forward)

August 2011 The operation of the Mission Command Training Center commenced

October 2011 Agreed on the partial return of land (approximately 5.4 ha) at Camp Zama

June 2012 Agreed on the shared use of a portion of land at Sagami General Depot (approximately 35 ha) with Sagamihara City

March 2013 The GSDF Central Readiness Force Headquarters was relocated from GSDF Camp to Camp Zama

September 2014 Partial return of land (approximately 17 Ha) at Sagami General Depot

December 2015 The shared use of a portion of land at Sagami General Depot (approximately 35 ha) commenced

February 2016 Partial return of land (approximately 5.4 ha) at Camp Zama


**VOICE**

**Message from the Mayor of Zama City, Kanagawa Prefecture** **Column**

**Zama Mayor Mikio Endo**

Situated roughly at the center of Kanagawa Prefecture, Zama City is a densely-populated city where approximately 129,000 people live in an
area of 17.57 km[2]. Zama City hosts Camp Zama, home to the headquarters of U.S. Army Japan (USARJ), etc., with its area of approximately
57 ha accounting for about 3.2% of the city.
Regarding the partial release of land at Camp Zama, “the United States-Japan Roadmap for Realignment Implementation” (Roadmap) of
May 2006 set forth the partial return of the land in conjunction with the relocation of the headquarters of the USARJ&I Corps (Forward), and
with the subsequent addition of land to be released, approximately 5.4 ha of land in total is to be returned. When the city was drawing up a
plan for the utilization of the returned land, several requests came in from citizens for construction of a hospital, given the circumstances at
the time, whereby as many as 74% of citizens requiring emergency care had to be transported to hospitals outside Zama City because of the
closing of hospitals within the city and other factors. Thus, the city decided on a plan to invite a private-sector hospital to the site that was
scheduled to be returned.
For the construction of the invited hospital, thanks to the extraordinary consideration of the Ministry of Defense (MOD), the U.S. Forces in
Japan, and particularly the U.S. Forces at Camp Zama, the commencement of construction work on the private-sector hospital was permitted
by means of the joint use of the land before the land return, which was an extremely rare case. This allowed the city to open the hospital in a
very short span of time only one month after the offi cial return of the land.
Given the current security environment surrounding Japan, it is extremely important for Zama City, which is hosting the U.S. military base,
to build a positive relationship of mutual trust with the U.S. Forces and related parties by realistically accepting that the stationing of the U.S.
Forces in Japan is crucial for national security based on the Japan-U.S. Alliance. The city believes that a string of processes leading to the
utilization of the returned land represents the major achievements of regular mutual exchanges and interactions.

Zama Mayor Endo (left) receiving a report on the return of land from Zama General Hospital, established in April 2016
the Director-General of the South Kanto Defense Bureau


-----

**(4) Measures relating to Atsugi Air Facility and MCAS Iwakuni**
a. Relocation of Carrier-Based Aircraft
Atsugi Air Facility (Ayase City, Yamato City and Ebina
City in Kanagawa Prefecture) is currently used as a
base for carrier-based aircraft. Since Atsugi Air Facility
is located at the center of an urban district, the noise of
carrier jets taking off and landing in particular has been
a problem for a long time. It is necessary to resolve such
problems as soon as possible in order to stably maintain
the operations of aircraft carriers.
Thus, after the completion of the runway relocation
project[12] at MCAS Iwakuni (Iwakuni City, Yamaguchi
Prefecture), which made aircraft operations possible with
less impact on the living environment of the surrounding
communities, CVW-5 squadrons were relocated from
Atsugi Air Facility to MCAS Iwakuni.
In order to mitigate impacts of the increased
operations at MCAS Iwakuni due to the relocation,
the related measures listed in Fig. II-4-4-12 are to be
taken. As a result, the noise problems are expected to
be mitigated from the current situation, with the area
requiring residential noise-abatement work, or the socalled first category area, decreasing from approximately
1,600 ha to approximately 500 ha.

See>> Fig. II-4-4-12 (Measures Related to Atsugi Air Facility and MCAS Iwakuni)
b. Field-Carrier Landing Practice (FCLP)
The 2006 Roadmap prescribes that a bilateral framework
to conduct a study on a permanent FCLP facility is to be
established with the goal of selecting a permanent site at
the earliest possible date. At the “2+2” Meeting of June
2011, it was confirmed that the Government of Japan will
explain to local authorities that Mageshima is considered
to be the candidate site for a new SDF facility. This SDF
facility would be used to support operations in response
to a variety of situations including large-scale disasters as
well as regular exercises and other activities, including
use by the U.S. Forces as a permanent site for FCLP. In
addition, the 2005 SCC document confirmed that the
U.S. Forces will continue to conduct FCLP at Iwo-To in
accordance with existing temporary arrangements until a
permanent FCLP training facility is identified.
c. Resumption of Civil Aviation Operations at MCAS Iwakuni
Considering that the local public entities, etc., including
Yamaguchi Prefecture and Iwakuni City, had been
working together to request the resumption of civil aviation
operations, it was agreed in the Roadmap that “portions
of the future civilian air facility will be accommodated
at MCAS Iwakuni.” Based on this agreement, Iwakuni


authorities, to deploy ASDF officers at the Yokota Radar
Approach Control (Yokota RAPCON), and to reduce
the airspace by about 40% (i.e. the release of air traffic
control from USFJ).
c. Civilian-Military Dual Use of Yokota Air Base
At the Japan-U.S. Summit Meeting held in 2003, it was
agreed that the joint civilian-military use of Yokota Air
Base would be studied, and a Liaison Conference was
then established as a working panel attended by relevant
government ministries and agencies and the Tokyo
Metropolitan Government. The governments of Japan and
the United States are conducting a study on the specific
conditions and modalities, with the understanding
that both countries will not compromise the military
operations and safety of Yokota Air Base.

**(3) Deployment of U.S. Aircraft Carrier to Yokosuka**
**Naval Base**

The presence of the U.S. Pacific Fleet plays an important
role in ensuring maritime security in the Asia-Pacific
region as well as regional peace and stability. The U.S.
aircraft carrier provides the core capability of the Fleet.
The U.S. Navy affirms that it will continue to
ensure that all of its forward-deployed nuclear-powered
vessels,[11] including USS Ronald Reagan, while anchored
at Yokosuka Naval Base (Yokosuka City, Kanagawa
Prefecture), adhere to the relevant safety policies. For
example, the nuclear reactor will normally be shut down
while the aircraft carrier is anchored, and repairing and
refueling will not be carried out in Japan. The Government
of Japan intends to continue taking all possible measures
to ensure safety.


Prime Minister Abe aboard USS Ronald Reagan (CVN-76) after the SDF Fleet Review, the first
Prime Minister of Japan to board the carrier (fourth from right)


11 Nuclear-powered aircraft carriers do not need to replenish their fuel and they are able to maintain the high speeds necessary for the operation of aircraft, giving them excellent combat and operational capabilities.

12 A project to relocate the runway of MCAS Iwakuni by approximately 1,000 meters to the east (offshore), in response to the requests from Iwakuni City, etc. The new runway commenced its operations in May


-----

|Measure|Status of Progress, etc.|
|---|---|
|Relocation of Carrier Air Wing Five (CVW-5) squadrons from Atsugi Air Facility to MCAS Iwakuni|To be completed by around 2017|
|Relocation of MSDF EP-3, etc. from MCAS Iwakuni to Atsugi Air Facility|Following bilateral consultations upon request from the local community and from the perspective of the defense system, Japan and the United States confrimed in 2013 that EP-3 aircraft will remain at MCAS Iwakuni.|
|Relocation of KC-130 air refueling aircraft from MCAS Futenma to MCAS Iwakuni|Relocation completed in August 2014|
|Rotational deployment of KC-130 to Kanoya Air Base and Guam|❍ In October 2015, Kanoya City expressed its understanding for rotational deployment of KC-130 to MSDF Kanoya Air Base (Kanoya City, Kagoshima Prefecture). ❍ Japan and the United States are currently holding consultations over the specific timing of the commencement of rotational deployment. ❍ Regarding rotational deployment to Guam, an inquiry about the status of exercises is being made to the U.S. Forces.|
|Relocation of CH-53D helicopters from MCAS Iwakuni to Guam|Japan and the United States confirmed that CH-53D helicopters, which had been sent to the Middle East, will return to the U.S. mainland without returning to MCAS Iwakuni, and will then be relocated to Guam.|


Fig. II-4-4-12 Measures Related to Atsugi Air Facility and MCAS Iwakuni

**Measure** **Status of Progress, etc.**

Relocation of Carrier Air Wing Five (CVW-5)
To be completed by around 2017
squadrons from Atsugi Air Facility to MCAS Iwakuni

Relocation of MSDF EP-3, etc. from MCAS Iwakuni Following bilateral consultations upon request from the local community and from the perspective of the defense
to Atsugi Air Facility system, Japan and the United States confirmed in 2013 that EP-3 aircraft will remain at MCAS Iwakuni.

Relocation of KC-130 air refueling aircraft from
Relocation completed in August 2014
MCAS Futenma to MCAS Iwakuni

❍ In October 2015, Kanoya City expressed its understanding for rotational deployment of KC-130 to MSDF
Kanoya Air Base (Kanoya City, Kagoshima Prefecture).

Rotational deployment of KC-130 to Kanoya Air ❍ Japan and the United States are currently holding consultations over the specific timing of the
Base and Guam commencement of rotational deployment.

❍ Regarding rotational deployment to Guam, an inquiry about the status of exercises is being made to the
U.S. Forces.

Relocation of CH-53D helicopters from MCAS Japan and the United States confirmed that CH-53D helicopters, which had been sent to the Middle East, will
Iwakuni to Guam return to the U.S. mainland without returning to MCAS Iwakuni, and will then be relocated to Guam.

: Implemented : Currently under implementation or scheduled for implementation


Kintaikyo Airport was opened in 2012, resuming regular
flights of civil aviation aircraft for the first time in 48 years.

**(5) Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD)**
Japan and the United States are set to continue close
coordination on BMD as the two countries improve their
respective BMD capabilities. In June 2006, an AN/TPY2 radar (so-called “X-Band Radar”) system was deployed
to the U.S. Shariki Communication Site (Tsugaru City,
Aomori Prefecture).[13] Also in October 2006, U.S. Army
Patriot PAC-3 units (Patriot Advanced Capability) were
deployed to Kadena Air Base (Kadena Town, Okinawa
City and Chatan Town in Okinawa Prefecture) and Kadena
Ammunition Storage Area (Yomitan Village, Okinawa
City, Kadena Town, Onna Village and Uruma City in
Okinawa Prefecture). In December 2014, the second TPY2 radar in Japan was deployed to the U.S. Kyogamisaki
Communication Site (Kyotango City in Kyoto Prefecture).
In addition, the United States deployed Aegis
destroyers with BMD capabilities to Yokosuka Naval
Base (Yokosuka City in Kanagawa Prefecture) in October
2015 and March 2016. The additional deployment is
scheduled for around July 2017.

See>> Part III, Chapter 1, Section 2-3 (Response to Ballistic Missile Attacks)


relocation has been underway since 2007.[14] The MOD
has been improving its infrastructure, as required, for the
training relocation.
In January 2011, at the Joint Committee, based on
the achievements at the “2+2” Meeting in 2010, both
governments agreed to include Guam as a new training
relocation site and to expand the scale of training.
Moreover, at the Joint Committee in October 2011, they
agreed on details for training sites. After that, training was
relocated to Guam and other locations for the first time,
leading to a series of training conducted at relocation sites.
Furthermore, in March 2014, both governments at
the Joint Committee agreed to add air-to-ground training
using the Misawa Air-to-Ground Range (Misawa City and
Rokkasho Village in Aomori Prefecture). This agreement
resulted in air-to-ground training using the Misawa Airto-Ground Range in June 2014.
The training relocation contributes to enhancing
interoperability between the two countries, and also to
relocating part of air-to-ground training conducted by
using Kadena Air Base. Thus, this training relocation will
help noise abatement around Kadena Air Base, thereby
contributing to the mitigation of the impact on Okinawa.
In addition to assisting USFJ, the MOD and the SDF
are conducting efforts to ensure the safety and security
of the local community, such as the establishment of a
liaison office, facilitating communication with related
government agencies, and response to requirements from
the local community. These efforts have been contributing
to successful training relocation.


**(6) Training Relocation**
Based on the decision that U.S. aircraft from three USFJ
facilities and areas—Kadena, Misawa (Misawa City
and Tohoku Town in Aomori Prefecture) and MCAS
Iwakuni—would participate for the time being in
bilateral training with ASDF at ASDF facilities, training


13 The radar was deployed to ASDF Shariki Sub Base (in Aomori Prefecture) in June 2006, but was thereafter transferred to the neighboring U.S. Shariki Communication Site.


-----

**y**

**Implementation Status of the Aviation Training Relocation and Support**

**Column**

**by Relevant Local Municipalities**

Based on “the United States-Japan Roadmap for Realignment Implementation” (Roadmap) of May 2006, the relocation of aviation training has so
far been implemented 43 times in Japan and 27 times in Guam and other overseas locations for a total of 70 times (as of the end of March 2016).
The relocation of training in Japan was conducted at Self-Defense Forces (SDF) facilities at Chitose Air Base (Chitose City and Tomakomai
City, Hokkaido), Misawa Air Base (Misawa City and Tohoku Town, Kamikita County, Aomori Prefecture), Hyakuri Air Base (Omitama City, Ibaraki
Prefecture), Komatsu Air Base (Komatsu City, Ishikawa Prefecture), Tsuiki Air Base (Chikujo Town, Chikujo County, Yukuhashi City, Fukuoka
Prefecture), and Nyutabaru Air base (Shintomi Town, Koyu County, Miyazaki Prefecture). In order to ensure the security and safety of residents
in the local communities, the respective regional defense bureaus have established local task forces to facilitate liaison and coordination with
the U.S. Forces and related government agencies, provide information promptly, and strive for noise abatement around the air bases. Ahead
of the implementation of the relocation of aviation training, relevant local municipalities render their services to inform residents in the local
communities of the relocated training by sponsoring explanatory meetings for local residents, circulating documents, and uploading related
information on their websites, and also to enhance the communication structure.
The Ministry of Defense (MOD) will strive to mitigate the impact on the local communities by stepping up the relocation of aviation
training to ensure the mitigation of noise problems in the local communities around the bases of the U.S. Forces in Japan, while obtaining the
understanding and cooperation of relevant local municipalities.

U.S. Forces aircraft participating in the Aviation Training Relocation Japan-U.S. coordination taking place at a local task force


**5 Initiatives for Smooth Implementation of the Realignment of the U.S. Forces in Japan**


In order to smoothly implement the realignment of the
U.S. Forces in Japan based on the Roadmap, the “Act
on Special Measures on Smooth Implementation of the
Realignment of United States Forces in Japan (USFJ
Realignment Special Measures Act)” was enacted in
August 2007. Realignment grants, Special Subsidy
Rates for Public Projects, etc. and other systems were
established based on the law.
During a period of time before and after the
implementation of realignment (10 years in principle),
realignment grants[15] will be awarded to help cover the
expenses of projects[16] which contribute to increasing
the convenience of the lives of residents of local
municipalities affected by the realignment,[17] and to


stimulate local industries. To this end, they will be
awarded in accordance with progress made in the steps
of U.S. Forces realignment, after the Defense Minister
designates the specifi ed defense facilities and neighboring
municipalities affected by realignment. As of April 2016,
18 defense facilities in 43 municipalities are eligible to
receive the grant.
In addition, under the U.S. Forces realignment, some
USFJ facilities and areas will be returned, and the U.S.
Marine Corps in Okinawa will be relocated to Guam.
Since these developments may affect the employment
of USFJ local employees, the Government of Japan will
take measures to include education and skills training,
which is to help retain their employment.


15 Approximately 12.9 billion yen in the FY2016 budget

16 Under the Realignment Special Measures Act, changes in the composition of units of those naval vessels that conduct operations integrally with U.S. air wings subject to realignment (replacement of the aircraft
carrier at Yokosuka Naval Base with a nuclear aircraft carrier) will be treated in the same way as the realignment of the U.S. Forces in Japan.

17 The specifi c scope of projects includes 14 projects identifi ed by Article 2 of the enforcement ordinance of the Act on Special Measures on Smooth Implementation of the Realignment of United States Forces in


-----

**6 Measures to Mitigate the Impacts of USFJ Facilities and Areas**



- 1  Initiatives to Conserve the Environments around
**USFJ Facilities and Areas**

At the “2+2” meeting in September 2000, based on the
recognition that environmental conservation is important,
the governments of both nations agreed to make it a common
objective to ensure the health and safety of residents in the
vicinity of USFJ facilities and areas, U.S. Forces personnel,
their families and other such parties, and made the “Joint
Statement of Environmental Principles.”[18] To follow up on
this announcement, Japan-U.S. consultations have been
enhanced. Specifi cally, the MOD has been working with
relevant ministries and agencies to enhance cooperation
for regular reviews of the Japan Environmental Governing
Standards (JEGS),[19] exchange information on the
environment, and deal with environmental pollution.
Additionally, at the “2+2” Meeting in May 2010,
Japan and the United States discussed the possibility
of taking a “Green Alliance” approach and studied the
adoption of renewable energy for the U.S. Forces facilities
and areas under development in Japan.
Furthermore, the Governments of Japan and the
United States engaged in discussions aimed at the creation
of a framework for increased initiatives in managing the
environment associated with USFJ facilities and areas.
The Government of Japan then commenced negotiations
with the United States on an agreement that supplements
the SOFA on an environmental front, and they reached
substantive accord in October 2014, before signing and
effectuating the supplementary agreement in September
2015. This supplemental agreement represents an
international commitment with legal binding force and sets
forth the following provisions concerning environmental
standards and access to U.S. Forces facilities and areas:
(1) Japan and the United States shall share available and
appropriate relevant information;
(2) The United States shall release and maintain the
Japan Environmental Governing Standards (JEGS),
and for these standards, Japan and the United States
shall adopt the more protective of Japanese, U.S. or
international agreement standards;
(3) Procedures shall be established and maintained to
allow appropriate access for the Japanese authorities
to U.S. Forces facilities and areas when an accident
with an impact on the environment (leakage) actually
occurs or when the Japanese authorities conduct a


fi eld survey (including a survey on cultural assets)
in relation to the return of U.S. Forces facilities and
areas; and
(4) Japan and the United States shall start consultations
at the Joint Committee on matters related to the
implementation of the agreement upon request from
either party.
This supplemental agreement is part of a more
comprehensive framework for recognizing the signifi cance
of environmental protection. The preparation of such an
agreement that supplements the SOFA is the fi rst of its
kind since the SOFA entered into force and has a historical
signifi cance that differs in nature from conventional
improvements in the operations of the SOFA.

- 2  Other Measures


The Government of Japan has been taking measures for
the improvement of the living environment in regions
surrounding USFJ facilities and areas. The Ministry
of Internal Affairs and Communication also provides
municipalities with base grants, which have alternate
features in terms of municipal tax on real estate.
Moreover, in the vicinities of USFJ facilities and
areas, incidents and accidents caused by U.S. Forces
personnel and others have affected local areas and their
residents, so the Government of Japan has requested
USFJ to take effective measures for the prevention of
recurrence, such as educating military personnel and
others, and enforcing strict discipline among them.
The Government of Japan is cooperating with USFJ in
these prevention measures; at the same time it has taken
measures for prompt and appropriate compensation for
the damage caused by the incidents and accidents.
The United States has also taken measures for its
part, putting in place its guidelines for off-duty action
(liberty policy), including measures such as nighttime
alcohol restrictions as well as curfews applying to U.S.
Forces personnel ranked below a certain level.
In May 2016, a member of the U.S. Forces civilian
component was arrested on suspicion of abandoning a
body in Okinawa Prefecture. Following this incident, the
Governments of Japan and the United States engaged
in intensive discussions, including the Japan-U.S.
Defense Ministerial Meeting in June, to develop effective


18 Consisting of four items; (1) environmental governing standards, (2) information sharing and access, (3) response to environmental contamination, and (4) environmental consultation.

19 JEGS is an environmental standard compiled by USFJ in order to ensure that USFJ activities and installations protect the natural environment and health of people, and stipulates the handling of environmental


-----

prevention measures, and announced the Japan-United
States Joint Statement on Reviewing Implementation
Practices of the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA)
Related to U.S. Personnel with SOFA Status, Including
the Civilian Component[20] on July 5, 2016. Based on this
Joint Statement, the two governments will work towards
announcing respective detailed measures. On the same
day, the Commander of the U.S. Forces Japan announced
several steps to update drunk-driving standards and
punishment and to enhance training.
Meanwhile, in order to never allow a recurrence


of the recent regrettable incident, it is necessary for the
Government of Japan to promptly promote measures
to deter crime and ensure the safety and security of the
people of Okinawa. In June 2016, the Government of
Japan prepared Crime Prevention Measures in Okinawa.
The pillars of the Measures consist of bolstering crime
prevention patrol operations and the establishment of a
safe and secure environment. The MOD will cooperate
with relevant ministries and agencies to ensure the
implementation of the effective measures.

See>> Part III, Chapter 4, Section 1-4 (Measures to Promote Harmony
between Defense Facilities and Surrounding Areas)


**Commentary**

**Exchanges between Local Residents and the U.S. Forces** **Column**

For the stationing of the U.S. Forces in Japan (USFJ), it is imperative to obtain understanding and cooperation from citizens who live near
U.S. Forces facilities. The Ministry of Defense (MOD) hosts Japan-U.S. friendship programs every year to promote exchanges between local
residents living around USFJ facilities and USFJ personnel and their families through sports and music events as part of initiatives to help
deepen the mutual understanding between Japan and the United States.
Among the friendship programs held during FY2015, for example, the fourth Misawa Ice Hockey (Hokki) Event took place near Misawa
Air Base (Misawa City, Aomori Prefecture). Approximately 160 children making up 16 Japanese and U.S. teams in total deepened exchanges
while enjoying “hockey games,” chasing pucks shaped like surf clams (called “hokki gai” in Japanese), which move erratically around skating
rinks, and trying to score goals.
Near MCAS Iwakuni (Iwakuni City, Yamaguchi Prefecture), the sixth IWAKUNI Japan-U.S. Exchange Joint Concert was held. Approximately
220 Japanese and U.S. children and students deepened exchanges through joint rehearsals and exchange parties, and in the fi nale, all the
performers played in concert and sang in chorus, receiving generous cheers and applause from an audience of approximately 720 people.
Since these Japan-U.S. friendship programs have been hugely popular among participants and local residents, the MOD plans to
proactively sponsor such programs while obtaining cooperation from local municipalities and the USFJ.

Sports Exchange Program (Misawa City) Music Exchange Program (Iwakuni City)

The Misawa Ice Hockey (Hokki) Event is a unique Japan-U.S. The IWAKUNI Japan-U.S. Exchange Joint Concert started in 2010
exchange event only seen in Misawa City. The game is designed with the participation of MCAS Iwakuni and elementary schools
to compete for points in the style of ice hockey using equipment of Iwakuni City. Subsequently, the wave of exchanges has been
designed in the shapes of “garlic” (helmets), “Chinese yam” (sticks) expanding, with the participation of elementary and junior high
and “surf clam” (pucks), all of which are the special local products schools in municipalities situated close to MCAS Iwakuni, including
of Misawa City. Waki Town (Yamaguchi Prefecture), Suo-Oshima Town (Yamaguchi

Prefecture) and Otake City (Hiroshima Prefecture).


-----

**Part**
###### III

Initiatives to Protect the Lives and
Property of the People as well as Securing
the Territorial Land, Water and Airspace

**Chapter 1**
**Organizations Responsible for**
**the Defense of Japan, and Effective**
**Deterrence and Handling**

**Chapter 2**
**Active Promotion of Security**
**Cooperation**

**Chapter 3**
**Measures on Defense Equipment**
**and Technology**

**Chapter 4**
**Interaction with Local Communities**
**and Japanese Citizens**


-----

**Chapter 1 the Defense of Japan, and**
**Effective Deterrence and Handling**


**Organization of the Ministry of Defense (MOD)/**

**Section 1**

**the Self-Defense Forces (SDF)**


**1 Organizational Structure Supporting Defense Capability**



- 1  Organization of the MOD/SDF


equipment administration, support the Minister of Defense in
accordance with their respective responsibilities, by providing
the Minister of Defense assistant from a policy perspective –
namely, to ensure that the affairs under the jurisdiction of the
MOD are properly carried out in accordance with laws and
regulations in order to accomplish the mission of the MOD.
The Joint Staff is a staff organization for the Minister of
Defense concerning the operation of the SDF. The Chief of
Joint Staff provides centralized support for the operations of
the SDF for the Minister of Defense from a military expert’s
perspective. The Ground Staff, Maritime Staff and Air
Staff are the staff organizations for the Minister of Defense
concerning their respective services except operations of the
SDF, with the Chiefs of Staff for the Ground Self-Defense
Force (GSDF), the Maritime Self-Defense Force (MSDF)
and the Air Self-Defense Force (ASDF) acting as the topranking expert advisers to the Minister of Defense regarding
these services. In this manner, the MOD has ensured that the
support for the Minister from a policy perspective and the
support for the Minister from a military expert’s perspective
shall be provided in a well-balanced manner like the two
wheels of a vehicle, so to speak, in order for the Minister
of Defense to appropriately make decisions. This existing
concept regarding the support system for the Minister of
Defense has been made even more explicit by the Article
12 of the Ministry of Defense Establishment Act, which has
been amended to stipulate that the support for the Minister of
Defense provided by the Director-General of the Minister’s
Secretariat and the Directors-General of each Bureau as
well as the Commissioner of ATLA shall be conducted in
cooperation with the support for the Minister by each Chief
of Staff, since 2015, when the Act was amended for the
establishment of ATLA and the reorganization of Joint Staff
etc., as part of an initiative for the MOD reform.[2]


To fulfi ll their mission of defending Japan, the Ministry of
Defense (MOD)/the Self-Defense Forces (SDF)[1] consist
of various organizations, mainly the Ground, Maritime
and Air Self-Defense Forces as armed forces.

See>> Fig. III-1-1-1 (Organizational Chart of the Ministry of Defense);
Fig. III-1-1-2 (Outline of the Ministry of Defense)

- 2  Systems to Support the Minister of Defense


The Minister of Defense is responsible for issues related
to the defense of Japan as the head of the MOD, and is in
overall charge of the SDF duties in accordance with the
provisions of the SDF Act. The Minister is supported by the
State Minister of Defense, the Parliamentary Vice-Ministers
of Defense (two) and the Senior Adviser to the Minister of
Defense. There are also the Special Advisers to the Minister of
Defense, who advise the Minister of Defense, and the Defense
Council, which deliberates on basic principles concerning
administrative affairs under the Ministry’s jurisdiction.
Furthermore, there are the Administrative Vice-Minister of
Defense, who organizes and supervises the administrative
affairs of each bureau and organization to support the Minister
of Defense, and the Vice-Minister of Defense for International
Affairs, who is responsible for the overall coordination of
duties such as those related to international affairs.
Moreover, the Internal Bureau of the MOD, Joint Staff,
Ground Staff Offi ce, Maritime Staff Offi ce, Air Staff Offi ce,
and the Acquisition, Technology & Logistics Agency (ATLA)
as an external bureau have been established in the MOD. The
Internal Bureau of the MOD is responsible for basic policy
relating to the duties of the SDF. The Director-General
of the Minister’s Secretariat and the Directors-General of
each Bureau within the Internal Bureau shall, along with
the Commissioner of ATLA who is in charge of defense


The MOD and the SDF form a single organization for national defense. Whereas the term “Ministry of Defense” refers to the administrative aspects of the organization, which manages and operates the GSDF,


-----

Fig. III-1-1-1 Organizational Chart of the Ministry of Defense

Cabinet

Prime Minister

Minister of Defense National Security Council

State Minister of Defense

Senior Adviser to the Minister of Defense Special Advisers to the Minister of Defense (up to three people)

Parliamentary Vice-Ministers of Defense (two)

Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense

Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs

Private Secretary of the Minister of Defense

(Internal bureaus)

Cooperative Cooperative
Units Organizations

(Excluding temporary or special positions.)



- 3  Base of Defense Administration in Regional Areas

The MOD has Regional Defense Bureaus in eight
locations across the country (Sapporo City, Sendai City,
Saitama City, Yokohama City, Osaka City, Hiroshima
City, Fukuoka City, and Kadena Town) as its local branch
offi ces in charge of comprehensive defense administration.
In addition to implementing measures to alleviate the


burden on local communities hosting bases and inspecting
equipment, Regional Defense Bureaus carry out various
activities to obtain the understanding and cooperation of
both local public entities and local residents toward the
MOD/SDF activities.

See>> Part III, Chapter 4, Section 1 (Collaboration with Local Communities)

**2 Joint Operations System of the Self-Defense Forces**


**1**

-   Outline of Joint Operations System


In order to rapidly and effectively fulfi ll the duties of the SDF,
the MOD/SDF has adopted the joint operations system in which
the GSDF, the MSDF, and the ASDF are operated integrally.
The MOD/SDF is making efforts to strengthen the foundation
of the joint operations as well as to enhance the functions of the
Joint Staff in light of the current security environment.


**(1) Role of the Chief of Staff**
a. The Chief of Joint Staff develops a joint operations
concept for SDF operations, and centrally supports the MOD
on SDF operations from a military expert’s perspective.


The Government has made remarks regarding civilian control and the role of the civilian offi cials in the Internal Bureau during the Diet deliberations on the Amendment Act, stating; “Civilian control means
the priority of politics to the military in democratic countries. Civilian control in our country consists of control by the Diet, control by the Cabinet (including the National Security Council), and control within the
MOD. Control within the MOD means that the Minister of Defense, a civilian, manages, operates, and controls the SDF. In addition to support from political appointees such as the State Minister of Defense and
Parliamentary Vice-Ministers of Defense, support from civilian offi cials in the Internal Bureau also plays an important role in aiding the exercise of civilian control by the Minister of Defense. The role of civilian ii


-----

|Organization|Outline|
|---|---|
|GSDF*|❍ Regional Armies • Composed of multiple divisions and brigades, and other directly controlled units (such as engineer briga • There are five regional armies, each mainly in charge of the defense of their respective regions ❍ Divisions and Brigades Composed of combat units and logistics support units which support combat units, and others ❍ Central Readiness Force Consisting of an airborne brigade, a helicopter brigade, the Central Readiness Regiment, the Special NBC Weapon Defense Unit|
|MSDF*|❍ Self-Defense Fleet • Consists of key units such as the Fleet Escort Force, the Fleet Air Force (consisting of fixed-wing p the Fleet Submarine Force • Responsible for the defense of sea areas surrounding Japan primarily through mobile operations ❍ Regional Districts There are five regional districts who mainly protect their responsible territories and support the Self-|
|ASDF*|❍ Air Defense Command • Composed of three air defense forces and the Southwestern Composite Air Division • Primarily responsible for general air defense duties ❍ Air Defense Force Composed of key units such as air wings (including fgi hter aircraft units and others), the Aircraft Contro aircraft warning and control units ), and Air Defense Missile Groups (including surface-to-air guided mis|
|National Defense Academy of Japan (Yokosuka, Kanagawa)|❍ An institution for the cultivation of future SDF personnel ❍ Offers a science and engineering postgraduate course equivalent to master’s or doctoral degree from postgraduate courses) and a comprehensive security postgraduate course equivalent to a master’s d|
|National Defense Medical College (Tokorozawa, Saitama)|❍ An institution for the cultivation of future SDF medical personnel, the SDF personnel and engineering ❍ An institution for the cultivation of future SDF officers who are public nurses, nurses, and SDF engine ❍ Offers a medical course that complies with university establishment standards for PhD programs for|
|National Institute for Defense Studies (Meguro-ku, Tokyo) *relocated to Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, in August 2016|❍ Organization that functions as a “think tank” of the Ministry of Defense • Conducts basic research and studies related to the administration and operation of the SDF • Conducts research and compiles data on military history • Educates SDF personnel and other senior officials • Manages books and documents of historical value|
|Defense Intelligence Headquarters (Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo)|❍ Central intelligence organization of the Ministry of Defense, which collects and analyzes military data • Collects various military intelligence, including signal, imagery and other information acquired by w comprehensively analyzes and assesses the information; and provides information to related organiz • Consists of six communication sites and its headquarters|
|Inspector General’s Office of Legal Compliance (Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo)|❍ Organization that inspects overall tasks of the Ministry of Defense and the SDF from an independent|
|Regional Defense Bureau (eight locations nationwide)|❍ Ensures understanding and cooperation of local public organizations, and conducts cost audit, super acquisition of defense facilities, management, construction, taking measures concerning neighborho of equipment|
|Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Agency (Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, etc.)|❍ External organization that integrates and consolidates the departments within the Ministry of Defens and development, etc.|


Fig. III-1-1-2 Outline of the Ministry of Defense

**Organization** **Outline**

❍ Regional Armies

-  Composed of multiple divisions and brigades, and other directly controlled units (such as engineer brigades and antiaircraft artillery groups)

-  There are five regional armies, each mainly in charge of the defense of their respective regions
❍ Divisions and Brigades

GSDF*

Composed of combat units and logistics support units which support combat units, and others
❍ Central Readiness Force
Consisting of an airborne brigade, a helicopter brigade, the Central Readiness Regiment, the Special Operation Group, and the Central
NBC Weapon Defense Unit

❍ Self-Defense Fleet

-  Consists of key units such as the Fleet Escort Force, the Fleet Air Force (consisting of fixed-wing patrol aircraft units and such), and

the Fleet Submarine Force

MSDF*

-  Responsible for the defense of sea areas surrounding Japan primarily through mobile operations
❍ Regional Districts
There are five regional districts who mainly protect their responsible territories and support the Self-Defense Fleet

❍ Air Defense Command

-  Composed of three air defense forces and the Southwestern Composite Air Division

-  Primarily responsible for general air defense duties

ASDF*

❍ Air Defense Force
Composed of key units such as air wings (including fighter aircraft units and others), the Aircraft Control and Warning Wing (including
aircraft warning and control units ), and Air Defense Missile Groups (including surface-to-air guided missile units and others)
National Defense ❍ An institution for the cultivation of future SDF personnel
Academy of Japan ❍ Offers a science and engineering postgraduate course equivalent to master’s or doctoral degree from a university (undergraduate and
(Yokosuka, Kanagawa) postgraduate courses) and a comprehensive security postgraduate course equivalent to a master’s degree

National Defense ❍ An institution for the cultivation of future SDF medical personnel, the SDF personnel and engineering personnel who are nurses
Medical College ❍ An institution for the cultivation of future SDF officers who are public nurses, nurses, and SDF engineering personnel
(Tokorozawa, Saitama) ❍ Offers a medical course that complies with university establishment standards for PhD programs for schools of medicine

National Institute for ❍ Organization that functions as a “think tank” of the Ministry of Defense
Defense Studies -  Conducts basic research and studies related to the administration and operation of the SDF
(Meguro-ku, Tokyo) -  Conducts research and compiles data on military history
*relocated to Shinjuku-ku, -  Educates SDF personnel and other senior officials

Tokyo, in August 2016 -  Manages books and documents of historical value

❍ Central intelligence organization of the Ministry of Defense, which collects and analyzes military data

Defense Intelligence

-  Collects various military intelligence, including signal, imagery and other information acquired by warning and surveillance activities;

Headquarters

comprehensively analyzes and assesses the information; and provides information to related organizations within the ministry

(Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo)

-  Consists of six communication sites and its headquarters
Inspector General’s Office of

Legal Compliance ❍ Organization that inspects overall tasks of the Ministry of Defense and the SDF from an independent position
(Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo)

❍ Ensures understanding and cooperation of local public organizations, and conducts cost audit, supervision, and inspection related to

Regional Defense Bureau

acquisition of defense facilities, management, construction, taking measures concerning neighborhood of the base, and procurement

(eight locations nationwide)

of equipment
Acquisition, Technology and

❍ External organization that integrates and consolidates the departments within the Ministry of Defense related to procurement, research

Logistics Agency

and development, etc.

(Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, etc.)

*See “Location of Principal SDF Units” at the end of the book.


b. The Minister’s commands concerning the operations of
the SDF shall be delivered through the Chief of Joint
Staff and orders concerning operations of the SDF shall
be executed by the Chief of Joint Staff. In doing this,
the Minister’s commands and orders shall be delivered
through the Chief of Joint Staff not only in cases where
a joint task force[3] is organized, but also in cases where a
single SDF unit is employed to respond.

**(2) Relationship between Chief of Staff, Joint Staff, and**
**Other Chiefs of Staff**

The Joint Staff undertakes functions relating to the
operations of the SDF, while the Ground, Maritime and
Air Staff Offices undertake functions for unit maintenance,
such as personnel affairs, building-up defense capability,
and education and training.

See>> Fig. III-1-1-3 (Operational System of the SDF and Roles of the Chief
of Joint Staff and the Chiefs of Staff of the Ground, Maritime, and Air
Self-Defense Forces)



- 2  Strengthening Integrated Operational Functions

In order to ensure the accuracy of decision-making relating to
the operations of the SDF and to make the process swifter, in
October 2015, the Bureau of Operational Policy was abolished
and some of this Bureau’s functions such as the planning and
drafting of laws and regulations relating to unit operations were
transferred to the Bureau of Defense Policy in order to unite
affairs concerning actual operations of the units into the Joint
Staff. This change has made the Joint Staff assume work that
the Internal Bureau had previously conducted, such as external
explanations including remarks at the Diet and communication
and coordination with related ministries and governmental
agencies. Regarding this work, therefore, the Administrative
Vice Chief of Joint Staff, a Vice-Chief of Joint Staff level post
for civilian officials has been established to conduct external
coordination duties etc., taking advantage of the expertise of
civilian officials concerning actual operations of the units. In


This applies to the case in which a special unit is organized to carry out a specific duty, or the required troops are placed partly under the authority of a commander outside of their usual command structure


-----

|Minister|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|f Defense||

|Col1|Col2|Force provider|
|---|---|---|
||||
||Chief of Staff, GSDF Ground Staff Office|Chief of Staff, MSDF Maritime Staff Office|


Operational System of the SDF and Roles of the Chief of Joint Staff and the Chiefs of Staff of the Ground, Maritime,
Fig. III-1-1-3
and Air Self-Defense Forces

Basic Rule for Joint Operation Prime Minister

The Chief of Joint Staff, solely assists the Minister of
Defense on SDF operations from a military expert’s
viewpoint Minister of Defense
The Minister of Defense commands SDF operations
through the Chief of Joint Staff
The Minister of Defense’s orders to the SDF are
executed by the Chief of Joint Staff

Responsibilities for affairs other than force operations
Responsibilities for force operations (such as human resources, education, training,[1] buildup
of defense capabilities)

Force user Force provider

Defense Intelligence
Headquarters
Directorate for
Joint Intelligence

Chief of Chief of Staff, Chief of Staff, Chief of Staff,
Joint Staff GSDF MSDF ASDF

Ground Staff Maritime Air Staff

Joint Staff

Office Staff Office Office

Chain of command for
operations

Chain of command for
affairs other than Joint Task Force Commanding General, Commander, Self- Commander, Air
operations[2] Commander Army and Others Defense Fleet and Others Defense Command

and Others

Information Line
Coordination Line Mobilization unit

Close coordination among the Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Joint Staff clearly indicates the integrated policies for rear support and other relevant activities
Each of the Chiefs of Staff of the GSDF, MSDF and ASDF assists in rear support and other activities
during operations

Notes: 1. The Chief of Joint Staff is responsible for joint training
2. With respect to forces affairs other than operations in regard to the Joint Task Force, command responsibilities of the Defense Minister.


addition, the Joint Staff Councilor, a post for civilian offi cials at
the level of a division director and department director general
has been established and staffed with necessary subordinates to
assist the Joint Staff Councilor.

- 3  Establishment of Foundation to Enhance the Joint
**Operations Structure**


communications system that uses advanced communications
technology available both within and outside Japan.
At the unit level, they are required to create plans
to be able to respond to various situations, while at the
same time they are also required to maintain conditions
to be ready for executing duties through joint training and
other means. For this purpose, personnel from other SDF
branches are stationed at major command headquarters
under normal circumstances, and the number of such staff
personnel is increased as necessary.
In addition, topics such as the improvement of
education and training, the SDF Headquarter structure,
the human resources development, and standardization of
equipment will continue to be reviewed, aiming for a more
effective joint operations system, and necessary measures
will be taken to realize this.

**3** **Reform of the Ministry of Defense**


and the establishment of operational management that
prioritizes the execution of duties, with the aim of total
optimization; additionally, in 2009, the establishment of
the Defense Council under law, the abolition of the post of
the Director of Defense and the establishment of the Senior
Adviser to the Minister of Defense (presently the Special
Adviser to the Minister of Defense) were implemented in


Within the joint operations structure, communication
of accurate commands and prompt information sharing
between the units in the GSDF, the MSDF and the ASDF are
crucial. The MOD/SDF is required to maintain a command
and control function utilizing an advanced communications
network and a system for sharing intelligence in order to
strengthen the joint operational foundation. Thus, the MOD/
SDF continues to develop a wide-ranging and fl exible

**3** **Reform of the Ministry of Defense**

- 1  Background and Direction of the Reform


Following the considerations made by the “Council for
Reforming the Ministry of Defense,” which was held at
the Prime Minister’s Offi ce in 2007 in response to the
frequent incidence of scandals within the MOD/SDF, the
MOD made various initiatives aimed at the MOD reform,
including thorough adherence to rules and regulations


-----

**(1) Main Initiatives in FY2014**
Along with the establishment of permanent posts for
uniformed personnel in the Internal Bureau and new posts
for civilian officials in the Joint Staff and the main units
of each branch of the SDF, a Vice-Minister of Defense for
International Affairs, who is responsible for the overall
coordination of duties such as those related to international
affairs, has been established.

**(2) Main Initiatives in FY2015**
a. Strengthening Integrated Operational Functions
❍ As work related to actual operations have been unified
into the Joint Staff, the Bureau of Operational Policy
has been abolished, and some of the functions of the
Bureau, such as the planning and drafting of laws
and regulations related to unit operations have been
transferred to the Bureau of Defense Policy
❍ Two new posts for civilian officials – Administrative
Vice Chief of Joint Staff (Vice-Chief of Joint Staff-level)
and Joint Staff Councilor (department director general/
division director-level) - have been established
b. Reorganization of the Internal Bureau, etc.
❍ Due to the reorganization related to the new establishment
of the Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Agency
(ATLA), the procurement and research and development
functions for defense equipment, etc., over which
the Bureau of Finance and Equipment, the Technical
Research and Development Institute, and the Equipment
Procurement and Construction Office had had jurisdiction,
have been transferred to the ATLA. The departments in the
Ground, Maritime, and Air Staff Offices that had conducted
work related to equipment have been consolidated as the
Logistics Planning Department
❍ The Strategic Planning Division has been established in
the Bureau of Defense Policy in order to strengthen the
policyplanning function regarding defense strategies based
on mid-to long-term perspectives and new policy issues
❍ The Bureau of Defense Buildup Planning has been
established in order to strengthen the defense capacities
build-up function
c. The Establishment of the Acquisition, Technology and
Logistics Agency
The ATLA has been established as an extra-ministerial
organization with the following four objectives, by bringing
together and consolidating the departments of the MOD
that had been related to equipment procurement, research
and development (the Internal Bureau, the respective Staff
Offices, the Technical Research and Development Institute,
and the Equipment Procurement Office).
(1) Implementation of unified project management
throughout the life cycle of equipment from a comprehensive
perspective; (2) Smooth and prompt reflection of the


order to strengthen support for the Minister of Defense
and to ensure civilian control thoroughly.
Following this, in the “Direction of the MOD
Reform” arranged in August 2013 at the “Committee for
the Deliberations on the MOD Reform,” established in the
MOD in the same year, it was determined that the following
full-fledged reform would be undertaken, taking matters
specified in previous considerations into account, and
considering the following situational changes, such as the
increasing severity of the security environment surrounding
Japan, recognition of the lessons learned relating to the unit
operations in the Great East Japan Earthquake and elsewhere;
and the changes in the policy environment, including the
establishment of the National Security Council.
(1) In order to foster a sense of unity among civilian
officials and uniformed personnel, permanent posts
will be established for uniformed personnel in the
Internal Bureau and for civilian officials in each of the
Staff Offices and major commands.
(2) In order to eliminate defense capabilities build-up based
on individual, vertically-divided optimization for each
GSDF, MSDF and ASDF, and to ensure that build-up
is instead conducted based on total optimization, a
procedure will be established for defense capabilities
build-up based on the joint operations. In combination
with this, equipment acquisition will be streamlined
and optimized by means of management of equipment
throughout its life cycle, and also organizational reform
will be conducted in order to contribute to the overall
optimization of defense capabilities.
(3) In order to ensure the accuracy of decision-making
relating to the operations of the SDF and to make the
process swifter, a review of the organization will be
conducted so that affairs concerning actual operations
will be unified into the Joint Staff.
(4) Policy-planning functions will be enhanced in response
to the rapid increase in international affairs-related
work and the establishment of the National Security
Council. In addition, public relations capability will
also be strengthened.
Furthermore, it is also stated as important to establish
a series of truly effective reforms by avoiding stagnation
and confusion in operations, and seeking changes in the
mentality of both civilian officials and uniformed personnel
through steady and phased implementation while the
Internal Bureau and the Staff Offices equally support the
Minister of Defense.

- 2  Specific Initiatives


In accordance with the “Direction of the MOD Reform,”
the following initiatives have been implemented


-----

operational needs of the units to the equipment to be
procured; (3) Active engagement in new areas (such
as further internationalization of defense equipment,
investment in cutting edge technology research, etc.); and

**Section 2** **Effective Deterrence and Response**


In order to respond to a variety of contingencies in a timely
and appropriate manner, and to assure the protection of the
lives and property of the people as well as territorial land,
water and airspace, it is necessary to make efforts to deter
the occurrence of a variety of contingencies before they
happen by building a comprehensive defense architecture.
If a contingency does occur, it is required to respond


(4) Simultaneously achieving procurement reform while
also maintaining and strengthening the foundations of
defense production and technology.

seamlessly to the situations as they unfold.
Therefore, it is important to ensure information
superiority[1] through continuous surveillance over a wide
region around Japan during peacetime. If a contingency does
arise, ensuring maritime superiority[2] and air superiority[3]
in our sea and airspace in a timely manner is important to
respond effectively and minimize the damage.


**1 Ensuring Security of Sea and Airspace Surrounding Japan**


Japan is comprised of a little over 6,800 islands, and is
surrounded by wide sea space, which includes the sixth
largest Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) in the world.
The Self-Defense Force (SDF) is engaged in persistent
intelligence collection and warning and surveillance over
Japan’s territorial waters and airspace during peacetime, as
well as the surrounding sea and airspace.

- 1  Warning and Surveillance in Waters and Airspace
**Surrounding Japan**


**(2) Response by the Ministry of Defense (MOD)/the Self-**
**Defense Forces (SDF)**

The Maritime Self-Defense Force (MSDF) patrols the waters
surrounding Hokkaido, the Sea of Japan, and the East China
Sea during peacetime, using P-3C patrol aircraft and other
aircraft to monitor the numerous vessels that sail through
those waters. The Air Self-Defense Force (ASDF) uses
radar sites at 28 locations nationwide, E-2C early warning
aircraft, and E-767 early warning and control aircraft,
amongst others, to carry out warning and surveillance
activities over Japan and its surrounding airspace 24 hours
a day. Warning and surveillance activities in major channels
are also conducted 24 hours a day by MSDF guard posts,
Ground Self-Defense Force (GSDF) coastal surveillance
units, and so forth. Furthermore, warning and surveillance
activities are carried out with the fl exible use of destroyers
and aircraft as required. Thus, the SDF maintains a defense
and security posture so that it can respond quickly to various
contingencies in areas surrounding Japan.


**(1) Basic Concept**
The SDF persistently engages in warning and surveillance
activities in the waters and airspace surrounding Japan
during peacetime so that it can respond to various
contingencies immediately and seamlessly.


GSDF personnel conducting coast observation MSDF P-3C patrol aircraft conducting warning and surveillance ASDF E-767 airborne warning and control system aircraft
conducting warning and surveillance

To have an advantage over the opponent in terms of quickly and correctly identifying, collecting, processing, and conveying information.

Maritime superiority refers to the condition in which one side has a tactical advantage over the opposing force at sea and can carry out maritime operations without suffering substantial damages by the opposing force.


-----

operational needs of the units to the equipment to be
procured; (3) Active engagement in new areas (such
as further internationalization of defense equipment,
investment in cutting edge technology research, etc.); and

**Section 2** **Effective Deterrence and Response**


In order to respond to a variety of contingencies in a timely
and appropriate manner, and to assure the protection of the
lives and property of the people as well as territorial land,
water and airspace, it is necessary to make efforts to deter
the occurrence of a variety of contingencies before they
happen by building a comprehensive defense architecture.
If a contingency does occur, it is required to respond


(4) Simultaneously achieving procurement reform while
also maintaining and strengthening the foundations of
defense production and technology.

seamlessly to the situations as they unfold.
Therefore, it is important to ensure information
superiority[1] through continuous surveillance over a wide
region around Japan during peacetime. If a contingency does
arise, ensuring maritime superiority[2] and air superiority[3]
in our sea and airspace in a timely manner is important to
respond effectively and minimize the damage.


**1 Ensuring Security of Sea and Airspace Surrounding Japan**


Japan is comprised of a little over 6,800 islands, and is
surrounded by wide sea space, which includes the sixth
largest Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) in the world.
The Self-Defense Force (SDF) is engaged in persistent
intelligence collection and warning and surveillance over
Japan’s territorial waters and airspace during peacetime, as
well as the surrounding sea and airspace.

- 1  Warning and Surveillance in Waters and Airspace
**Surrounding Japan**


**(2) Response by the Ministry of Defense (MOD)/the Self-**
**Defense Forces (SDF)**

The Maritime Self-Defense Force (MSDF) patrols the waters
surrounding Hokkaido, the Sea of Japan, and the East China
Sea during peacetime, using P-3C patrol aircraft and other
aircraft to monitor the numerous vessels that sail through
those waters. The Air Self-Defense Force (ASDF) uses
radar sites at 28 locations nationwide, E-2C early warning
aircraft, and E-767 early warning and control aircraft,
amongst others, to carry out warning and surveillance
activities over Japan and its surrounding airspace 24 hours
a day. Warning and surveillance activities in major channels
are also conducted 24 hours a day by MSDF guard posts,
Ground Self-Defense Force (GSDF) coastal surveillance
units, and so forth. Furthermore, warning and surveillance
activities are carried out with the fl exible use of destroyers
and aircraft as required. Thus, the SDF maintains a defense
and security posture so that it can respond quickly to various
contingencies in areas surrounding Japan.


**(1) Basic Concept**
The SDF persistently engages in warning and surveillance
activities in the waters and airspace surrounding Japan
during peacetime so that it can respond to various
contingencies immediately and seamlessly.


GSDF personnel conducting coast observation MSDF P-3C patrol aircraft conducting warning and surveillance ASDF E-767 airborne warning and control system aircraft
conducting warning and surveillance

To have an advantage over the opponent in terms of quickly and correctly identifying, collecting, processing, and conveying information.

Maritime superiority refers to the condition in which one side has a tactical advantage over the opposing force at sea and can carry out maritime operations without suffering substantial damages by the opposing force.


-----

Fig. III-1-2-1 Conceptual Image of Warning and Surveillance of the Sea Areas and Airspace Surrounding Japan

Territorial waters (Including inland waters) around HokkaidoSea areas IslandEtrofu

Contiguous zone

EEZ
(Including contiguous zone)

E-2C Airborne E-2C Airborne
Early Warning AircraftEarly Warning Aircraft

P-1 Patrol Aircraft

Sea of Japan

Takeshima

E-767 Airborne WarningE-767 Airborne Warning Joint Staff, etc.
and Control System and Control System

Hachijo
Island

P-3C Patrol Aircraft

Ogasawara Minami Torishima
Islands

Destroyer

Senkaku
Islands

East China Sea Ground SDF: Coast observation unit

Okidaitojima

Air SDF: Radar site

Yonagunijima Air SDF: Radar site (BMD response)

-  Schematic image of a surveillance range.
It does not exactly match with the actual range.

Okinotorishima

-  Flow of information


Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense Fujimaru inspecting a P-3C etc.
at the MSDF Kanoya Air Base

Following September 2012 when the Government of
Japan acquired ownership of the Senkaku Islands, Chinese
government vessels have carried out intermittent intrusion
into Japan’s territorial water surrounding the Senkaku
Islands.[4] In 2015, there were eight confi rmed incidents
of activities by Chinese Navy vessels including passing
through the southwestern islands. In addition to these, a
Chinese Navy vessel, which participated in a China-Russia
joint exercise, navigated into the Bering Sea for the fi rst time


Number of Incursions into the Territorial

Fig. III-1-2-2 Waters around the Senkaku Islands by Chinese

Government Ships

(Times)

25

**21**

20

**18**

15

**13**

**12** **12** **12**

**11**

**10** **10**

10

5

**3** **3**
**2**

0

Jan.-Apr. May-Aug. Sep.-Dec. Jan.-Apr. May-Aug. Sep.-Dec. Jan.-Apr. May-Aug. Sep.-Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar.

2013 2014 2015 2016


after circling around Japanese archipelago in September
2015. Not only that, a Chinese Navy reconnaissance vessel
sailed near the contiguous zone to the south of the Senkaku
Islands in November 2015 as well as the contiguous zone


-----

**VOICE**

**Defense of the Sea Surrounding Japan** **Column**

**JMSDF Naha Naval Base (Naha City, Okinawa Prefecture)**
**Lieutenant (MSDF) Hiroya Matsunaga, Air Patrol Squadron 5**

I work at the MSDF Air Patrol Squadron 5 located in Naha City, Okinawa Prefecture, as a P-3C fi xed-wing patrol aircraft pilot. The MSDF vessel
and aircraft units conduct warning and surveillance activities concerning the situation of ships sailing around Japan night and day and even
under normal circumstances. The Air Patrol Squadron 5 is mainly in charge of the southern part of the East China Sea waters, which includes
the Senkaku Islands. Not only surface vessels but also underwater submarines are the subjects of our warning and surveillance activities, so
we cooperate closely with MSDF destroyers, ASDF airborne warning and control systems, Japan Coast Guard patrol boats, and others in order
to maintain the readiness to be able to deal with various events. As our activities have received increasing attention in recent years, every
personnel in the unit remains vigilant while working.
The P-3C also engages in various missions other than warning and
surveillance duties, including disaster relief dispatch. In addition, two P-3C
aircraft are always dispatched for counter-piracy operations off the coast of
Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden. I was also deployed to the counter-piracy
operations from February to May 2015 as a pilot of the 18th Deployment
Air Force for Counter Piracy Enforcement, and engaged in a mission in a
sea area with a high possibility of piracy occurrence, whilst cooperating with
other foreign dispatched units.
While I face my duty, which requires my full attention, every day, I will
continue to improve myself and intend to do my duty of national defense as a
national guardian “Sakimori” for the pure beautiful sea (Churaumi), thanking
my family that supports me.

The author boarding a P-3C as a pilot.


which is to the south-east of the Bousou Peninsula in
December 2015 and February 2016. Furthermore, in June
2016, a Chinese Navy vessel entered the Japan’s contiguous
zone to the north of the Senkaku Islands. In the same month,
a Chinese Navy reconnaissance vessel also sailed within
Japan’s territorial water west of Kuchinoerabujima Island
(Kagoshima Prefecture) and then entered the Kitadaitojima
Island contiguous zone as well as further carried out a round
trip in waters south of the Senkaku Islands. It is anticipated
that the areas of activity by Chinese government vessels
and Navy vessels will continue to further expand and their
activities will become more active.
Due to such circumstances, the MOD/SDF is working
to strengthen the collaboration with relevant government
ministries and agencies, for example by routinely sharing
information obtained through warning and surveillance
activities with the Japan Coast Guard from peacetime.

See>> Fig. III-1-2-1 (Conceptual Image of Warning and Surveillance of the
Sea Areas and Airspace Surrounding Japan); Fig. III-1-2-2 (Number
of Incursions into the Territorial Waters around the Senkaku Islands
by Chinese Government Ships)

- 2  Warnings and Emergency Takeoffs (Scrambles) in
**Preparation against Intrusion of Territorial Airspace**


F-15 fi ghter scrambling

conducted as an act to exercise the right of policing
intended to maintain public order. Unlike measures taken
on land or at sea, this measure can be taken only by the
SDF. Therefore, the ASDF is primarily responsible for
conducting the actions based on Article 84 of the SDF Act.

See>> Reference 24 (Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces);
Reference 25 (Statutory Provisions about Use of Force and Use of
Weapons by SDF Personnel)

**(2) Response by the MOD/SDF**
The ASDF detects and identifi es aircraft fl ying in the
Japanese territorial airspace using warning and control
radars, the E-767 early-warning and control aircraft, and
E-2C early-warning aircraft. If any suspicious aircraft
heading to Japan’s territorial airspace are detected, fi ghters
and other aircraft scramble to approach them to confirm


**(1) Basic Concept**
Under international law, countries have complete and
exclusive sovereignty over their airspace. Scrambling
against aircraft intruding into territorial airspace is


-----

the situation and monitor the aircraft as necessary. In the
event that a territorial airspace intrusion occurs, responses
such as warning to withdraw will be conducted.
In December 2012, a fi xed-wing aircraft (Y-12) of
the Chinese State Oceanic Administration intruded into
Japan’s territorial airspace in the vicinity of Uotsurijima, which is part of the Senkaku Islands. In September
2015, an incident occurred in which a Russian aircraft
(assumed) intruded into Japanese airspace off the coast
of the Nemuro peninsula in Hokkaido. Moreover, during
the same year, peculiar incidents occurred such as longrange fl ights passing through between the main island of
Okinawa and Miyakojima by Chinese military aircraft and
long- range fl ights in Japan’s surrounding airspace. These
cases indicate that the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) of


China and the Russian Armed Forces have become more
active in the area surrounding Japan. In response to these
incidents, the ASDF scrambled its fi ghters, and in FY2015
the ASDF aircraft scrambled 873 times.[5]
Among these, the number of scrambles against
Chinese aircraft counted for 571 times, which was an
increase by 107 times in comparison with the previous
fi scal year, and marked the highest since 2001, when
the breakdown number of scrambles according to the
opponents’ nationality and region was published for the
fi rst time.
Even after the establishment of the “East China Sea
Air Defense Identifi cation Zone” by China in November
2013, the MOD/SDF has been implementing warning
and surveillance activities and the like as before in the

|Fig. III-1-2-3|Number and Breakdown of Scrambles since the Cold War|
|---|---|
|(Times) 1,000 994433 944 887733 Russia China Taiwan Other countries total 812 810 800 464 567 600 415 571 425 386 400 306 311 299 96 156 220 237 200 158 31 38 359 473 264 247 248 288 193 197 124 0 1984* 1989 1993 1998 2003 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 (FY) Note: The peak of the cold war||

|Fig. III-1-2-4|Example Flight Patterns of Aircraft to Which Scrambles Responded|
|---|---|
|: Flight paths taken by Chinese aircraft : Flight paths taken by Russian aircraft||

|Fig. III-1-2-5|Air Defense Identif ciation Zone (ADIZ) of Japan and those of Neighboring Countries|
|---|---|
|Northern Japanese territories territorial airspace ROK ADIZ Takeshima East China Sea ADIZ * Senkaku Japan ADIZ Ogasawara Taiwan ADIZ Islands Islands Yonaguni Island *The ROK expanded its ADIZ in December 2013 Philippines ADIZ ADIZ: Air Defence Identification Zone||


-----

East China Sea, including the zone in question, and have
continued to take all initiatives necessary to engage in
warning and surveillance in both the sea and airspace
around Japan. The MOD/SDF also engages in strict
airspace anti-intrusion measures in accordance with
international law and the SDF Act.

See>> Reference 24 (Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces); Reference
25 (Statutory Provisions about Use of Force and Use of Weapons by
SDF Personnel); Fig. III-1-2-3 (Number and Breakdown of Scrambles
since the Cold War); Fig. III-1-2-4 (Example Flight Patterns of Aircraft to
Which Scrambles Responded); Fig. III-1-2-5 (Air Defense Identification
Zone (ADIZ) of Japan and those of Neighboring Countries)

- 3  Response to Submarines Submerged in Japan’s
**Territorial Waters**


Joint exercises and training conducted by the MSDF and the Japan Coast Guard



- 4  Response to Armed Special Operations Vessels

**(1) Basic Concept**
The Japan Coast Guard, as a police organization, is
primarily responsible for responding to suspicious
armed special operations vessels (unidentified vessels).
However, in the event that it is deemed extremely difficult
or impossible for the Japan Coast Guard to respond to a
situation, an order for maritime security operations will
be issued and the situation will be handled by the SDF in
cooperation with the Japan Coast Guard.

See>> Reference 24 (Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces); Reference
25 (Statutory Provisions about Use of Force and Use of Weapons by
SDF Personnel)

**(2) Response by the MOD/SDF**
In light of the lessons learned from the cases of an
unidentified vessel off the Noto Peninsula in 1999, an
unidentified vessel in the sea southwest of Kyushu in
2001, and other similar incidents, the MOD/SDF has
strengthened cooperation with other relevant ministries
and agencies by conducting joint exercises with the Japan
Coast Guard on a regular basis.
In particular, the MSDF has been taking the
following steps: (1) deployment of guided-missile patrol
boats; (2) establishment of the MSDF Special Boarding
Unit[7]; (3) equipment of destroyers with machine guns;
(4) furnishing forcible maritime interdiction equipment
(flat-nose shells)[8]; (5) improving the sufficiency ratio of
military vessel personnel; and (6) enhancing equipment for
the Vessel Boarding Inspection Team. Furthermore, based
on the “Manual on Joint Strategies concerning Unidentified
Vessels” jointly prepared by the Japan Defense Agency
(then) and the Japan Coast Guard in 1999, the MSDF also
makes an effort to strengthen cooperation between these
two organizations.


**(1) Basic Concept**
With respect to foreign submarines navigating underwater
in Japan’s territorial waters,[6] an order for maritime security
operations will be issued. The submarine will be requested
to navigate on the surface of the water and show its flag, in
accordance with international law, and in the event that the
submarine does not comply with the request, the SDF will
request it to leave Japanese territorial waters.

See>> Reference 24 (Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces); Reference
25 (Statutory Provisions about Use of Force and Use of Weapons by
SDF Personnel)

**(2) Response by the MOD/SDF**
The MSDF is maintaining and enhancing capabilities
for: expressing its intention not to permit any navigation
that violates international law; and responding in shallow
water areas by detecting, identifying, and tracking foreign
submarines navigating under the territorial waters of Japan. In
November 2004, the MSDF observed a submerged Chinese
nuclear-powered submarine navigating under Japanese
territorial waters around the Sakishima Islands. In response to
this incident, the MSDF issued an order for maritime security
operations, and MSDF vessels and aircraft continued to track
the submarine until it entered the high seas.
In May 2013, March 2014, and February 2016,
although there was no intrusion into the territorial waters
of Japan, the MSDF P-3C etc. observed submarines
navigating underwater in the contiguous water zone.
Although international law does not forbid foreign
submarines navigating underwater in the contiguous zone
of coastal states, Japan maintains a posture to appropriately
deal with such activities.


The term “territorial waters” also includes inland waters.

A special unit of the MSDF was newly established in March 2001 to deter expected resistance, and disarm suspicious vessels in the event of vessel boarding inspections under maritime security operations.l


-----

**2 Defense of Japan’s Remote Islands**



- 2  Initiatives of the MOD/SDF

For defense posture buildup in the southwestern region,
in January 2016, the ASDF newly establish the 9th Air
Wing following the completion of the relocation of one
fi ghter squadron at Naha Air Base so that they have two
fi ghter squadrons. The GSDF newly formed the Yonaguni
coast observation unit on Yonaguni in March of the same
year. Going forward, the GSDF will deploy an area
security unit in charge of the initial responses within the
remote islands area in the southwestern region, as well as
establishing an “Amphibious Rapid Deployment Brigade
(provisional name)” equipped with a full function for
amphibious operations. In addition, the MSDF will
acquire helicopters (SH-60K) and other equipment.
Through these initiatives, the MOD/SDF will continue
persistent intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
(ISR) operations, and develop an immediate response
posture in the case of contingencies.
Furthermore, in order to secure capabilities for swift
and large-scale transportation and deployment of units,
initiatives are underway to enhance rapid deployment
capabilities through: the improvement of Osumi class
transport LST (Landing Ship, Tank); overseas research



- 1  Basic Concept

Japan has a number of remote islands. In order to respond
to attacks on these islands, it is important to position units
and so forth in accordance with the security environment,
and also to detect signs at an early stage through persistent
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR)
conducted by the SDF in peacetime as well as obtaining
and securing maritime and air superiority.
If signs of attack are detected in advance, troops will be
deployed and concentrated in an area expected to be invaded
ahead of the deployment of enemy units, and, through the
joint operation involving all the SDF forces (the GSDF,
MSDF, and ASDF), deter and remove enemy attacks. If
there is an invasion of the islands, the enemy will be brought
under control by ground fi re from aircraft and vessels, and
then tactical operations will be implemented to regain the
islands by the landing of SDF forces and other initiatives.
Furthermore, a precise response will be taken to attacks
using ballistic missiles, cruise missiles and other weapons.

See>> Reference 24 (Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces); Reference
25 (Statutory Provisions about Use of Force and Use of Weapons by
SDF Personnel); Fig. III-1-2-6 (Conceptual Image of Defending Japan’s
Offshore Islands)


Fig. III-1-2-6 Conceptual Image of Defending Japan’s Offshore Islands

Overall air defenseOverall air defense

Secure and maintain marine
superiority and air superiority Aerial refuelingAerial refueling

SurfaceSurface
vesselsvessels

Maritime air supportMaritime air support

Anti-surfaceAnti-surface
warfarewarfare

Strategy to recapture remote islands
in the case of an invasion

SDF troops will be swiftly deployed and concentrated in
an area expected to be attacked ahead of the deployment

Close Air SupportClose Air Support

of enemy units and they will try to intercept and defeat
any invasions. Landing

by aircraft

Response in the water

Landing by
amphibious

Anti-submarine warfareAnti-submarine warfare

vehicle

Landing
by boat

Submarine
Enemy submarines


-----

The ASDF 9th Air Wing Commander receiving the fl ag of their unit from the State Minister of
Defense Wakamiya at the ASDF Naha Air Base


GSDF personnel participating in the U.S.-Australia Joint Exercise “Talisman Saber” for
the fi rst time

MOD/SDF hopes to gain understanding from the local
community through providing in-depth explanations.[9]

In addition, the SDF conducts various training
exercises to improve the joint operation capabilities
of the GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF, and also training
exercises with the U.S. Forces aimed at establishing
mutual coordination procedures. In August 2015, the
GSDF, MSDF and ASDF participated in a joint exercise
held on the western coast of the United States called
“Dawn Blitz.” As Japan-U.S. bilateral training exercises
overseas (Dawn Blitz 15), they conducted a series of
tactical activities related to collaboration with the U.S.
Forces, and response to island invasions. The GSDF also
annually conducts a fi eld training exercise (Iron Fist) in
California with the U.S. Marine Corps. In addition, in
July 2015, the GSDF, for the fi rst time, participated in the
U.S.-Australia joint exercise (Exercise Talisman Sabre)
held in Australia and strives to strengthen amphibious
operational capabilities by, for example, carrying out a
fi eld training exercise with the U.S. Marines.


Western Army Commanding General receiving the fl ag of the Coast Observation Unit from
Minister of Defense Nakatani

to review the role of multipurpose vessels; and the
introduction of V-22 Ospreys.
In particular, for the operation of V-22 Ospreys,
the MOD determined that the KYUSHU-SAGA
International AIRPORT was the best airfi eld to be used
as the deployment site for V-22 Ospreys due to positional
relationships with relevant units in joint operations, the
length of the runway, and the geographic environment that
can reduce burdens borne by the local community. The


**3 Response to Ballistic Missile Attacks**


Japan began developing the Ballistic Missile Defense
(BMD) system in FY2004 to be fully prepared for the
response against ballistic missile attacks. Necessary
amendments were subsequently made to the SDF Act
in 2005, and in the same year, the Security Council
and Cabinet decided to begin Japan-U.S. cooperative
development of an advanced ballistic missile interceptor.
To date, Japan has steadily built up its own multi-tier


defense system against ballistic missile attacks, by such
means as installing ballistic missile defense capability to
the Aegis-equipped destroyers and deploying the Patriot
Advanced Capability-3 (PAC-3).[10] In light of the situation
that the North Korea has made further progress in overall
ballistic missile development, Japan will accelerate its
efforts and review concerning the overall enhancement
of its capacity to respond to ballistic missiles, while it


9 At the KYUSHU-SAGA International AIRPORT, the ramp, aircraft hangars, etc., are to be developed on the west side of the airport by FY2019. Approximately 70 aircraft, consisting of 17 newly acquired V-22
Ospreys and approximately 50 helicopters transferred from Camp Metabaru are expected to be deployed.

10 The Patriot PAC-3 system is one of the air defense systems for countering airborne threats. Unlike the conventional type of anti-aircraft PAC-2 missiles, which mainly intercepts aircraft, the PAC-3 missiles are


-----

**y**

**Strengthening of the Southwestern Region** **Column**

Japan has approximately 6,800 remote islands as part of its territory, of which approximately 1,000 islands are located in the southwestern
region and form a vacuum region for SDF unit deployment. Furthermore, considering the recent severe security environment, the MOD and the
SDF have reinforced their defense posture in the southwestern region in order to be able to perform an immediate and continuous response
when incidents occur.
Based on such a defense approach, the MOD established a coast observation unit on Yonaguni Island for the development of a constant
monitoring system in the southwestern region in March 2016. In addition, the MOD selected Amamioshima Island, Miyako Island and Ishigaki
Island as the locations for the area security unit, which will swiftly deal with emergency situations including disasters when they occur, and is
currently conducting a review on this matter with an understanding of the local communities in these locations.

**VOICE**

**GSDF Camp Yonaguni (Yonaguni-cho, Yaeyama-gun, Okinawa Prefecture),**
**Lieutenant Colonel Daigo Shiomitsu, Commanding Offi cer of the Yonaguni Coast Observation Unit and**
**Commander of GSDF Camp Yonaguni**

In March 2016, the Coast Observation Unit was newly formed on Yonaguni Island, the westernmost point of Japan, after having
overcome various issues. The population of Yonaguni Island was originally only about 1,500 people. The local residents offered
tremendous support toward conducting the development of the living environment of approximately 250 SDF personnel and their
families, which account for nearly 20% of the total population of the island, and accepted them.
In addition, Yonaguni Island is in an area where typhoons
often pass through. During the preparation period for the coast
observation unit, Typhoon No. 21 (maximum gust speed of
81m/s) passed through the vicinity. The deployed unit in the
local area conducted activities to support the life of citizens
through disaster relief, while at the same time administrative
offi cials were the main actor in minimizing the impact of the
disaster on the establishment of the new unit in cooperation
with contractors.
Henceforward, as a pioneer of the newly deployed
southwestern unit, everyone in the unit will work on the
warning and surveillance of the surrounding area as well as the
deterrence and response to various incidents, while continuing
to cherish cooperation with the local community. The author saluting at the organizing completion ceremony


will continue to conduct studies on the United States’
advanced initiatives and equipments.

See>> Reference 44 (History of Efforts for BMD Development in Japan)

- 1  Japan’s Ballistic Missile Defense


launched against Japan as an armed attack, it will be
dealt with by issuing a defense operation order for
armed attack situations. On the other hand, if ballistic
missiles are launched towards Japan, and the situation
is not acknowledged as an armed attack, the Minister
of Defense can order the SDF units to take measures to
destroy the ballistic missiles with suffi cient consideration
taken to carrying out prompt and appropriate response
and ensuring civilian control.
As a response against ballistic missiles or other
objects, the Joint Task Force-BMD is formed, with the
Commander of the Air Defense Command serving as its
Commander, and various postures for effective defense


**(1) Basic Concept**
Japan’s BMD is an effective multi-tier defense system
with the upper tier interception by Aegis-equipped
destroyers and the lower tier by Patriot PAC-3, both
interconnected and coordinated by the Japan Aerospace
Defense Ground Environment (JADGE).[11]

In case ballistic missiles or other objects[12] are


11 JADGE is a core system for the command and control as well as communication functions. It centrally processes the information regarding aircraft captured by radars installed nationwide, and it provides fi ghters
instructions required for scrambling against aircraft intruding into Japanese territorial airspace and air defense combat operations. In addition, it controls Patriot and radar, etc. in responses to ballistic missiles.


-----

Fig. III-1-2-7 Build-up and Operational Concept of BMD

**Mid-course phase**
In this phase, the rocket engine burns
out and the missile is flying in outer
space (exoatmosphere) inertially

**Detection/Discrimination/**

**Boost phase**

**Tracking**

In this phase, the

**Terminal phase**

rocket engine is

This phase covers the

burning and

part from atmospheric

accelerating the

re-entry to the impact

missile

**ASDF**
**ASDF Air control and**
**Patriot PAC-3**
**warning radar**

**Ballistic missile**

**(FPS-5, FPS-3 Upgraded)**

**JADGE (Japan Aerospace Defense**
**Ground Environment)**
**MSDF Aegis**
**BMD destroyer** **Commander, Joint Task Force-BMD**

Commander, Air Defense Command


are to be taken under a unifi ed command through JADGE.
Furthermore, the GSDF will play a leading role in dealing
with damage caused by the impact of ballistic missiles.

See>> Fig. III-1-2-7 (Build-up and Operational Concept of BMD)

**(2) Response by the MOD/SDF**
In March 2009, in response to North Korea’s advance
notifi cation for an intended launch of an “experimental
communication satellite” received through the International
Maritime Organization (IMO), the Minister of Defense
issued the “Order for destruction measures against ballistic
missiles” in accordance with Article 82-3, Paragraph 3
of the SDF Act and deployed destroyers equipped with
SM-3 missiles to the Sea of Japan and Patriot PAC-3 units
in the Tohoku region and the Tokyo Metropolitan area.
In addition, in March and December 2012, responding to
North Korea’s advance notifi cation for an intended launch
of a “satellite,” received through the IMO, the Minister
of Defense issued the “Order for destruction measures
against ballistic missiles” in accordance with Article 82-3,
Paragraph 3 of the SDF Act and the MOD/SDF deployed
destroyers equipped with SM-3 missiles to the Sea of
Japan and the East China Sea, and Patriot PAC-3 units on
the islands of Okinawa Prefecture and within the Tokyo
metropolitan area, while simultaneously dispatching the
GSDF units to the Southwestern Islands in case any debris
were to fall from the sky


PAC-3 units deployed on Ishigaki Island

In response to North Korea’s advance notifi cation
for an intended launch of an “earth observation satellite”
received on February 2, 2016, through the IMO and the
International Civil Aeronautics Organization (ICAO), on
February 3 the MOD issued the “Order for Destruction
Measures against Ballistic Missiles” in preparation for
any unforeseen contingencies. Through this order, the
MOD deployed destroyers equipped with SM-3 missiles
in both the Sea of Japan and the East China Sea, and the
PAC-3 units on Ishigaki Island and Miyakojima as well as
within the Tokyo Metropolitan area, while the PAC-3 units
deployed on the Okinawa main island maintained their
readiness at their own bases. The MOD/SDF also took
every necessary measure including dispatching the GSDF
units to the Southwestern Islands for collecting damage


-----

U.S. Forces, and sharing intelligence gathered by assets
including transportable BMD radar (TPY-2 radar) and
Aegis-equipped destroyers deployed in Japan by the
U.S. Forces. Maintenance, enhancement and validation
of Japan-U.S. bilateral response capabilities have been
actively conducted through training and other activities.
Since 2010, BMD exercise has been held between the
MSDF and the U.S. Navy, connecting their ships via a
network and conducting a simulation of response to
ballistic missiles, to improve tactical capabilities and
strengthen bilateral coordination. In addition, the JapanU.S.-ROK joint missile defense drill, PACIFIC DRAGON
2016, was conducted in waters off Hawaii in June 2016.

See>> Part I, Chapter 2, Section 2-1 (North Korea)

- 2  Missile Defense of the United States and Japan**U.S. BMD Technical Cooperation**


MSDF Aegis destroyer carrying out SM-3 missiles firing exercises

information and consequence management in case any
debris were to fall from the sky. With respect to the ballistic
missile launch, which was purported to be a “satellite,” on
the 7th of the same month, the MOD/SDF transmitted
launch information collected from Shared Early Warning
(SEW),[13] the various SDF radar units, and other systems
to the Prime Minister’s Office and other agencies, while
simultaneously carrying out information gathering to
identify any damage caused by this incident. On February
8, the Minister of Defense issued the order to terminate
“destruction measures against ballistic measures” in order
to promptly withdraw the units. North Korea has conducted
ballistic missile launches repeatedly since March of the
same year as well. The MOD/SDF continues to conduct
thoroughgoing intelligence collection as well as warning
and surveillance activities while being alert in order to be
able to respond to any situations, whilst closely cooperating
with the United States and the Republic of Korea (ROK).
Further cooperation with the U.S. government
including the U.S. Forces in Japan is necessary for efficient
and effective operation of the BMD system. Thus, related
measures including constant real-time sharing of BMD
operational and relevant information, and the expansion
of BMD cooperation have been agreed upon at the JapanU.S. Security Consultative Committee (2+2 Meeting).
Furthermore, Japan has closely cooperated with the
United States in responding to ballistic missiles, by means
such as receiving Shared Early Warning (SEW) from the


**(1) Missile Defense of the United States**
The United States is developing a multi-tier missile defense
system that combines defense systems suited for each of the
following phases of the ballistic missile flight path to provide
a mutually complementary response: (1) the boost phase,
(2) the mid-course phase, and (3) the terminal phase. Japan
and the United States have developed close coordination
concerning ballistic missile defense, and a part of the missile
defense system of the United States has been deployed in our
country in a step-by-step manner. Specifically, a TPY-2 radar
(so-called “X-band radar”) for BMD has been deployed at
the U.S. Shariki Communication Site in 2006, and BMDcapable Aegis ships have been forward deployed in Japan
and surrounding areas. In October 2006, Patriot PAC-3 units
were deployed in Okinawa Prefecture, and in October 2007,
a Joint Tactical Ground Station (JTAGS)[14] was deployed in
Aomori Prefecture. Furthermore, the 2nd TPY-2 radar was
deployed at the U.S. Kyogamisaki Communication Site in
December 2014.

**(2) Japan-U.S. BMD Technology Cooperation, etc.**
The government commenced a Japan-U.S. cooperative
research project on a sea-based upper-tier system in
FY1999. As the result showed good prospects for
resolving initial technical challenges, in December 2005,
the Security Council and the Cabinet decided to start
Japan-U.S. cooperative development of an advanced
ballistic missile interceptor by using the results of the
project as a technical basis. The joint development started
in June 2006 with a view to expanding the coverage of


13 Information on the area and time of launch, the projected area and time, where and when objects fall relating to ballistic missiles launched in the direction of Japan, which is analyzed and conveyed to the SDF
by the U.S. Forces in a short period of time after the launch. (The SDF started to receive the information since April 1996.)


-----

protection and dealing with future threats posed by
increasingly advanced and diverse ballistic missiles
attacks, and it is aimed to be completed by around 2017.
With regard to the Japan-U.S. cooperative
development, it is necessary to export BMD related arms
from Japan to the United States. In accordance with the
Chief Cabinet Secretary’s statement issued in December
2004, it was determined that the Three Principles on
Arms Exports would not apply to the BMD system and
related matters under the condition that strict controls are
maintained. Based on these circumstances, it was decided
that the prior consent of Japan could be given to the
third party transfer of the SM-3 Block IIA under certain

**4 Response to Attacks by Guerillas, Special Operations Forces and Others**


In Japan where most of the towns and cities are highly
urbanized, even small-scale infi ltrations and attacks can
pose a serious threat against the country’s peace and security.
These cases refer to various mode and forms including illegal
activities by infi ltrated foreign armed agents[16] etc., and
sabotage carried out by foreign guerillas or special forces,
which can be deemed as an armed attack against Japan.


conditions.[15] This decision was formally announced in the
Joint Statement of the Japan-U.S. Security Consultative
Committee (2+2 Meeting) in June 2011.
The Three Principles on Transfer of Defense
Equipment and Technology (Three Principles) received
Cabinet approval in April 2014. However, with regard
to exceptional measures instigated before the Three
Principles were decided, overseas transfers will continue
to be organized in the guidelines for the principles as
allowable under the Three Principles.

See>> Reference 68 (Three Principles on Transfer of Defense Equipment
and Technology)

of assistance such as transportation of police offi cers and
provision of equipment to the police force will be carried
out. If the case cannot be dealt with by the general police
force, then public security operations by the SDF will be
implemented. Furthermore, if it has been confi rmed that
an armed attack is being carried out against Japan, the
SDF will respond under a defense operation order.

See>> Fig. III-1-2-8 (Responses to Attacks by Guerillas, Special Operations
Forces and Others)



- 1  Basic Concept

In the stage where the actual situation of intruders and
the details of the ongoing case are not clear, the police
primarily respond to the situation, while the MOD/SDF
will collect relevant information and reinforce the security
of the SDF facilities. When the situation is clearer and can
be dealt with by the general police force, various forms



- 2  Responses to Attacks by Guerillas and Special
**Operations Forces**

Typical forms of attacks by guerrillas or special forces
include the destruction of critical private infrastructure and
other facilities, attacks against people, and assassinations
of dignitaries. In the event that an armed attack is carried


Fig. III-1-2-8 Responses to Attacks by Guerillas, Special Operations Forces and Others

When police forces can deal with the case

H Strengthening security at the SDF facilities
H Transportation of police officers and provision of various materials
and equipment to the police, as necessary

In the situation where details of
intruders or incident are not clear When police forces cannot deal with the case

The police will respond H Strengthening security at the SDF facilities

H Transportation of police officers and provision of various materials

(Actions to be taken by the SDF) and equipment to the police, as necessary
H Grasping the situation H Conducting intelligence gathering prior to the issuance of a public
H Strengthening the security of security oparations order as necessary
the SDF facilities H Response through public security operations
H Transportation of police personne
and provision of various materials
and equipment to the police

When the case is deemed an armed attack situation

H Responce under / a defense operation order


15 This refers to the case where the transfer supports the national security of Japan and/or contributes to international peace and stability, and when the third party has suffi cient policies to prevent the further
transfer of the SM-3 Block IIA.i


-----

Fig. III-1-2-9 Example of Operations against the Attacks by Guerillas and Special Forces

Patrol helicopter

Enemy aircraft
Fixed-wing patrol aircraft

Search and destruction

Observation helicopter

Reconnaissance aircraft at sea by MSDF and ASDF

Guerillas and Destroyer

Enemy Submarine special forces landing
submarine Depot ship

Base for underwater vehicles
used in landing operations

Underwater scooters used Search and

Warning and

in landing operations destruction at

surveillance

the water’s edge Light armored

Protection of Air vehicle Reconnaissance
important facilities defense unit

Search and Mobile Combat
destruction in Fighting helicopter Vehicles

Short range Tanks Obstacle mountainous areas Infantry unit
surface-to-air
missiles Multipurpose

Base Search and helicopter

destruction
in urban areas

Shovel car

Tank Tank

Bulldozer
Mortar

Consequence Infantry unit
management Wheeled armored vehicle

Base Leading local residents

for evacuation, etc. Police

NBC attack

NBC

Artillery reconnaissance

vehicle Rescuing hostage Special

operations unit

Mortar Decontamination vehicle


out against Japan by guerillas or special forces, the SDF
will respond under a defense operation order.
In dealing with attacks by guerrillas or special forces,
the MOD/SDF responds with a particular emphasis on
the establishment of a relevant information gathering
posture, warning and surveillance to prevent invasions in
coastal areas, protection of key facilities, and search and
destroy of invading guerrillas or special forces. Efforts
will be made for early detection of attacks and indications
through warning and surveillance, and, as required, the
SDF units will be deployed to protect key facilities such as
nuclear power plants and necessary posture for protection
will be established at an early stage. Based on this, in
the event of an infi ltration of our territory by guerrillas
or special operations forces, they will be searched for
and detected by reconnaissance units, aviation units and
others and combat units will be promptly deployed to
besiege and capture or to destroy them.

See>> Reference 24 (Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces);
Reference 25 (Statutory Provisions about Use of Force and Use of
Weapons by SDF Personnel); Fig. III-1-2-9 (Example of Operations
against the Attacks by Guerillas and Special Forces)



- 3  Response to Armed Agents

**(1) Basic Concept**
While the police assumes primary responsibility for
responding to illegal activities of armed agents, the SDF
will respond in accordance with situational developments.
When this happens, the SDF cooperates with the police
force. Accordingly, with regard to public security operations
of the SDF, the Basic Agreement[17] concerning cooperation
procedures between the SDF and the police, as well as
local agreements between GSDF divisions/brigades and
prefectural police forces, have been concluded.[18]


**(2) The MOD/SDF Initiatives**
The GSDF continues to conduct exercises nationwide
with the prefectural police of each prefecture and has
been strengthening such collaboration by, for example,
conducting fi eld exercises at nuclear power plants throughout
the country since 2012.[19] Furthermore, combined exercises
in dealing with suspicious vessels are also continuously
conducted between the MSDF and the Japan Coast Guard.


17 The Agreement on the Maintenance of Public Order in the Event of Public Security Operations, which was concluded between the then Defense Agency and the National Public Safety Commission (concluded
in 1954 and fully revised in 2000).

18 In 2004, guidelines were jointly formulated between the National Police Agency and the Defense Agency concerning dealing jointly with public security operations in the event of armed agent incidents.

19 The GSDF also conducted exercises at Ikata Nuclear Power Plant (Ehime Prefecture) in 2012, at Tomari Nuclear Power Plant (Hokkaido) and Mihama Nuclear Power Plant (Fukui Prefecture) in 2013, at Shimane
Nuclear Power Plant (Shimane Prefecture) in 2014, and at Higashidori Nuclear Power Plant (Aomori Prefecture) and Kashiwazaki-Kariwa Nuclear Power Plant (Niigata Prefecture) in 2015.


-----

GSDF personnel conducting joint training with the Fukuoka Prefectural Police GSDF personnel conducting decontamination training


when the incident does not fall under the category of
defense operations or public security operations, the
chemical protection units of the GSDF and medical units of
the ASDF, GSDF and MSDF will cooperate with relevant
organizations in information gathering concerning the extent
of the damage, decontamination activities, transportation of
the sick and injured, and medical activities through disaster
relief dispatches and civil protection dispatches.

**(2) The MOD/SDF Initiatives**
The MOD/SDF possesses and maintains the GSDF
Central Nuclear Biological Chemical (NBC) Weapon
Defense Unit and the Countermeasure Medical Unit as
well as increasing the number of chemical and medical
protection unit personnel, in order to improve the
capability for responding to NBC weapon attacks. Also,
the GSDF has designated personnel to take initial action
in the event of extraordinary disasters in order to allow
operations to begin within approximately one hour.
The MSDF and the ASDF have also acquired protective
equipment and materials to be used on vessels and at bases.



- 4 **Response to Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Weapons**

In recent years, there has been strong recognition of the
danger of NBC (Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical)
weapon proliferation, which can cause indiscriminate
mass casualties and contamination of an extensive area,
and the means for transporting such weapons, as well as
related equipment and materials, to terrorists and countries
under suspicion of proliferating such weapons. The sarin
gas attack[20] on the Tokyo subway in 1995 is one of the
examples of an incident in which these weapons were used.


**(1) Basic Concept**
In the event of the use of NBC weapons in Japan in a way
that corresponds to an armed attack, the SDF will conduct
defense operations to repel the armed attack and rescue
victims. Furthermore, in the event of the use of NBC
weapons in a way that does not correspond to an armed
attack but against which the general police alone cannot
maintain public security, the SDF will conduct public
security operations to suppress the armed group and rescue
victims in cooperation with related agencies. Furthermore,

**5 Initiatives towards Ensuring Maritime Security**


- 1  Basic Approach by the Government


by conducting bilateral/multilateral joint exercises related
to maritime security. In addition, it is stated that Japan will
provide assistance to those coastal states alongside the sea
lanes of communication and other states in enhancing their
maritime law enforcement capabilities.
The new Basic Plan on Ocean Policy,[21] which was
given Cabinet approval in April 2013, states the following


The National Security Strategy (NSS) states that Japan
will play a leading role in maintaining and developing
“Open and Stable Seas,” and will take necessary measures
to address various threats in sea lanes of communication,
including counter-piracy operations, ensuring safe maritime
transport and promoting cooperation with other countries


20 An incident in which members of the Aum Shinrikyo spread extremely poisonous sarin gas in subway trains crowded with commuters, claiming the lives of 12 people (this number refers to the number of deaths
indicated in the judgment rendered to Chizuo Matsumoto (commonly known as Shoko Asahara, a guru of Aum Shinrikyo)). The SDF conducted decontamination operations on the trains and stations as well as
supported police forensics.

21 Based on changes in the situation regarding the ocean, the Basic Plan on Ocean Policy specifi es the following targets for Japan as an oceanic state and has set out initiatives to be pursued intensively:
(1) international cooperation and contribution to the international community, (2) wealth and prosperity through ocean development and use, (3) shift from a country protected by the ocean to a country that


-----

**VOICE**

**The SDF Defends a Remote Island Near the National Border** **Column**

**GSDF Camp Tsushima (Tsushima City, Nagasaki Prefecture),**
**Colonel Katsuya Mitsuzuka, Commanding Offi cer of Tsushima Area Security Force and Commander of GSDF Camp Tsushima**

Tsushima is an island with its population of approximately 32,000 people located in the area north of Kyushu, which spreads about 80km from
north to south, and about 20km from east to west. It can also be described as an island near the national borders in that on a day of clear air
we can overlook Busan of the Republic of Korea (ROK), which is located approximately 50km north of the north end of the island.
In Tsushima, three SDF forces are deployed, which are the GSDF Tsushima Area Security Force, the MSDF Tsushima Coastal Defense
Group, and the ASDF 19th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron. These three SDF forces carry out their defense missions in Tsushima and
its surrounding area such as warning and surveillance in the surrounding waters and airspace on a round-the-clock basis and in responses
to frequently occurring disasters, as they mutually and closely collaborate as well as cooperate by regularly conducting trilateral SDF forces
meetings and joint exercises.
Partly due to the historical background that the “Sakimori” in ancient Japan (soldiers garrisoned at the border areas), the medieval samurai
and the military personnel in the early modern period have been protecting Tsushima together with the islanders, the understanding of the
Tsushima islanders including cooperation groups about the SDF activities is high. We also strive to maintain good relationships with them
through actively supporting local events and participating in various meetings and competitions. In addition, we deepen exchanges with relevant
organizations such as the police and coast guard offi ces on a regular basis to share information related to the security and safety of the area.
In this sense, it is no exaggeration to say that the entire island functions as a “Sakimori of the border.”
We, the three SDF forces, will continue to be aware of our great responsibility of working at the forefront of the border, and will make out best effort
in conducting day-to-day training and performing our missions whilst cooperating with the islanders and other relevant organizations.

GSDF Camp Tsushima Commander’s Cup Boys Kendo Tournament Overlooking Busan, ROK, across the sea.
ASDF Unishima Sub Base


initiatives for ensuring the security of the oceans:
reinforcement of the wide-area continuous surveillance
system; programmed improvement of warships, aircraft and
other vehicles; strengthening of the system of collaboration
between the SDF and Japan Coast Guard; and development
of a system of collaboration to ensure order and safety on
the coasts and isolated islands. In addition, the Basic Plan on
Ocean Policy states that in order to contribute to the creation
and development of order on the ocean, it will make use of
fora such as multilateral and bilateral ocean conferences to
contribute to international rules- and consensus-building.

- 2  Initiatives of the MOD/SDF


MOD/SDF promotes various kinds of initiatives such
as implementing counter-piracy activities, providing
capacity building assistance to coastal countries, and
enhancing joint training and exercises using a variety of
opportunities.
Within the framework of the Western Pacifi c Naval
Symposium (WPNS), the MSDF has been actively
engaged in and cooperating with initiatives such as the
establishment of the Code for Unplanned Encounters at
Sea (CUES),[22] which was adopted at the 14th meeting in
April 2014.
In October of the same year, the sixth Japan-ASEAN
Defense Vice-Ministerial Forum hosted by the MOD
took place and participants agreed to further strengthen
cooperation in each fi eld such as discussion of the
establishment of a hotline in preparation for unforeseen


In order to maintain the order of “Open and Stable
Seas” and to ensure the safety of maritime transport, the


22 This specifi es the procedures for ensuring safety, communications methods and other factors when there are unplanned encounters at sea by naval ships and naval aircraft of the participating nations in the i


-----

consequences and the promotion of capacity building
assistance by the MSDF.
In addition, in relation to China, consultation
meetings have been held between the defense authorities
of both countries towards the commencement of early
implementation of the maritime and air communication
mechanism in order to avoid and prevent unexpected
situations.

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-4-4 (Japan-China Defense Exchanges and
Cooperation); Part III, Chapter 2, Section 2 (Ensuring Maritime Security)

**6 Responses in Space**


For Japan whose defense force is built in line with the
basic principles of maintaining and exclusively defense
oriented policy, the use of space, which does not belong
to any territories of any nations and which is not subject
to the constraints of conditions such as the surface of
the terrain, is extremely important when: collecting
information to perceive signs of various incidents in
advance and strengthening the surveillance activities
in its surrounding seas and airspace; ensuring means of
communication by the SDF in their international peace
cooperation activities and other activities.


Chief of Staff of the MSDF Takei (right) participating in the Western Pacific Naval Symposium
(WPNS)


and strengthening of space industry and scientifi c/
technological bases.

- 2  Initiatives of the MOD/SDF


The use of space is extremely important for the MOD/
SDF to conduct a range of tasks effectively and effi ciently.
Thus, the National Defense Program Guidelines (NDPG)
stipulates that the MOD/SDF ensures the effective
and stable use of space by strengthening information
collection capabilities using satellites, reinforcing
command, control and telecommunications capabilities,
and enhancing the survivability of satellites through such
initiatives as Space Situational Awareness (SSA).
In August 2014, the MOD revised the “Basic Policy
Relating to the Development and Use of Space,” which
was formulated in 2008, refl ecting to the formulation of
the National Security Strategy (NSS) and NDPG in 2013.
Also, from the perspective of further promoting
cooperation in the space fi eld between the defense
authorities in Japan and the United States, the two
countries established the “Space Cooperation Working
Group (SCWG)”in April 2015 and held the fi rst and the
second meetings in October 2015 and February 2016,
respectively. The SCWG will continue to further promote
reviews in broader fi elds such as: (1) promotion of policyrelated consultation regarding space, (2) closer information
sharing, (3) cooperation for nurturing and securing experts,
(4) implementation of tabletop exercises.



- 1  The Whole-of-Government Approach

The Offi ce of National Space Policy[23] established in the
Cabinet Offi ce in July 2012 engages in the planning,
drafting, coordinating, and other policy matters relating to
the government’s development and use of space. In light
of the environmental changes surrounding space policy
and the new security policies stated in the NSS that was
approved by the Cabinet in 2013, the Basic Plan on Space
Policy was decided upon in the Strategic Headquarters
for Space Development established within the Cabinet in
January 2015. This Basic Plan was prepared as a 10-year
development plan focusing on the next approximately 20
years to improve predictability of industries’ investments,
and strengthen the industrial base, and has the following
goals: (1) Ensuring space security; (2) Promoting the
use of space in the civilian sector; and (3) Maintaining


**7 Response to Cyber Attacks**


Information and communications technology has developed an essential infrastructure for socioeconomic activities. On
and been rapidly and widely adopted. As a result, it is now the other hand, there is a possibility that people’s life and


-----

economic activities will be severely affected if the computer
systems or networks fail. The same is true of both the MOD/
SDF. If the critical functions of the SDF are intercepted by a
cyber attack, there is a possibility that problems that threaten
the core of Japan’s defense may arise.
With regard to cyber attacks, the number of
cases recognized as threats to Japanese governmental
organizations and agencies in FY2014 reached
approximately 3,990,000, and these threats have become
increasingly serious.[24]

- 1  The Whole-of-Government Approach and
**Other Initiatives**



- 2  Initiatives of the MOD/SDF

**(1) Contribution to the Whole-of-Government Approach**
Along with the National Police Agency, the Ministry
of Internal Affairs and Communications, the Ministry
of Economy, Trade and Industry, and the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, the MOD, as one of the five government
agencies that cooperate particularly closely with the
NISC, participates in cyber attack response training and
personnel exchanges, and provides information about
cyber attacks, etc. to the cross-sector initiatives led by the
NISC as well as sending personnel to the CYMAT.


**(2) Unique Initiatives by the MOD/SDF**
As unique initiatives by the MOD/SDF, the SDF C4
(Command, Control, Communication & Computers) Systems
Command is monitoring MOD/SDF communications
networks around the clock. In addition, the MOD/SDF is
engaged in holistic measures including the introduction of
intrusion prevention systems in order to increase the safety
of information and communication systems, development
of defense systems such as the security and analysis device
for cyber defense, enactment of regulations,[26] stipulating
postures and procedures for responding to cyber attacks, and
improving the human resources and technological bases, as
well as conducting research on cutting-edge technology.
The Cyber Policy Review Committee, chaired by
the Parliamentary Senior Vice-Minister of Defense,
was established in February 2013. The committee is
conducting integrated deliberations regarding cooperation
with other countries and relevant organizations, training
and securing personnel capable of responding to cyber
attacks, cooperation with the defense industry, and


In light of such incidents as the cyber attacks on defense
industry companies reported in 2011, the National
Information Security Center (NISC) has established
the Cyber Incident Mobile Assistance Team (CYMAT)
to provide agile support, forming partnerships among
ministries and agencies.
In order to deal with the increasing threat to cyber
security, in November 2014, the Cyber Security Basic Act
was enacted. The Act aims to contribute to the security
of Japan by clarifying the basic principles of Japan’s
cyber security measures and the responsibilities of local
governments, as well as by comprehensively and effectively
promoting the measures regarding cyber security.
In response to this, in January 2015, the Cyber
Security Strategic Headquarters was established in the
Cabinet and the National center of Incident readiness
and Strategy for Cyber Security (NISC)[25] was established
in the Cabinet Secretariat. The NISC is responsible for
planning and promotion of cyber security-related policies
and serves as the control tower in taking measures and
responding to significant cyber security incidents in
government organizations and agencies, as well as
critical infrastructures. Furthermore, in September
2015, the Cyber Security Strategy was formulated for
the comprehensive and effective promotion of measures
pertaining to cyber security, with the aims: to create
and develop free, fair and safe cyber space; to enhance
the vitality of the economy and society and realize
their sustainable development; to realize society in
which citizens can live safely and with peace of mind;
to contribute to peace and stability of the international
communities as well as the security of Japan.


Personnel working at the Cyber Defense Group

24 Cybersecurity Annual Report 2014 (submitted at the “Information Security Policy Council” on July 23, 2015).

25 With the enactment of the Cyber Security Basic Act in January 2015, the name of the organization was changed from the National Information Security Center (NISC) to the National center of Incident readiness
and Strategy for Cybersecurity (NISC).


-----

Fig. III-1-2-10 MOD/SDF Comprehensive Measures to Deal with Cyber Attacks

2) Responses by special units to cyber attacks

-  24-hour monitoring of networks and information systems as well as
advanced measures against cyber attacks (virus analysis) by the Cyber 3) Development of a response posture to
Defense Group (Joint Staff), System Protection Unit (GSDF), Communication cyber attacks

1) Ensuring safety of information

Security Group (MSDF), and Computer Security Evaluation Squadron (ASDF) -  Establishment of security measures criteria

systems

of information systems

-  Introduction of firewall and virus detection -  Establishment of security measures with
software which MOD/SDF staff should comply

-  Separate the network into the Defense -  Development of response posture at the
Information Infrastructure (DII) open system time of cyber attack occurrence
and close system -  Establishment of the Cyber Policy Review

-  Implementation of system audit, etc. Committee

Internet

DII opennetwork Comprehensive Defensive The Six Pillars of

DII closed
network Measures against Cyber Attacks 4) Research of cutting-edge technology

6) Coordination with other
organizations and agencies -  Research on technology to develop the

cyber training environnent

-  Information sharing with the
National center of Incident Cyber Training Environment
readiness and Strategy for
Cybersecurity, the U.S. Armed Simulated attacks

Simulated environment

Forces, and other relevant nations

5) Development of human resources Defense

-  For the purpose of human resources development, implementing
studying abroad programs at organizations affiliated with Carnegie
Mellon University and studying programs at graduate schools in Japan, Control and evaluation
as well as education at professional courses at the SDF Research

-  For the purpose of fostering security awareness, offering education at -  Allows for counter-cyber attack
workplace and professional education at the National Defense Academy training in a simulated environment


responses to supply chain risks.[27]

In March 2014, a “Cyber Defense Group” was
established under the SDF C4 (Command, Control,
Communication & Computers) Systems Command, in
order to appropriately deal with the threat posed by cyber
attacks, which are becoming increasingly sophisticated
and complicated, and the relevant systems were enhanced
and strengthened. In addition, in March 2015, cyber
information gathering devices were installed to aid the
prevention of attacks by the early detection of cyber attack
indications. Going forward, the necessary systems are
also scheduled to be developed, such as the development
of a cyber training environment in which the SDF units
can conduct more practical trainings.

See>> Fig. III-1-2-10 (MOD/SDF Comprehensive Measures to Deal with
Cyber Attacks)

**(3) Cooperation with the United States**
Since comprehensive defense cooperation, including joint
response, between Japan and its ally the United States is
vital, the Cyber Defense Policy Working Group (CDPWG)
was set up as a framework between the defense authorities
of Japan and the United States. Under this framework,
meetings have been held four times to discuss the following


topics: (1) promotion of policy discussions regarding cyber
issues, (2) closer sharing of information, (3) promotion of
joint exercises incorporating response to cyber attacks,
and (4) matters such as cooperation for training and
maintaining experts. In May 2015, a joint declaration on
the specifi c future direction of the cooperation between the
two countries was announced.
In addition, through participation in the “JapanU.S. Cyber Dialogue,” a whole-of-government approach
by both nations, holding of the “Japan-U.S. IT Forum,”
a framework between the defense authorities that has
been discussed repeatedly since 2002, and dispatching
liaison offi cers to the U.S. Army’s cyber educational
institution, Japan’s cooperation with the United States
is to be further strengthened.

**(4) Cooperation with Other Countries etc.**
In addition to the IT Forum held between the defense
authorities of Singapore, Vietnam, and Indonesia, cyber
dialogues are also being held between the authorities of
the United Kingdom, NATO, Estonia, the Republic of
Korea and others, in order to exchange views on threat
awareness and relevant initiatives taken by each country.
In April 2015, Japan participated in a cyber defense


27 Supply chain risks refers to the risks that malicious software (malware), including computer viruses, may be inserted in the components of equipment during the design, manufacturing, procuring, or installation


-----

exercise (Locked Shields) organized by the Cooperative
Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence (CCDCOE) based in
Estonia, and in November of the same year participated in
another cyber defense exercise (Cyber Coalition) hosted
by NATO as an observer. Japan intends to strengthen
international cooperation in the cyber fi eld through
continuous and active participation in these cyber defense

**8 Response to Large-Scale Disasters**


When disasters such as natural disasters occur, the SDF
works in collaboration with municipal governments,
engaging in various activities such as the search and rescue
of disaster victims or missing ships or aircraft, controlling
fl oods, offering medical treatment, preventing epidemics,
supplying water, and transporting personnel and goods.


exercises and other similar opportunities.
In July 2013, the “Cyber Defense Council” (CDC)
was set up, and its core members consist of around ten
companies in the defense industry with a strong interest in
cyber security. Efforts are being made to improve capacities
to counter cyber attacks by the MOD/SDF, and the defense
industry, through joint exercise and other initiatives.

- 2  Response of the MOD/SDF


**(1) Response to Natural Disasters**
a. Disaster Dispatch relating to the Support to Re-Searches
for Missing Persons on Mount Ontake
With respect to the volcanic eruption occurred on Mount
Ontake on September 27, 2014, the SDF, in response to
the request for disaster relief dispatch from the Governor
of Nagano Prefecture, conducted lifesaving operations
and searches for missing persons. On July 3, 2015,
responding to the request for disaster relief dispatch
relating to support for re-searches from the Governor of
Nagano who decided to conduct re-searches for missing
persons, the SDF assisted the re-searches of missing
persons by airlifting personnel from the police and fi re
department as well as goods. The scale of this disaster
relief dispatch was approximately 1,160 personnel, 210
vehicles, and 48 aircraft.
b. Disaster Relief Dispatch to the Kanto-Tohoku Heavy
Rainfall Disaster in September 2015
On September 10, 2015, a heavy rain emergency warning
was issued in Ibaraki Prefecture and the overfl owing
from the Kinugawa River occurred, and fl ood occurrence
information was also issued. Responding to the disaster
relief dispatch request from the Governor of Ibaraki
Prefecture, the SDF conducted rescue operations of
isolated individuals, evacuation assistance using boats,
fl ood control activities using sandbags, water supply
activity, bathing assistance, and epidemic control
operations. The scale of this disaster relief dispatch was
approximately 7,540 personnel, 2,150 vehicles, 180
boats, and 105 aircraft.
On the same day, a heavy rain emergency warning
was issued also in Tochigi Prefecture. Although the
warning was withdrawn on the following day, the SDF
carried out rescue operations of isolated individuals in



- 1  Outline of Disaster Relief Dispatches

In principle, disaster relief dispatch is conducted as follows;
prefectural governors or other offi cials ask the Minister of
Defense, or an offi cer designated by the Minister, to dispatch
the SDF units, etc. in the event of natural disaster; and
then the minister or the designated offi cer will conduct the
dispatch if it is deemed to be necessary for responding to the
disaster.[28] This is because the course of action considered to
be most appropriate is that prefectural governors and other
offi cials grasp the overall conditions of the disaster and their
own disaster relief capabilities fi rst, and then decide whether
to make a request for the SDF disaster relief dispatch.
However, when a warning declaration is issued based on
the Act on Special Measures Concerning Countermeasures
for Large-Scale Earthquakes[29] or a declaration of a nuclear
emergency situation is issued based on the Act on Special
Measures Concerning Nuclear Emergency Preparedness,
the Minister of Defense is authorized to order a nuclear
disaster dispatch upon the request of the Director of the
Nuclear Disaster Countermeasures Headquarters (the Prime
Minister).
The SDF has put in place arrangements for an initial
response to ensure that disaster relief operations are
conducted promptly. This is called “FAST-Force.”

See>> Reference 24 (Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces);
Reference 25 (Statutory Provisions about Use of Force and Use of
Weapons by SDF Personnel); Fig. III-1-2-11 (Flow of Events from the
Point of Request to Dispatch and Withdrawal); Fig. III-1-2-12 (State
of Readiness for Disaster Dispatches (Standard))


28 The Commandant of the Japan Coast Guard, the Director General of the Regional Coast Guard Headquarters, and the Director of the Airport Administrative Offi ce may request a disaster relief dispatch. With
regard to disaster relief dispatch, earthquake prevention dispatch, and nuclear disaster relief dispatch, (1) SDF personnel ordered for the dispatch may exercise authority based on the SDF Act; (2) SDF Reserve
Personnel and SDF Ready Reserve Personnel may be called up for service in the event of disaster relief dispatch, and SDF Ready Personnel in the event of earthquake prevention dispatch or nuclear disaster
relief dispatch; and (3) special units may be temporarily formed as necessary.

29 The Prime Minister issues an earthquake alert with the endorsement of the Cabinet in the event that an earthquake has been predicted and when it is deemed necessary to urgently implement emergency


-----

|Col1|Call up in such cases as disasters SDF ready reserve personnel SDF reserve personnel|
|---|---|
|Disaster relief operations||

|Fig. III-1-2-12|State of Readiness for Disaster Dispatches (Standard)|
|---|---|
|Common to All The state of readiness with which SDF troops can begin gathering information immediately after an earthquake of seismic intensity five or greater occurs. FAST Force (GSDF) First response units throughout Japan (about 3,900 personnel, about 1,100 vehicles, and about 40 aircraft) are on standby around- the-clock and will be deployed in an hour (standard) upon receiving an order as a standard procedure. Various units including helicopters (video transmission), chemical protection, and bomb disposal are on standby in each regional army. FAST Force (MSDF) Vessels on standby: Designate one initial response vessel in each regional district Aircraft on standby (about 20 aircraft): Deploy in 15 minutes to two hours in each base FAST Force (ASDF) Standby for scrambling against intrusions into airspace Standby for aircraft rescue and emergency transport duties (about 20 aircraft): Deploy within 15 minutes to two hours in each base *When an earthquake of seismic intensity five or greater occurs, standby aircraft are diverted into information collecting||


Fig. III-1-2-11 Flow of Events from the Point of Request to Dispatch and Withdrawal

Outbreak of
a disaster

In case of particular urgency with no time to
wait for a request from prefectural governors

Demand a request from the prefectural governor -  Prefectural governors Request for withdrawal

-  Commandant of the Japan Coast Guard

-  Director General of the Regional Coast Guard

Municipal mayor

Headquarters

1) Procedure for request

-  Director of the Airport Administrative Office

Direct notification -  Normally requested in written
(when demanding a request is not possible) Request for dispatch form

-  Requested verbally or by

The Minister of Defense or the individuals designated by the Minister telegram or telephone in

case of emergency (a written

Order to dispatch Order to dispatch Call up[1] request should later follow)

2) Content of request

Dispatch of units Dispatch of units Call up in such cases as -  Conditions of the disaster and
(discretionary dispatch) disasters reasons for the request

SDF ready reserve -  Desired duration for dispatch
personnel -  Desired area for dispatch
SDF reserve personnel

and desired activities

-  Other items for reference

Disaster relief operations

-  Disbandment of call up[2]

-  Order for withdrawal

Disbandment of call up[2]

Withdrawal of units

Notes: 1. SDF ready reserve personnel and SDF reserve personnel will be called on by the Minister of Defense as necessary
with the approval of the Prime Minister.

2. Disbandment of SDF ready reserve personnel and SDF reserve personnel must be done by the Minister of Defense.


response to the request from the Governor of Tochigi
Prefecture for disaster relief dispatch received on the
11th since some areas in Nikko City were isolated by the
heavy rain. The scale of this disaster relief dispatch was
approximately 70 personnel, 15 vehicles, and 5 aircraft.
Furthermore, another heavy rain emergency warning
was issued on the 11th in Miyagi Prefecture. As the heavy
rain caused overflowing from part of the Yoshida River
and flood occurrence information was also issued. Due to
the floodwater, some areas became isolated, and the SDF
conducted rescue operations of the isolated individuals
responding to the disaster relief dispatch request from the
Governor of Miyagi Prefecture. The scale of this disaster
relief dispatch was approximately 190 personnel, 40
vehicles, 7 aircraft, and 37 boats.


Rescue activities through disaster relief dispatch relating to the Kanto-Tohoku Heavy Rainfall
Disaster in September 2015

c. Disaster Relief Dispatch to Water Supply Assistance in
Heavy Snow Conditions
Due to the impact of the record cold wave from January 23
to 25, 2016, water outage occurred throughout Japan. In
response to the requests for disaster relief dispatch from
the Governors of Shimane Hiroshima Fukuoka Saga


-----

Nagasaki, Oita, Miyazaki, and Kagoshima Prefectures,
the SDF conducted water supply assistance in 29 cities
within the eight prefectures to provide approximately
1,280 tons of water in einght days from January 25 to
February 1 of the same year. The scale of this disaster
relief dispatch was approximately 1,860 personnel and
340 vehicles including water trailers.
d. Disaster Relief Dispatch to the Kumamoto Earthquake
Disaster in 2016
On April 14, 2016, an earthquake with an epicenter in
the Kumamoto region in Kumamoto Prefecture (M6.5)
occurred. Responding to the disaster relief dispatch
request from the Governor of Kumamoto Prefecture,
the SDF conducted lifesaving operations and livelihood
support for the victims (transportation of goods, provision
of food and water, bathing assistance, etc.). Moreover,
on April 16 of the same year, another earthquake with
an epicenter in the Kumamoto region in Kumamoto
Prefecture (M7.3) occurred. The SDF, responding to
the disaster relief dispatch request from the Governor of
Oita Prefecture in addition to that from the Governor of
Kumamoto Prefecture, formed a joint task force with the
Commanding General of the Western Army Headquarters
as its commander on the same day and carried out
lifesaving operations and livelihood support activities by
deploying the maximum of nearly 26,000 personnel.
This disaster relief dispatch ended on May 30, 2016,
and its scale came to be approximately 814,000 personnel,
2,600 aircraft, and 300 vessels. The SDF carried out in
full force the following livelihood support activities for
the victims: (1) transportation of goods – 227 places;
(2) meal providing assistance – 49 places; (3) water supply
assistance – 147 places; (4) bathing assistance – 25 places;
(5) medical assistance – 9 places at the maximum.
Considering the fact that the Kumamoto Earthquake
caused an enormous damage to the affected areas, Ready
Reserve Personnel were gathered for the second time
since the Great East Japan Earthquake in 2011 and the
maximum of approximately 160 of them engaged in the
livelihood assistance activities from April 23 through
to May 2. Also from April 23 to May 29, as part of the
initiative taken by the government’s Team in Charge of
Assisting the Lives of Disaster Victims the private ship,
Hakuo, which is on contract to make use of the PFI Act,[30]
was used as a refreshment facility for the victims at the
Yatsushiro Port in Kumamoto Prefecture, and the services
including its use as an accommodation for one night/two
days, meals, and bathing were provided for 17 times in
total for approximately 2,600 people.
Furthermore, the U.S. Forces in Japan provided the


following assistance: (1) transportation of SDF personnel
and SDF vehicles to Kumamoto Airport using C-130,
(2) transportation of SDF personnel to Kumamoto Airport
using UC-35, and (3) transportation of aid goods to the
disaster affected areas using the MV-22 Osprey, while the
ROK Forces provided instant rice packs, drinking water,
blankets and tents using two C-130 aircraft.

See>> Reference 46 (Record of Disaster Relief Dispatches (Past Five Years));

Fig. III-1-2-13 (Record of Disaster Relief Dispatches (FY2015))

|Description|Number of dispatches|Total number of personnel|Total number of vehicles|Total number of aircraft|Total number of vessels|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Responses to storm, flood, and earthquake disasters|13|21,293|3,689|288|0|
|Transporting emergency patients|419|2,209|2|457|0|
|Search and rescue|22|1,092|180|37|2|
|Assisting firefighting|61|2,164|166|71|0|
|Other|26|3,277|1,133|35|0|
|Total|541|30,035|5,170|888|2|


|Fig. III-1-2-13|Record of Disaster Relief Dispatches (FY2015)|
|---|---|
|Total Total Total Total Number of Description number of number of number of number of dispatches personnel vehicles aircraft vessels Responses to storm, flood, and 13 21,293 3,689 288 0 earthquake disasters Transporting emergency 419 2,209 2 457 0 patients Search and 22 1,092 180 37 2 rescue Assisting 61 2,164 166 71 0 firefighting Other 26 3,277 1,133 35 0 Total 541 30,035 5,170 888 2||



**(2) Transportation of Emergency Patients**
The SDF uses its aircraft to transport emergency patients
from isolated islands and remote areas with insufficient
medical facilities (transportation of emergency patients).
In FY2015, out of a total of 541 cases of disaster relief
operation dispatch, 419 cases involved the transportation
of emergency patients, with dispatches to remote
islands such as the Southwestern Islands (Okinawa and
Kagoshima Prefectures), the Ogasawara Islands (Tokyo),
and remote islands of Nagasaki Prefecture representing
the majority of such cases.
In addition, the SDF carries out sea rescues upon
requests by the japan Coast Guard in such occasions as
transport of emergency patients from vessels navigating
areas of ocean far from the mainland where the aircraft of
other organizations are unable to respond, due to reasons
including a short flight range; emergencies of vessels
due to incidents such as fire, flooding or capsizing.
Furthermore, the SDF conducts wide-area medical
transport operations for serious-case patients, by C-130H
transport aircraft, utilizing its mobile medical units in
certain occasions.
Furthermore, in FY2015, the SDF carried out
61 dispatches of firefighting support, with 55 cases
responding to fire in the areas near SDF facilities.


-----

**VOICE**

**Disaster Relief Dispatch related to the Kanto-Tohoku Heavy Rainfall Disaster** **Column**
**in September 2015**

**GSDF Camp Kitautsunomiya (Utsunomiya City, Tochigi Prefecture)**
**Major (GSDF) Yasunari Matsushita, Leader of the 1st Aviation, 12th Helicopter Unit**

I joined the disaster relief dispatch for the Kanto-Tohoku Heavy Rainfall Disaster as an aviation pilot of UH-60JA. On September 10, the day
when the disaster occurred, I was given a reconnaissance mission and was heading to the affected area. On the way to the destination,
I received an order, “Perform a rescue operation, not a reconnaissance mission,” from our leader who perceived the need for rescue activities.
Actually, when I arrived at the outburst site of the Kinugawa River, there was an unimaginable severe scene unfolding in the area. A man
clinging to an electric pole and calling for help was the fi rst thing I saw, followed by a boy waving a yellow towel from the balcony of the fi rst
fl oor of a house with a brown roof. After that, I also confi rmed a couple holding a dog on the top of a building, and parents and children who
were desperately seeking help from a white two-story house. Each of these cases was an emergency but we had to prioritize them for a rescue
operation. So, we focused on one house, which was a brown house and the ground fl oor part had pillars, which were bent and jiggling, and
without hesitation, we decided to rescue the people in that house fi rst. While considering the possibility that the house might be washed away
whilst rescuing and shouldering the pressure that we should never cause an aviation accident, we managed to successfully rescue a family of
four including the boy above from the house immediately before it was swept up by the water, based on the sense of responsibility that “we the
SDF is the last resort” as the driving force. Following this, we rescued the remaining people who required our help.
I believe that our success in protecting the lives of the people in this country resulted from the right judgment at the scene of the disaster
and also from the fact that all of the crews bravely made efforts to perform the rescue mission working together. This made me realize that
the steady training in our daily life would inevitably pay off. At the same time, this came as a fresh reminder of the necessity of readiness and
training in preparation for various events and situations.

UH-60JA and the author A scene of rescuing using a hoist


Additionally, the SDF also conducts aerial fi refi ghting
activities in locations such as mountain and forest areas
where fi refi ghting conditions are severe.

**(3) The MOD/SDF Response to Nuclear Disaster**
In order to respond to nuclear disasters, the MOD/SDF
has formulated “The SDF Nuclear Disaster Response
Plan.” The SDF also participates general nuclear disaster
prevention drills jointly implemented by the government,
local governments, and nuclear operators, and strengthen
cooperation with relevant agencies in confi rming the
effectiveness of local governments’ evacuation plan and
in the condition of nuclear disaster emergency. Moreover,
since October 2014, fi ve personnel from the GSDF, MSDF,
and ASDF were transferred (on temporary assignment) to
a section in charge of nuclear disaster prevention within
the Cabinet Offi ce as part of an effort to enhance the
effectiveness of nuclear disaster response capabilities.


**(4) Formulating Plans for Responding to Various Disasters**
In the event of the occurrence of various disasters, the
MOD/SDF will take all possible measures such as swift
transportation and deployment of suffi ciently sized units
in their initial response. By establishing a rotating staffi ng
posture based on a joint operational approach, the MOD/
SDF will ensure that they are able to sustain a wellprepared condition for a long-term response. In doing so,
the MOD/SDF will fully take into account the lessons
learned from the Great East Japan Earthquake.
The MOD/SDF is in the process of formulating various
contingency plans for responses to large-scale earthquakes,
which are under consideration at the Central Disaster
Management Council, based on the Ministry of Defense
Disaster Prevention plan to respond to such earthquakes.

**(5) Exercises Involving the SDF**
In order to respond to large-scale and various other
disasters in a speedy and appropriate manner the SDF


-----

Commander of the 21st Squadron welcomed by the Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense
Kumada at the event for F-2 fighter aircraft returning to the ASDF Matsushima Air Base

carries out various disaster prevention drills, and also
actively participates in disaster prevention drills organized
by the Japanese government or local government and is
seeking to ensure cooperation with various ministries and
agencies, and local governments.
a. Joint Exercise for Rescue (JXR)
From June to July 2015, the SDF conducted a command
post exercise and a field training exercise in preparation
for the predicted Tokyo Inland Earthquake to enhance the
SDF’s earthquake response capability. At the same time,
the exercise aimed to strengthen Japan-U.S. cooperation
through the participation of all the military services of the
U.S. Forces in Japan.
b. Joint Disaster Response Exercise with U.S. Forces
(TREX – Tomodachi Rescue Exercise)
In June, 2015, the SDF conducted a field training
exercise in preparation for the predicted earthquake
along the Nankai trough, and worked to enhance their
earthquake response capability by practicing cooperation
procedures among the SDF, the U.S. Forces in Japan and
organizations relevant to disaster prevention, etc. This
exercise was implemented in conjunction with a general
disaster prevention training hosted by Kochi Prefecture,
while it was also intended to strengthen Japan-U.S.
cooperation through the first ever participation of the
U.S. Army Japan in the training.
c. Other
The SDF worked to enhance their earthquake response
capability, for example, by conducting the Nankai Rescue
27, an exercise in preparation for the predicted earthquake
along the Nankai trough earthquake along the Japan and
Chishima Trench implemented by the GSDF Middle
Army in July 2015, and the Northern Rescue 2015, an
exercise in preparation for the predicted implemented by
the GSDF Northern Army in August of the same year.

See>> Reference 47 (Implementation and participation record of major drills
related to disaster dispatch (FY2015))


GSDF personnel measuring radiation dosage during the Hokkaido nuclear disaster drill

Japanese and U.S. personnel transporting an injured person to a U.S. military aircraft during the
Japan-U.S. Joint Disaster Response Exercise (TREX - Tomodachi Rescue Exercise)


**(6) Coordination with Local Governments**
It is also important for the SDF to strengthen coordination
with local governments form peacetime for the purpose
of smooth disaster relief operations smoothly. For this
reason, the SDF implements various measures including:
(1) Establishment of the post of Liaison Officer for Civil
Protection and Disaster Management (administrative
official) at the SDF Provincial Cooperation Offices;
(2) Temporary assignment of SDF officers to the
department in charge of disaster prevention at the Tokyo
Metropolitan Government, and mutual exchange between
administrative officials of both the GSDF Middle Army
Headquarters and Hyogo Prefectural Government;
and (3) Recommendation of retired SDF personnel
with knowledge in disaster prevention in accordance
with requests from local governments. As of the end
of March 2016, as many as 372 retired SDF personnel
are working in disaster prevention and other sections in
249 local governments in 46 prefectures throughout the
country. Such cooperation in human resources is a very
effective way of strengthening coordination between the
MOD/SDF and local governments, and its efficacy was
confirmed through the experience of the Great East Japan
Earthquake In particular each GSDF regional Army


-----

**y**

**Resuming the F-2 Flying Training at the Matsushima Air Base** **Column**

The ASDF Matsushima Air Base in Miyagi Prefecture holds the 21st squadron, which is in charge of providing fl ying training using F-2
fi ghter aircraft.
The Great East Japan Earthquake occurred in 2011 caused serious damage to a variety of equipment including F-2 fi ghter aircraft and
facilities at the Matsushima Air Base. The 21st squadron was relocated to the ASDF Misawa Base in Aomori Prefecture to continue providing
fl ying training on a reduced scale due to the situation in which the squadron was unable to conduct fl ying training at all. At the Matsushima
Base, initiatives aiming to resume the fl ying training have begun, such as the repairing and procuring of affected equipment, and raising
construction of aircraft hangars and a ramp as a countermeasure against tsunamis.
Five years have passed since the Earthquake. As repairing and procuring of the aircraft and various equipment progressed and the
raising construction of the aircraft hangars etc., was also completed, the Matsushima Air Base has restored itself to its pre-disaster condition.
In addition, in March 2016, the 21st squadron, which had been providing training after the relocation to the Misawa Base, returned to the
Matsushima Base after about fi ve years and resumed its fl ying training.
The 21st squadron thanks the Misawa Base and all the residents in the surrounding areas that accepted the relocated training in the
post-disaster period and relishes the pleasure to be able to have training at the Matsushima Base. In such a situation, the 21st squadron works
on nurturing excellent and robust fi ghter pilots.

F-2 fi ghter (with a special painting of cherry blossoms, which is the fl ower F-2 fi ghter returned to the Matsushima Air Base
of Higashi Matsushima City) returning to the Matsushima Air Base from
the Misawa Air Base


establishes a forum for interaction with senior directors
for crisis management and other offi cials from local
governments and exchange information and opinions to

**9 Transport of Japanese Nationals Overseas, etc.**


In the event of disasters, insurgencies, and other
emergencies overseas, the Minister of Defense can order
SDF units to transport Japanese nationals and other people
overseas upon request from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and subsequent consultations with the Minister, on
the basis of Article 84 (4) of the SDF Law (transport of
Japanese nationals overseas, etc.). In such cases, the SDF
will protect the Japanese nationals and other parties in
the country concerned, and safely guide them to aircraft,
ships or vehicles, and safely transport them. To this end,
the SDF maintains operational readiness, with the GSDF
designating a helicopter unit and leading transport unit
personnel, the MSDF designating vessels such as transport
ships (including ship-based aircraft), and the ASDF
designating on airlift units and personnel for dispatch.
Since the transport of Japanese nationals overseas


strengthen coordination with those local governments.

See>> Reference 22 (Employment situation of retired uniformed SDF
Personnel in disaster prevention-related bureaus in local government)

An exercise for transporting Japanese nationals overseas carried out in Cobra Gold


-----

requires close coordination among the GSDF, MSDF,
and ASDF, joint exercises are carried out under normal
circumstances. In the annual multinational joint exercise
“Cobra Gold” in Thailand, in February 2015, the MOD
participated in the exercise for the transport of Japanese
nationals overseas in cooperation with the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, the Japanese Embassy in Thailand, and
others, together with the staff of the embassy and their
family members, and conducted the fi rst ever overseas
ground transport exercise. In addition, in February 2016,
a destroyer (including a ship-based aircraft) participated
in this joint exercise for the fi rst time, while an SDF
vehicle (a high mobility vehicle) was brought in and used
in the training of land transport by vehicles.
With respect to the Terrorist Attack in Dhaka,
Bangladesh, which occurred in July 2016, a government
aircraft was sent from the ASDF Special Aircraft Group

**10 Readiness against Invasion**


The NDPG states that only the necessary level of readiness
against land invasions involving the mobilization of large
ground forces, which was expected primarily during the
Cold War, will be retained.
In case Japan faces a full-scale invasion, the SDF
will respond to the situation in an aligned and systematic
manner based on their integrated operations. Their
operations are categorized into (1) operations for aerial
air defense operations, (2) defense operations protecting
waters around Japan, (3) operations protecting the
land, and (4) operations ensuring security in maritime
communication, based on the characteristic of their
purposes. In executing these operations, the U.S. Forces
will assist the operations implemented by the SDF and
deploy operations to complement the capabilities of the
SDF, including the use of striking power, in line with the
Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation.

See>> Reference 24 (Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces);
Reference 25 (Statutory Provisions about Use of Force and Use of
Weapons by SDF Personnel)


(belong to the Chitose Air Base) to Dhaka in Bangladesh
for the purpose of transporting Japanese victims and
others involved based on Article 84-4 of the SDF Act
(Transportation of Japanese nationals staying abroad)
and the bodies of Japanese victims (seven nationals) and
their families were transported to Japan. In relation to the
deterioration of the situation in South Sudan in July of the
same year, the ASDF transport aircraft (C-130H) were
sent to transport the embassy staff from Juba to Djibouti.
With regard to the protection of Japanese nationals
in emergency situation in foreign countries, a provision
pertaining to the protection measures of Japanese
nationals overseas was added to the Legislation for Peace
and Security enacted in September 2015.

See>> Reference 24 (Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces); Reference
25 (Statutory Provisions about Use of Force and Use of Weapons by
SDF Personnel); Part II, Chapter 3, Section 2-1 (Outline of the Act for
the Development of the Legislation for Peace and Security)

Operations for aerial defense[32] can be categorized into
comprehensive aerial defense mainly conducted by
the ASDF and individual aerial defense conducted by
the GSDF, MSDF or ASDF for their bases or troops.
Comprehensive aerial defense aims to deal with enemy
aerial attacks at the farthest point from our territory,
prohibiting enemies from gaining air superiority and
preventing harm to the people and the sovereign territory
of Japan. At the same time, efforts will be made to
infl ict signifi cant damage on the enemy thus making the
continuation of their aerial attack diffi cult.

See>> Fig. III-1-2-14 (Example of Air Defense Operations)



- 2  Defense Operations Protecting Waters
**Surrounding Japan**

If an armed attack is carried out against Japan, which is island
country aerial attacks are expected to be combined with
attacks against our ships and territory by enemy destroyers.
In addition, transport vessels could be deployed to enable
massive enemy ground forces to invade our territory.
Our defense operations protecting the waters
surrounding Japan are composed of measures at sea,
measures in waters around our coasts, measures in
major straits, and aerial defense above waters around
Japan. We need to protect the waters around our country
by combining these multiple operations, blocking the



- 1  Air Defense Operations

Based on the geographic features of Japan, in that it is
surrounded by the sea, and the features of modern wars,[31]
it is expected that Japan will be repeatedly hit by rapid
and surprise aerial attacks by aircraft and missiles in the
case where a full-scale invasion against Japan occurs.


31 Aerial attacks are important elements infl uencing the results of modern wars. It is vital to obtain air superiority before or at the same time as implementing ground or maritime operations.

32 A special characteristic of aerial defense operations is that initial response is critical and can infl uence the entirety of operations. Thus, Japan needs to maintain its readiness for a quick initial response on an


-----

|Fig. III-1-2-15|Example of the Strategy for Defending Sea Areas Surrounding Japan|
|---|---|


Fig. III-1-2-14 Example of Air Defense Operations

Interception
order

Detect

Airborne Warning
and Control System
(AWACS) [1]

Destroy Combat air patrol

(CAP) [2]

Aerial refueling/transport

Intercept aircraft (KC-767)

Detect

Warning and

Detect Destroy control radar

Destroy Cruise missile launched by an enemy

Scrambing fighters Intercept

Identification of
friend or foe

Flow of air defense operations

Interception
order

Air Defense Direction Center (DC)
Air wing command post

Notes: 1. Aircraft with airborne warning and control functions in waters distant from its national land and with alternative control capabilities for defense

ground environments

2. Keeping armed fighters on an airborne alert so that they can immediately respond to approaches by enemy aircraft


Airborne warning and
control system

Anti-air warfare Fighters

Air defense in Enemy aircraft
the surrounding waters

Response in the main channel

Enemy surface
vessels

Anti-surface

Mine deployment warfare warfare

Patrol helicopter

Surface-to-ship
Surface vessels
missile

Response in the waters

Fixed-wing patrol aircraft

Minesweeper

Anti-mine warfare

Anti-submarine warfare

Response in coastal waters Submarine Enemy submarine


-----

Fig. III-1-2-16 Example of Operations for Coping with the Landing of Invading Forces

Fighters Ospreys

Response in coastal waters

Assault
helicopter

Surface-to-ship missile Surface ship

Unmanned
reconnaissance aircraft

Surface-to-air missile

Reconnaissance
Combat Vehicles Response in sea waters

Response to enemy
heliborne units

Mobile Combat
Vehicles

Surface-to-air
missile

Surveillance radar

Tank

Response in sea waters

Armored Artillery
vehicle

Response in urban areas

Response to enemy
airborne unit

Guiding evacuees


invasion of our enemies, and attacking and depleting their
combat capabilities.

See>> Fig. III-1-2-15 (Example of the Strategy for Defending Sea Areas
Surrounding Japan)

- 3  Operations Protecting the Land



- 4 **Operations Ensuring Security in Maritime Transportation**

Japan depends upon other countries for the supply of much
of its resources and food, making maritime transportation
routes the lifeblood for securing the foundation of our
existence and prosperity. Furthermore, if our country
comes under armed attack etc., maritime transportation
routes will be the foundation to maintain continuous
warfare capabilities and enable the U.S. Forces to come
and assist in the defense of Japan.
As such, in operations to ensure the safety of our
maritime transportation, the SDF combines various
operations such as anti-sea, anti-submarine, anti-air and
anti-mine operations to patrol,[33] defend SDF ships, and
protect straits and ports, as well as setting up sea lanes[34] to
directly defend Japanese ships etc. Aerial defense (anti-air
operations) for Japanese ships on maritime transportation
routes is conducted by destroyers, and support from fi ghter
jets and other aircraft is provided as required.


In order to invade the islands of Japan, invading countries
are expected to gain sea and air superiority, followed by
the landing of ground troops from the sea and airborne
troops from the air.
For invading ground and airborne troops, it tends to
be diffi cult to exert systematic combat capabilities while
they are moving on their vessels or aircraft or right before
or after they land in our territory. As we protect our land,
we need to make best use of this weakness to deal with our
enemies between coastal and sea areas or at landing points
as much as possible and attack them at an early stage.

See>> Fig. III-1-2-16 (Example of Operations for Coping with the Landing of
Invading Forces)


33 The act of systematically monitoring a specifi c area with the purpose of gathering information and intelligence to prevent a surprise attack by an opposing force.ii


-----

**11** **Response to Other Events**



- 1  Response to Situations that will Have an Important
**Infl uence on Japan’s Peace and Security**

In the event of situations that will have an important
infl uence on Japan’s peace and security, the MOD/SDF
will provide materials and services as rear area support
activities and conduct rear area search and rescue
activities or ship inspection activities as stipulated in
the Law Concerning the Measures to Ensure Peace
and Security of Japan in Situations that will Have an
Important Infl uence on Japan’s Peace and Security and
the Ship Inspection Operations Law.

See>> Reference 24 (Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces);
Reference 25 (Statutory Provisions about Use of Force and Use of
Weapons by SDF Personnel); Part II, Chapter 3, Section 2-1 (Outline of
the Act for the Development of the Legislation for Peace and Security)



- 2  Military Intelligence Collection

For formulating defense policy accurately in response to
the changes in the situation and for effective operation of
defense capabilities in dealing with various contingencies,
it is necessary to grasp the long-term military trends in
the neighboring countries of Japan and to detect the signs
of those situations at an early stage. For this reason, the
MOD/SDF always makes efforts to collect information
swiftly and accurately using various methods.
Some examples of intelligence collection methods used
by the MOD/SDF includes: (1) collecting, processing and
analyzing signals detected from military communications
and electronic weapons, in the air over Japanese territory;
(2) collecting, interpreting, and analyzing data from various
imaging satellites (including Information Gathering
Satellite)[35]; (3) warning and surveillance activities by ships,
aircraft and other vehicles; (4) collecting and organizing


**Commentary**

**GSDF Joint Exercises and Training for Effective Deterrence and Responses** **Column**

The fi rst joint exercise conducted by the GSDF was the joint communication training joint command and post exercise with the U.S. Armed
Forces at the Higashifuji Training Area (Shizuoka Prefecture) in 1981. Since then, with the aim to maintain and enhance the Japan-U.S. joint
response capabilities in the event of an invasion of Japan, both “fi eld training exercises with the U.S. Marine Corps and the U.S. Army” and
“the Japan-U.S. joint army corps command and post exercise” have been continuously conducted. In recent years, considering the changes in
the security environment surrounding Japan, landing drills for remote island defense, such as Iron Fist and Dawn Blitz, and air borne operation
exercises such as Arctic Aurora have been conducted to enrich the Japan-U.S. joint exercises in order to improve the interoperability with the
U.S. Armed Forces as well as the tactical skills of Japan and the United States respectively in any circumstances. In addition, the JGSDF also
participates in the Japan-U.S.-Australia joint exercise Southern Jackaroo for enhancing the tactical skills of their personnel and forces, the
multinational joint exercise Cobra Gold for enhancing capabilities such as non-combatant evacuation operation (NEO), and other joint exercises.
This way, in addition to bilateral exercises between Japan and the United States, the GSDF aims to enhance and expand the contents with
respect to multilateral exercises involving Australia and ASEAN countries.
In combination with multilateral joint exercises such as the Pacifi c Partnership and Kahn Quest, which focus on the non-traditional security
areas such as international peacekeeping activities and humanitarian assistance/disaster relief activities, we believe that these exercises
and training will enhance our deterrence and response capabilities, which will eventually contribute to the peace and stability of Japan, its
surrounding areas and the international community.

Opening ceremony of the Japan-U.S. joint exercise, Yama Sakura 69 (YS-69) Combat shooting training in the exercise Southern Jackaroo.


-----

a variety of open source information; (5) information
exchanges with defense organizations of other nations; and
(6) intelligence collection conducted by Defense Attachés
and other offi cials.
As the security environment surrounding Japan
has become increasingly severe, the strengthening
of information capabilities is considered to be an
increasingly important issue. For this reason, the MOD
is currently promoting comprehensive enhancement


of its information capabilities at all stages, including
gathering, analyzing, sharing, and securing intelligence.
Specifi cally, the MOD is going to implement the highlevel use of geospatial data such as by integrating various
information to visualize the situation, securing highly
competent analysts by integrating and strengthening
educational curricula, and strengthening the dispatch
system of Defense Attachés through their dispatch to the
Middle East.


**VOICE**

**Three Personnel from the GSDF, MSDF and ASDF Accredited as Defense Attachés** **Column**
**to India**

**Colonel (GSDF) Yoshifumi Inoue, Defense Attaché to the Japanese Embassy in India**

The Japan-India defense cooperation and exchanges have achieved a remarkable development, and are still growing through high-level mutual
visits such as defense ministerial meetings; defense policy dialogues; regular participation of the MSDF in the bilateral naval exercise Malabar;
Japan-India bilateral naval joint exercises; mutual dispatch of vessels to naval reviews; cooperation and exchanges between the GSDF and the
Indian Army in United Nations (U.N.) peacekeeping operations. During the previous fi scal year, both countries started to exchange test pilots and
airlift units between the ASDF and the Indian Air Force, and their defense cooperation and exchanges are progressively moving forward even
at both unit and personnel levels.
There used to be only one defense attaché, who was from the GSDF, but responding to the expansion of defense cooperation and
exchanges, another two defense attachés were dispatched from the MSDF
and the ASDF in 2014 and 2015 respectively to make it a three defense
attachés formation involving personnel from all of the SDF branches.
As a defense attaché at a site of defense cooperation and exchanges,
I feel on a day-to-day basis the excellence of the Indian Armed Forces, which
are proud to be defending their democratic country, and a further possibility
of the Japan-India defense cooperation. In December 2015, the Transfer of
Defense Equipment and Technology Agreement and the General Security
of Military Information Agreement were signed between Japan and India.
Currently, the two countries are engaging in an ongoing consultation to realize
the relocation of US-2 rescue aircraft to India. If this relocation is realized, it
will open up a new horizon to the Japan-India relationship. Three defense

At a reception celebrating the SDF anniversary. From the right, Colonel Inoue

attachés from each SDF service are going to cooperate with each other and (GSDF) and his wife, Captain Takahashi (MSDF) and his wife, and
strive to further strengthen the Japan-India defense cooperation relationship. Colonel Uemura (ASDF) and his wife


-----

**Chapter 2** **[Active Promotion of ]**
**Security Cooperation**


Various issues and destabilizing factors have become
more obvious and aggravated in the security environment
surrounding Japan; such as the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, the threat of international terrorism,
and increasing risks regarding the global commons such
as the oceans, space and cyberspace.
With structural changes such as transformation of
power balance and the progress of globalization, these
issues have become more complicated and diversifi ed,
making it diffi cult for any single country to resolve on
their own. As countries, including Japan, can no longer
ensure the stability of the international community and
the security of their own country independently, it has
become even more important that countries sharing
strategic interests can address the issues in a coordinated
manner. Moreover, as the roles of military forces have
also diversifi ed, there are increasing opportunities for
them to play an important role in building peace and

**Section 1** **Toward Strategic International Defense Cooperation**

**1 Signifi cance and Evolution of Security Cooperation and Dialogue and Defense Cooperation and Exchange**


Amid the ongoing change in the region, which comprises
the balance of power at the global level, peace and
stability in the Asia-Pacifi c region is important not only
for the security of Japan, but increasingly across the
international community. While some nations possess
large-scale military power over the region, a framework
for regional security cooperation has not yet been
suffi ciently institutionalized. Also, due to the political,
economic and social systems of the countries, visions
of security vary from country to country. There have
also been an increasing number of cases of unilateral
actions in an attempt to change the status quo by coercion
without paying respect to existing international law. The
issues involving the South China Sea, in particular, cause
concerns over the maintenance of the rule of law at sea,


supporting post-confl ict reconstruction, as well as
promoting confi dence-building and friendly relationships
between nations.
In this way, in situations where international
cooperation in the security and defense areas is required, and
from the perspective of “Proactive Contribution to Peace”
based on the principle of international cooperation, the
MOD/SDF is required to actively contribute to the security
of Japan as well as the peace and stability of the region.
Furthermore, active contribution of the MOD/SDF is also
necessary in ensuring the peace, stability, and prosperity
of the entire international community. Specifi cally, Japan
plans to enhance bilateral and multilateral cooperative
relations and exchanges, and more actively promote the
United Nations Peace Keeping Operations (UN PKO),
anti-piracy operations, international peace cooperation
activities, and other relevant missions as avenues to
address global security issues.

**Toward Strategic International Defense Cooperation**

freedom of navigation and freedom of fl ight over the high
seas, and stability in the Southeast Asian region. Thus,
responses to these issues have become an important
challenge in terms of ensuring the regional stability. For
such a situation, strategic international cooperation,[1]
which promotes bilateral and multilateral security
cooperation and exchanges more strategically and
effectively, is necessary. The need for such cooperation
is increasing in order to build trust between the relevant
countries and establish a foundation on which each
country works in cooperation to resolve shared regional
security issues.
Both within and outside of the region, strengthening
trust and cooperation with countries who share strategic
interests with Japan such as Australia, the Republic of


On December 16, 2015, at the Meeting of the Ministry of Defense and SDF Senior Personnel, Prime Minister Abe said “I would like you to advance strategic international defense cooperation boldly and without


-----

Fig. III-2-1-1 Major Achievements in High-Level Exchanges (January 2015 – June 2016)

United Kingdom MongoliaMongolia

GermanyGermany

Republic
ChinaChina of Korea

FranceFrance

ItalyItaly

More than 5 exchanges

Number of bilateral agreements and IndiaIndia More than 3 exchanges
memorandums in the field of defense concluded MyanmarMyanmar 2 exchanges

20 LaosLaos 1 exchange

ThailandThailand VietnamVietnam PhilippinesPhilippines

Agreement

15 Memorandum, etc.

Cambodia

MalaysiaMalaysia

10 SingaporeSingapore

5

IndonesiaIndonesia Timor-Leste

0 AustraliaAustralia

Before FY2010- FY2013FY2009 FY2012 FY2015

Number of bilateral dialogues and consultations between defense authorities held

100

90 America (excl. the U.S.)

Europe

80

Middle East and Africa

70 Former Soviet Union countries

60 South Asia

50 Pacific

Southeast Asia

40

Mongolia

30

China

20 Republic of Korea

10

0

FY2005 FY2006 FY2007 FY2008 FY2009 FY2010 FY2011 FY2012 FY2013 FY2014 FY2015 (FY)


Korea (ROK), India, Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) countries, and European countries is
most important.
Japan has developed one of the most progressed
cooperative bilateral relationships with Australia. Also,
as allies of the United States, cooperation through JapanAustralia and Japan-U.S.-Australia frameworks in a
wide range of areas is possible to form regional order
and maintain and strengthen peace and stability in the
international community. Similarly, with the ROK, an
ally of the United States, it is important that cooperation
to deal with various issues including the issues related
to North Korea is based on the Japan-ROK bilateral
relationship with the ROK and the Japan-U.S.-ROK
trilateral relationship. With respect to India, the world’s
largest democratic nation positioned in the center of
sea lanes of communication, Japan will strengthen
cooperation for example through joint exercises in a wide


range of areas such as maritime security. Furthermore,
through traditional partnership, Japan seeks to strengthen
its practical defense cooperation with ASEAN countries
in recognition of their proximity to Japanese sea lanes
and their significant influence on the peace, stability and
prosperity of the region.
Stable relations between Japan and China are essential
for the peace and stability of the Asia-Pacific region. Japan
will encourage China to demonstrate greater transparency
in its military and security activities and policies, and
will work to enhance the mutual trust between the two
countries through the promotion of defense exchanges. At
the same time, Japan will also promote the construction
of the “Maritime and Air Communication Mechanism”
between defense authorities in Japan and China to avert
or prevent unexpected situations.
Russia is an important neighboring country, and Japan
seeks to increase the trust relationship through defense


-----

|Classification|Type|Significance|Outline|
|---|---|---|---|
|Bilateral|Exchange between Defense Ministers and high-level officials|Improving and reinforcing mutual trust and cooperation through frank exchanges of views on regional situations and national defense policies that are important common interests to both sides, as well as enhancing the following defense exchanges.|• Dialogues and mutual visits between Japan’s Defense Minister and Defense Ministers from other countries • Dialogues and mutual visits between Japan’s State Minister of Defense; Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Defense; Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense; Chief of Joint Staff; GSDF, MSDF, ASDF Chiefs; and their counterparts in other countries|
||Regular consultation between defense officials|Paving the way for high-level dialogues and exchanges through continuous and direct exchanges of views between national defense policy-makers, and contributing to the enhancement of mutual trust and cooperation between related countries.|• Consultations between Director-General-level officials, Deputy Director-General-level officials, and their counterparts • Dialogue between Japan’s Joint Staff, GSDF, MSDF, ASDF, and their counterparts in foreign countries|
||Exchange between units|Contributing to the improvement and enhancement of mutual trust and cooperation between related countries through bilateral exercises and events for exchanges.|• Personnel exchanges • Mutual visits to vessels of training squadrons and aircraft, and bilateral exercises for search and rescue operations|
||Exchange of students|In addition to the original educational purposes, deepening the understanding of the other countries’ defense policies and the situation of their defense units, as well as building mutual trust through the promotion of relatively long-term personnel exchange and establishing human networks.|• Mutual acceptance of students • Dispatch of students to overseas military-related organizations|
||Research exchanges|Deepening mutual understanding between researchers of both countries through frank exchange of opinions for the maintenance and promotion of defense exchanges.|Research exchanges between Japan’s National Institute for Defense Studies and military-related research organizations in other countries|
|Multilateral|Security dialogue|Deepening mutual understanding on the recognition of situations and on security policy among related countries as well as exchanging views and discussing on a wide range of multilateral issues.|• Dialogues at the ADMM Plus and ARF • Multilateral dialogues sponsored by the Ministry of Defense Japan • Multilateral dialogues sponsored by governments • Multilateral dialogues sponsored by private sectors|
||Multilateral exercises and seminars|Improving skills and contributing to enhancement of mutual trust and cooperation through multilateral exercises and seminars.|• Personnel exchanges • Multilateral exercises and seminars related to disaster relief, minesweeping, and submarine rescue operations|


Fig. III-2-1-2 Security Dialogues and Defense Exchanges

**Classification** **Type** **Significance** **Outline**

Improving and reinforcing mutual trust and cooperation -  Dialogues and mutual visits between Japan’s Defense
through frank exchanges of views on regional situations Minister and Defense Ministers from other countries

Exchange between

and national defense policies that are important common -  Dialogues and mutual visits between Japan’s State Minister

Defense Ministers

interests to both sides, as well as enhancing the following of Defense; Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Defense;

and high-level

defense exchanges. Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense; Chief of Joint Staff;

officials

GSDF, MSDF, ASDF Chiefs; and their counterparts in other
countries

Paving the way for high-level dialogues and exchanges -  Consultations between Director-General-level officials,

Regular consultation through continuous and direct exchanges of views Deputy Director-General-level officials, and their
between defense between national defense policy-makers, and contributing counterparts
officials to the enhancement of mutual trust and cooperation -  Dialogue between Japan’s Joint Staff, GSDF, MSDF, ASDF,

Bilateral between related countries. and their counterparts in foreign countries

Contributing to the improvement and enhancement of -  Personnel exchanges

Exchange between

mutual trust and cooperation between related countries -  Mutual visits to vessels of training squadrons and aircraft,

units

through bilateral exercises and events for exchanges. and bilateral exercises for search and rescue operations

In addition to the original educational purposes, deepening -  Mutual acceptance of students
the understanding of the other countries’ defense policies -  Dispatch of students to overseas military-related

Exchange of students and the situation of their defense units, as well as building organizations

mutual trust through the promotion of relatively long-term
personnel exchange and establishing human networks.

Deepening mutual understanding between researchers of Research exchanges between Japan’s National Institute for
Research exchanges both countries through frank exchange of opinions for the Defense Studies and military-related research organizations in
maintenance and promotion of defense exchanges. other countries

Deepening mutual understanding on the recognition of -  Dialogues at the ADMM Plus and ARF
situations and on security policy among related countries -  Multilateral dialogues sponsored by the Ministry of Defense

Security dialogue as well as exchanging views and discussing on a wide Japan

range of multilateral issues. -  Multilateral dialogues sponsored by governments

Multilateral

-  Multilateral dialogues sponsored by private sectors

Improving skills and contributing to enhancement -  Personnel exchanges

Multilateral exercises

of mutual trust and cooperation through multilateral -  Multilateral exercises and seminars related to disaster relief,

and seminars

exercises and seminars. minesweeping, and submarine rescue operations


exchanges. Taking the Ukrainian situation and other
factors into account, it is essential that the Government
of Japan takes an appropriate response whilst recognizing
the solidarity of the G7 (Group of Seven), maintaining
constant contact at the working level in order to mitigate
any unforeseen circumstances or unnecessary conflicts.
Japan will also cooperate with other partners in the
Asia-Pacific region such as Mongolia and New Zealand
in various areas to ensure regional stability.
European countries such as the United Kingdom
and France have the international influence to formulate
public opinions and the capacity to develop norms and
share universal values with Japan. They are partners for
Japan, which together take a leading role in ensuring
the peace, stability and prosperity of the international
community. Despite the geographical distance between
Japan and Europe, both parties are facing a common
security issue to establish an international order based
on universal values and rules. Therefore, it is crucial
that Japan further strengthens its relationship with the
European countries including cooperation with the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). In light
of the high-level defense capabilities and technologies
possessed by European countries, more specific
cooperation such as joint exercises as well as defense
equipment and technology cooperation will be promoted.
Furthermore since the stability of the Middle East is for


Japan, an issue directly connected to the stable supply of
energy, security and defense cooperation with the Middle
Eastern countries such as the Gulf countries will also be
promoted. With the advancement of globalization, there
have been an increasing amount of security challenges,
which are beyond the regional boundaries. Considering
such a situation, as far as the resources of the MOD/SDF
permit, it is necessary to expand the network of defense
exchanges and cooperation by promoting exchanges
with countries in regions such as Central Asia as well
as Central and South America with which Japan has not
conducted active defense exchanges.
Regarding the form of defense cooperation and
exchanges, Japan has long strived to alleviate any
conditions of confrontation and vigilance, as well as
fostering a collaborative and cooperative atmosphere
by building face-to-face relationships through bilateral
dialogues and exchanges. In addition, recognizing the
increasing need for international cooperation, Japan has
recently enhanced bilateral defense relationships from
traditional exchanges to deeper cooperation in a phased
manner by appropriately combining various means
including joint exercises and capacity building assistance,
defense equipment and technology cooperation,
and establishing institutional framework such as the
Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement.
In addition multilateral security cooperation and


-----

dialogue in the region are in the process of developing
from dialogue focused on cooperation that seeks to
construct order in the region. It is important to promote
bilateral and multilateral defense cooperation and
exchanges in a multi-layered and practical manner,
leading to the improvement of the regional and global
security environment.


See>> Reference 48 (Record of Major Multinational Security Dialogues
(Asia-Pacific Region, Last Five Years)); Reference 49 (Exchange
Student Acceptance Record (Number of Newly Accepted Students in
FY2015))

See>> Fig. III-2-1-1 (Major Achievements in High-Level Exchanges (January

2015 – June 2016))

See>> Fig. III-2-1-2 (Security Dialogues and Defense Exchanges)
See>> Fig. III-2-1-3 (From Dialogues and Exchanges to Cooperation)
See>> Fig. III-2-1-4 (Image of Defense Cooperation and Exchanges)
See>> Fig. III-2-1-5 (Situations Concerning the Conclusion of Agreements)

|Col1|Cold War Inception Period Developing Period Deepening Period Era (1990s - early 2000s) (Beginning of 2000 -) (2010’s -)|
|---|---|
|Bilateral|Substantial Partial and From “exchanges” to “cooperation” exchanges begin limited “exchanges” Promoting mutual Promoting mutual understanding and trust Toward more understanding and trust Carried specific cooperation: over ＋ • Defense equipment cooperation China, ROK, →Main focus on explaining defense Promoting security and • Strengthening of cooperation in Western policies and on facilitating mutual defense cooperation within the region the operational side ＋ Europe, etc. understanding Mainly non-traditional security (disaster relief, maritime security, • Capacity building assistance, etc. counter-terrorism, etc.), and logistics support|
|Trilateral|＋ Framework for complementing bilateral/ multilateral cooperation (Japan-U.S.-Australia, Japan-U.S.-ROK)|
|Multilateral|Beginning of multilateral From “dialogue” to “cooperation “dialogue” within the region (the construction of an intraregional order)” Development of ARF, etc. 1994 1997 2003 2005 2006 2009 2010 2011 2013 2014 2015 ARF Disaster Terrorism/ EAS ADMM Maritime Security ADMM-Plus ARF-DiREx carried out ADMM Plus Humanitarian Commencement of ADMM Plus established Relief ISM Transnational established established ISM, established (implemented biannually Assistance/Disaster the second phase Humanitarian Crime ISM Non-proliferation since this year) Relief/Military Medicine activities by each Assistance/Disaster and disarmament ISM, Experts’ Working Groups Field Exercise conducted EWG, etc. Relief table top Exercise ARF Disaster Relief (EWG) for the five fields Second ADMM-Plus ADMM-Plus maritime Third ADMM-Plus Exercises (ARF-DiREx) of ADMM-Plus established: Meeting held security tabletop Meeting held carried out (1) Humanitarian assistance/ Humanitarian Mine exercise Japan-ASEAN Defense Disaster relief Action EWG for ADMM-Plus Observation of Vice-Ministerial Forum (2) Maritime security established antiterrorism Exercises (implemented annually (3) Counterterrorism by the Australian since this year) (4) Military medicine Defence Force (5) Peacekeeping operations Japan-ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Informal Meeting Main focus on fostering trust in the Reinforcement of security and defense cooperation short term with the ultimate goal of resolving conflicts through specific and practical cooperation|

|Fig. III-2-1-3|From Dialogues and Exchanges to Cooperation|
|---|---|
|Cold War Inception Period Developing Period Deepening Period Era (1990s - early 2000s) (Beginning of 2000 -) (2010’s -) Substantial Partial and From “exchanges” to “cooperation” exchanges begin limited “exchanges” Promoting mutual Promoting mutual understanding and trust Toward more understanding and trust Carried specific cooperation: Bilateral over ＋ • Defense equipment cooperation China, ROK, →Main focus on explaining defense Promoting security and • Strengthening of cooperation in Western policies and on facilitating mutual defense cooperation within the region the operational side ＋ Europe, etc. understanding Mainly non-traditional security (disaster relief, maritime security, • Capacity building assistance, etc. counter-terrorism, etc.), and logistics support ＋ Framework for complementing bilateral/ Trilateral multilateral cooperation (Japan-U.S.-Australia, Japan-U.S.-ROK) Beginning of multilateral From “dialogue” to “cooperation “dialogue” within the region (the construction of an intraregional order)” Development of ARF, etc. 1994 1997 2003 2005 2006 2009 2010 2011 2013 2014 2015 Multilateral ARF Disaster Terrorism/ EAS ADMM Maritime Security ADMM-Plus ARF-DiREx carried out ADMM Plus Humanitarian Commencement of ADMM Plus established Relief ISM Transnational established established ISM, established (implemented biannually Assistance/Disaster the second phase Humanitarian Crime ISM Non-proliferation since this year) Relief/Military Medicine activities by each Assistance/Disaster and disarmament ISM, Experts’ Working Groups Field Exercise conducted EWG, etc. Relief table top Exercise ARF Disaster Relief (EWG) for the five fields Second ADMM-Plus ADMM-Plus maritime Third ADMM-Plus Exercises (ARF-DiREx) of ADMM-Plus established: Meeting held security tabletop Meeting held carried out (1) Humanitarian assistance/ Humanitarian Mine exercise Japan-ASEAN Defense Disaster relief Action EWG for ADMM-Plus Observation of Vice-Ministerial Forum (2) Maritime security established antiterrorism Exercises (implemented annually (3) Counterterrorism by the Australian since this year) (4) Military medicine Defence Force (5) Peacekeeping operations Japan-ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Informal Meeting Main focus on fostering trust in the Reinforcement of security and defense cooperation short term with the ultimate goal of resolving conflicts through specific and practical cooperation||

|Level|Examples of Specific Initiatives|
|---|---|
|Defense Exchange Defense Cooperation|H Overseas student exchanges, research exchanges H High-level and working-level exchanges between defense authorities and between forces H Unit-to-unit exchanges between forces, mutual visits to vessels and aircraft H Goodwill training H Memorandums of defense cooperation and exchanges H Capacity building assistance H Range of cooperation in non-traditional security (including joint training) [Ex.] • Field training exercises at the ADMM-Plus and ARF, joint search and rescue exercises • JPN-AUS Cooperation (Support from the Australian Army when the Great East Japan Earthquake occurred, cooperation in the missing Malaysian Airplane case, Japan-U.S.-Australia joint disaster relief exercises “Michinoku ALERT”, etc.) • Pacific Partnership, cooperation with countries and organizations in counter-piracy, etc. H Conclusion of various agreements related to defense cooperation (Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement, Information Security Agreement, Defense Equipment and Technology Transfer Agreement, etc.) H Formulation of joint response plan H Joint exercises on the premise of joint response (Examples: Japan-U.S. Bilateral Joint Exercise, Japan-U.S. Bilateral Regional Army Command Post Exercises, Special Anti-Submarine Exercises, and Japan-U.S. Bilateral Fighter Combat Training) H Joint response in the event of Japan’s crisis|

|Fig. III-2-1-4|Image of Defense Cooperation and Exchanges|
|---|---|
|Level Examples of Specific Initiatives Defense H Overseas student exchanges, research exchanges Exchange H High-level and working-level exchanges between defense authorities and between forces H Unit-to-unit exchanges between forces, mutual visits to vessels and aircraft H Goodwill training H Memorandums of defense cooperation and exchanges H Capacity building assistance H Range of cooperation in non-traditional security (including joint training) [Ex.] • Field training exercises at the ADMM-Plus and ARF, joint search and rescue exercises Defense • JPN-AUS Cooperation (Support from the Australian Army when the Great East Japan Earthquake occurred, cooperation Cooperation in the missing Malaysian Airplane case, Japan-U.S.-Australia joint disaster relief exercises “Michinoku ALERT”, etc.) • Pacific Partnership, cooperation with countries and organizations in counter-piracy, etc. H Conclusion of various agreements related to defense cooperation (Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement, Information Security Agreement, Defense Equipment and Technology Transfer Agreement, etc.) H Formulation of joint response plan H Joint exercises on the premise of joint response (Examples: Japan-U.S. Bilateral Joint Exercise, Japan-U.S. Bilateral Regional Army Command Post Exercises, Special Anti-Submarine Exercises, and Japan-U.S. Bilateral Fighter Combat Training) H Joint response in the event of Japan’s crisis||


Cold War Inception Period Developing Period Deepening Period
Era (1990s - early 2000s) (Beginning of 2000 -) (2010’s -)

**Substantial**

**Partial and** **From “exchanges” to “cooperation”**

**exchanges begin**

**limited**
**“exchanges”** Promoting mutual Promoting mutual understanding and trust Toward more

understanding and trust Carriedover ＋ specific cooperation:• Defense equipment cooperation

China, ROK, →Main focus on explaining defense Promoting security and -  Strengthening of cooperation in
WesternEurope, etc. policies and on facilitating mutual  understanding Mainly non-traditional security (disaster relief, maritime security, defense cooperation within the region ＋ the operational side • Capacity building assistance, etc.

counter-terrorism, etc.), and logistics support

＋

Framework for complementing bilateral/
multilateral cooperation

(Japan-U.S.-Australia, Japan-U.S.-ROK)

**Beginning of multilateral**

**From “dialogue” to “cooperation**

**“dialogue” within the region**

**(the construction of an intraregional order)”**

Development of ARF, etc.

1994 1997 2003 2005 2006 2009 2010 2011 2013 2014 2015

ARF Disaster Terrorism/ EAS ADMM Maritime Security ADMM-Plus ARF-DiREx carried out ADMM Plus Humanitarian Commencement of ADMM Plus
established Relief ISM Transnational established established ISM, established (implemented biannually Assistance/Disaster the second phase Humanitarian

Crime ISM Non-proliferation since this year) Relief/Military Medicine activities by each Assistance/Disaster

and disarmament ISM, Experts’ Working Groups Field Exercise conducted EWG, etc. Relief table top Exercise
ARF Disaster Relief (EWG) for the five fields Second ADMM-Plus ADMM-Plus maritime Third ADMM-Plus
Exercises (ARF-DiREx) of ADMM-Plus established: Meeting held security tabletop Meeting held
carried out (1) Humanitarian assistance/ Humanitarian Mine exercise
Japan-ASEAN Defense Disaster relief Action EWG for ADMM-Plus Observation of
Vice-Ministerial Forum (2) Maritime security established antiterrorism Exercises
(implemented annually (3) Counterterrorism by the Australian
since this year) (4) Military medicine Defence Force

(5) Peacekeeping operations Japan-ASEAN Defense

Ministers’ Informal Meeting

Main focus on fostering trust in the Reinforcement of security and defense cooperation
short term with the ultimate goal of resolving conflicts through specific and practical cooperation


Defense H Overseas student exchanges, research exchanges
Exchange H High-level and working-level exchanges between defense authorities and between forces

H Unit-to-unit exchanges between forces, mutual visits to vessels and aircraft
H Goodwill training

H Memorandums of defense cooperation and exchanges
H Capacity building assistance
H Range of cooperation in non-traditional security (including joint training)

[Ex.] • Field training exercises at the ADMM-Plus and ARF, joint search and rescue exercises

Defense -  JPN-AUS Cooperation (Support from the Australian Army when the Great East Japan Earthquake occurred, cooperation
Cooperation in the missing Malaysian Airplane case, Japan-U.S.-Australia joint disaster relief exercises “Michinoku ALERT”, etc.)

-  Pacific Partnership, cooperation with countries and organizations in counter-piracy, etc.
H Conclusion of various agreements related to defense cooperation (Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement, Information
Security Agreement, Defense Equipment and Technology Transfer Agreement, etc.)

H Formulation of joint response plan
H Joint exercises on the premise of joint response
(Examples: Japan-U.S. Bilateral Joint Exercise, Japan-U.S. Bilateral Regional Army Command Post Exercises, Special Anti-Submarine
Exercises, and Japan-U.S. Bilateral Fighter Combat Training)
H Joint response in the event of Japan’s crisis


-----

|Col1|Security and Defense Cooperation Documents|Information Security Agreement|Defense Equipment and Technology Transfer Agreement|Acquisition and Cross- Serving Agreement (ACSA)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|United States|Japan-U.S. Security Treaty Signed in September 1951 and entered into force in April 1952 Signed in January 1960 and entered into force in June 1960|Signed and entered into force in August 2007|Signed the Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement between Japan and the United States of America in March 1954 and entered into force in May 1954 Established the Transfer of Military Technologies to the United States of America (exchange of notes) in November 1983 Established the Transfer of Arms and Military Technologies to the United States of America (exchange of notes) in June 2006|Signed in April 1996 Entered into force in October 1996 Signed the amended Agreement in February 2004 The amended Agreement entered into force in July 2004|
|Australia|Signed in September 2003 Revised in December 2008|Signed in May 2012 Entered into force in March 2013|Signed in July 2014 Entered into force in December 2014|Signed in May 2010 Entered into force in January 2013|
|United Kingdom|Signed in January 2004 Revised in June 2012|Signed in July 2013 Entered into force in January 2014|Signed and entered into force in July 2013|Agreed to commence negotiation concerning the conclusion at the Summit Meeting in May 2014|
|France|Signed (exchange of notes) in April 2001 Revision of annex statement In August 2003 Signed statement of intent in July 2014|Signed and entered into force in October 2011|Signed in March 2015|Under consideration|
|India|Signed in September 2014|Negotiation commenced in September 2015 Signed and entered into force at the Japan-India Summit Meeting in December 2015|Negotiation commenced in August 2015 Signed at the Japan-India Summit Meeting in December 2015|—|
|Republic of Korea|Signed in April 2009|Agreed at the Japan-ROK Ministerial Meeting in January 2011 to promote an exchange of views * The signing was postponed by the request from the ROK side at the end of June 2012|—|Agreed to move forward with opinion exchanges at the Japan-ROK Ministerial Meeting in January 2011|
|Indonesia|Signed in March 2015|—|Negotiation commenced at the “2+2” Meeting in December 2015|—|
|Philippines|Signed statement of intent in July 2012 Signed memorandum in January 2015|—|Broadly agreed at the Summit Meeting in November 2015 Signed in February 2016 Entered into force in April 2016|—|
|Malaysia|—|—|Agreed to commence negotiation at the Summit Meeting in May 2015|—|
|New Zealand|Signed in August 2013|—|—|Under consideration|
|Italy|Signed statement of intent in June 2012|Substantive agreement at the Japan-Italy Summit Meeting in August 2015 Signed in March 2016|—|—|
|Canada|—|—|—|Agreed to commence negotiation for conclusion at the Japan-Canada Vice- Minister level “2+2” dialogue in August 2011 Substantial agreement at the Summit Meeting in September 2013|
|Russia|Signed in August 1999 Revised in January 2006|—|—|—|
|NATO|—|Signed and entered into force in June 2010|—|—|


Fig. III-2-1-5 Situations Concerning the Conclusion of Agreements

**Security and Defense** **Information Security** **Defense Equipment and Technology** **Acquisition and Cross-**
**Cooperation Documents** **Agreement** **Transfer Agreement** **Serving Agreement (ACSA)**

Signed the Mutual Defense Assistance
Agreement between Japan and the
United States of America in March 1954 Signed in April 1996

Japan-U.S. Security Treaty

and entered into force in May 1954 Entered into force in October

Signed in September 1951

Established the Transfer of Military 1996

and entered into force in

Signed and entered into force in Technologies to the United States Signed the amended

United States April 1952

August 2007 of America (exchange of notes) in Agreement in February 2004

Signed in January 1960 and

November 1983 The amended Agreement

entered into force in June

Established the Transfer of Arms entered into force in July

1960

and Military Technologies to the United 2004
States of America (exchange of notes)
in June 2006

Signed in May 2012 Signed in May 2010

Signed in September 2003 Signed in July 2014
Australia Entered into force in March Entered into force in January
Revised in December 2008 Entered into force in December 2014

2013 2013

Agreed to commence

Signed in July 2013

United Signed in January 2004 Signed and entered into force in July negotiation concerning the

Entered into force in January

Kingdom Revised in June 2012 2013 conclusion at the Summit

2014

Meeting in May 2014

Signed (exchange of notes)
in April 2001
Revision of annex statement Signed and entered into force in

France Signed in March 2015 Under consideration

In August 2003 October 2011
Signed statement of intent in
July 2014

Negotiation commenced in
September 2015 Negotiation commenced in August 2015

India Signed in September 2014 Signed and entered into force Signed at the Japan-India Summit —

at the Japan-India Summit Meeting in December 2015
Meeting in December 2015

Agreed at the Japan-ROK
Ministerial Meeting in January

Agreed to move forward

2011 to promote an exchange

Republic of with opinion exchanges at
Signed in April 2009 of views —
Korea the Japan-ROK Ministerial

-  The signing was postponed by

Meeting in January 2011

the request from the ROK side
at the end of June 2012

Negotiation commenced at the “2+2”
Indonesia Signed in March 2015 — —
Meeting in December 2015

Signed statement of intent in Broadly agreed at the Summit Meeting
July 2012 in November 2015

Philippines — —

Signed memorandum in Signed in February 2016
January 2015 Entered into force in April 2016

Agreed to commence negotiation at the
Malaysia — — —
Summit Meeting in May 2015

New Zealand Signed in August 2013 — — Under consideration

Substantive agreement at the

Signed statement of intent in Japan-Italy Summit Meeting in
Italy — —
June 2012 August 2015

Signed in March 2016

Agreed to commence
negotiation for conclusion at
the Japan-Canada Vice-
Minister level “2+2” dialogue

Canada — — —

in August 2011
Substantial agreement at
the Summit Meeting in
September 2013

Signed in August 1999
Russia — — —
Revised in January 2006

Signed and entered into force in
NATO — — —
June 2010

-  In addition to the countries in the table, Japan has signed documents regarding defense cooperation with Singapore, Vietnam, Mongolia, Cambodia, Spain, Bahrain, Qatar and Georgia.


-----

**2** **Initiatives under the Multilateral Security Framework and through Dialogue**


Initiatives under the multilateral framework such as the
ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM) Plus and
the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF),[2] which is a security
cooperation framework in the Asia-Pacifi c region,
have seen steady development and serve as important
foundation for cooperation and exchange in the areas
of security and defense. Japan has contributed to the
enhancement of multilateral cooperation in the region, for
example, by annually holding the Tokyo Defense Forum
and the Japan-ASEAN Defense Vice-Ministerial Forum.

- 1  Initiatives under the ASEAN Defense Ministers’
**Meeting-Plus (ADMM Plus) Framework**


The Third ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM Plus)

|ASEAN Def Officials’ M (ADSO • Held annual • Vice-Ministe General leve|ence Senior eeting Plus M-Plus) ly r and Director l|
|---|---|


|Fig. III-2-1-6|Organizational Chart and Overview of the ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM Plus)|
|---|---|
|ASEAN Defence Ministers’ <Participating countries> Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus) ASEAN + Australia, China, India, Japan, New Zealand, Republic of Korea, Russia, • Held once every two years United States • Ministerial level ASEAN Defence Senior Officials’ Meeting Plus (ADSOM-Plus) • Held annually • Vice-Minister and Director General level Experts’ Working Group (EWG) ADSOM-Plus Working Group • Held annually • Director level Overview of Experts’ Working Group (EWG) Establishing EWGs in the six specific regional security fields Co-chaired with non-ASEAN countries Promoting information sharing, workshops and seminars, and multinational joint training Submitting recommendations and reports EWG and Chair Nations (1) Humanitarian assistance and disaster relief (Laos and Japan) (2) Maritime security (Brunei Darussalam and New Zealand) (3) Military medicine (Thailand and Russia) (4) Counter-terrorism (Singapore and Australia) (5) Peacekeeping operations (Cambodia and ROK) (6) Humanitarian Mine Action (Vietnam and India)||



Singapore served as co-chairs of the EWG on Military
Medicine, and the participants in the meeting exchanged
practical opinions on approaches to cooperation with
each country in the fi eld of military medicine at times of
a major disaster. Furthermore, at meetings of the EWG
on Maritime Security, Japan emphasized the importance


The countries of ASEAN hold the ASEAN Defence
Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM), which is a ministerial
level meeting between defense authorities in the ASEAN
region, and the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ MeetingPlus (ADMM Plus), which contains an additional eight
non-ASEAN countries[3] including Japan to the members.
The ADMM Plus is the only offi cial meeting for the
region’s defense ministers in the Asia Pacifi c region
including the countries outside the ASEAN region. Thus,
the establishment of the ADMM Plus is highly signifi cant
from the perspective of encouraging the development
and deepening of security and defense cooperation in the
region, and the MOD/SDF is providing active support for
its initiatives.
The ADMM Plus is comprised of (1) ADSOMPlus (ASEAN Defence Senior Offi cials’ Meeting Plus),
(2) ADSOM-Plus Working Groups (ADSOM-Plus WG),
and (3) Experts’ Working Groups (EWG). At the third
meeting of the ADMM Plus in Kuala Lumpur in November
2015, Japan stressed the importance of the international
community working together to ensure the freedom of
navigation and overfl ight. Japan also emphasized, as a
practical guiding principle for the entire region to cooperate,
the importance of “wider promotion of common rules and
laws concerning regional air and water,” “maritime and
aerospace security,” and “the improvement of ability to
respond to disaster in the region.”
Japan also actively contributes in the fi elds of
EWG. From July 2011 until March 2014, Japan and


The ARF, a forum aimed at improving the security environment in the Asia-Pacifi c region through dialogue and cooperation on the political and security sectors, has been held since 1994. The ARF currently
comprises 26 countries and 1 organization as member states, and holds various inter-governmental meetings on security that are attended by both foreign affairs offi cials and defense offi cials to exchange
opinions on the regional situation and security areas that require a particular focus. The 26 countries consist of 10 ASEAN countries (Brunei, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand,
Vietnam, Cambodia (since 1995) and Myanmar (since 1996)), in addition to Japan, Australia, Canada, China and India (since 1996), New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of Korea (ROK), Russia, the
United States and Mongolia (since 1998), North Korea (since 2000), Pakistan (since 2004), Timor-Leste (since 2005), Bangladesh (since 2006), and Sri Lanka (since 2007), plus the European Union (EU).


-----

of establishing shared customary “manners” by which all
countries abide, in order to avoid unintended collisions
and the escalation of situations when warships or
government vessels approach and encounter each other
at sea. Furthermore, Japan and Laos have served as cochairs of the EWG on humanitarian assistance and disaster
relief since December 2014, and working on the on-going
discussion on making Standard Operating Procedure
(SOP), etc., for the establishment and operation of the
Multi-National Coordination Center (MNCC), which
will amplify disaster relief activities by assisting foreign
forces. In August 2015, Japan conducted a tabletop
exercise (TTX) on the same EWG in Laos and carried
out the verification of this SOP.

See>> Fig. III-2-1-6 (Organizational Chart and Overview of the ASEAN Defense

Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM Plus))

- 2  ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)


such as HADR, and maritime security, was a breakthrough
opportunity, bringing together defense ministers from
Japan and the ASEAN countries for the first time in the
40 years of friendship and cooperation between Japan
and ASEAN. This marked an important first step towards
strengthening defense cooperation in future. Moreover, in
November this year, the second Japan-ASEAN Defense
Ministers’ Informal Meeting is planned to be held.

**(2) Tokyo Defense Forum etc.**
As Japan’s own initiatives regarding security in the
Asia-Pacific region, the MOD has held the Asia-Pacific
Defense Forum (Tokyo Defense Forum) each year since
1996 with the participation of officers in charge of
defense policy (Director Generals of defense ministries
and General-class officers) from the countries in the
region. At the forum, defense policies of the participating
countries and confidence-building measures in the region
are discussed.
22 countries from the Asia-Pacific region, as well
as the ASEAN Secretariat, the European Union (EU),
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) took part in the 20th
forum in March 2016. At this forum, discussions took
place on the topics; (1) “Enhance Capabilities in NonTraditional Security Areas in the Region: Efforts and
Challenges”; and (2)”Defense Policies Related to the
Region and Participating Countries.”
In addition, since 2001, the MOD has invited key
figures who are primarily involved in security policy to
Japan from countries in the Asia-Pacific region, with
the objective of promoting understanding of Japan’s
security and defense policy as well as the current status
of the SDF.


Regarding the ARF, which is operated mainly by
diplomatic authorities, in recent years, specific initiatives[4]
in non-traditional security areas such as disaster relief,
maritime security, and peacekeeping and peace building
have been actively implemented, and the MOD is making
active contributions to this Forum as well. For example,
in the maritime security field, an Inter-Sessional Meeting
on Maritime Security (ISM on MS) has been held since
2009.[5] At the ISM on MS, a collection of best practices
concerning support for capacity building in the field
of maritime security was formulated on the basis of
a summary compiled by Japan. In the field of disaster
relief, the MOD/SDF has dispatched SDF personnel and
aircraft to participate in ARF Disaster Relief Exercises
(ARF-DiREx) (conducted every two years) since 2009.
In May 2015, ARF-DiREx 2015, the fourth such exercise,
was held in Malaysia, with Japan sending around 10
personnel to participate.

- 3  Multilateral Security Dialogue Hosted by
**the MOD/SDF**


**(3) Japan-ASEAN Defense Vice-Ministerial Forum**
Since 2009, the MOD has annually held the Japan-ASEAN
Defense Vice-Ministerial Forum, with the purpose of
creating a foundation for strengthening multilateral
and bilateral relationships through establishing human
networks between Japanese and ASEAN vice-ministeriallevel officials. The 7th meeting was held in Sapporo in
September 2015, attended by the vice-ministerial level
officials from ASEAN member states and the ASEAN
Secretariat. They exchanged opinions on the topics of
(1) Wider promotion of common rules and laws at sea and
in the air; and (2) Promotion of maritime and aerospace


**(1) Japan-ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Informal Meeting**
Based on the proposal by Prime Minister Abe at the
Japan-ASEAN Commemorative Summit in December
2013, the Japan-ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Informal
Meeting took place in Myanmar in November 2014. This
meeting, in which opinion exchanges were conducted
regarding cooperation in non-traditional security areas


In addition to Ministers’ meetings at the Foreign Minister level, the Senior Officials Meeting (SOM) and Inter-Sessional Meetings (ISM) are held each year, as well as meetings of the Inter-Sessional Support Group
on Confidence Building Measures and Preventive Diplomacy (ISG on CBM/PD) and the ARF Security Policy Conference (ASPC). Moreover, since the Ministers’ meeting in 2002, ARF Defense Officials’ Dialogues
(DOD) is held ahead of the main meeting.


-----

**(2) Inter-Service Branch Initiatives**
a. Asia-Pacific Chiefs of Defense Conference (CHOD)
The CHOD is a meeting of the chiefs of defense, mostly
from the Asia-Pacific region, aimed at nurturing trust
among countries in the region and enhancing security
relations through free exchanges of opinions on regional
security and bilateral dialogues, among other activities.
Japan has continued to participate in each conference
since the first one held in 1998, and the Joint Chief of
Staff attended the 18th Conference in September 2015.
b. Pacific Armies Chief Conference (PACC)
PACC is a biannual conference with the aim to enhance
the relationship among the ground forces in the countries
in the region held jointly by the U.S. Army and the
ground forces from the countries in the Asia-Pacific
region. The Ground Self-Defense Force (GSDF) has
been participating in this conference since 1999, and the
Chief of the Staff of the GSDF attended the last one in
September 2015.
c. The Western Pacific Naval Symposium (WPNS)
The WPNS has been held since 1988. It is attended
by the chiefs of staff of the navy of countries in the
Western Pacific region, and holds discussions on various
maritime security issues. The Maritime Self-Defense
Force (MSDF) has been participating since the second
symposium in 1990, and the Chief of Maritime Staff
attended the meeting in April 2016. The WPNS plays
a substantive role in the regional maritime security by
adopting the Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea
(CUES) during the symposium held in Qingdao, China,
in April 2014.
d. The Pacific Air Chiefs Symposium (PACS), etc.
The PACS, hosted by the United States, is held every
two years. It aims to promote mutual understanding and
enhance security relationships between the countries in
the region through exchanges of views among the chiefs
of staff of the air forces, etc. from those countries. The
Air Self-Defense Force (ASDF) has been participating in
PACS since the first symposium in 1989, except the 13th
in 2013, and the Chief of Staff of the ASDF attended the
last meeting in September 2015.

See>> Reference 51 (Other Multilateral Security Dialogues)


security; and (3) Improvement of disaster response
capability. At the forum, participants confirmed the
principle of the freedom of navigation and overflight as
well as the importance of establishing a risk management
system on the sea, while at the same time they also shared
the perception of the necessity to increase interoperability
through joint exercises for disaster responses.

See>> Reference 50 (Multilateral Security Dialogues Hosted by the Ministry
of Defense)

- 4  Other


**(1) International Conferences Held by Private Organizations**
In the field of security, inter-governmental international
conferences as well as international conferences
organized by private organizations in which various
people such as government officials, scholars, and
journalists participate, are held, and such conferences
provide a forum for sharing and exchanging opinions
on medium-to-long-term security issues. The leading
international conferences are the International Institute for
Strategic Studies (IISS) Asia Security Summit (ShangriLa Dialogue)[6] and the Munich Security Conference,[7]
one of the most prestigious meetings among the security
meetings in Europe and the United States.
At the 15th Shangri-La Dialogue held in June
2016, Minister of Defense Nakatani delivered a speech
at the second plenary session entitled “Managing
Military Competition in Asia,” and also held bilateral
and trilateral talks with the participating countries to
exchange opinions on regional situations and defense
cooperation including the South China Sea situation and
to confirm the plan for strengthening future cooperation
with other participating countries.
State Minister of Defense Wakamiya participated in
the 52nd Munich Security Conference held in February
2016. Over 600 participants including national leaders,
ministers, and other high-level officials from the United
States, Germany, the United Kingdom, France and other
countries gathered at this meeting, and broad discussion
on global security issues such as counter-terrorism,
refugee problem, and the Middle East and Africa situation
took place.


This is a multilateral conference initiated by IISS, a private British think tank, in which defense ministers from various countries participate with the objective of discussing defense-related issues and regional
defense cooperation. Since the 1st conference in 2002, it has been held in Singapore each year and is known as the Shangri-La Dialogue, from the name of the hotel at which it takes place.

One of the most prestigious international meetings in Europe and the United States hosted by private organizers, which has been held annually (usually in February) since 1962. Officials at the ministerial level


-----

**3 Promoting Capacity Building Assistance and Other Practical Multilateral Security Cooperation**


While Japan’s bilateral and multilateral relationships
continue to deepen, the MOD seeks to further strengthen
and deepen defense cooperation and exchanges by
combining more practical and wide-ranging means such
as capacity building assistance.

- 1  Proactive and Strategic Initiatives for Capacity
**Building Assistance**


Malaysia and Laos. During FY2015, the following
dispatch programs were conducted: Seminars on
international aviation law in the Philippines and Malaysia,
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief in Myanmar
and Laos, vehicle maintenance in Timor-Leste, maritime
security (oceanography) in Indonesia, fl ight safety and
aviation medicine in Vietnam, underwater medicine
in Myanmar and Vietnam, and road constructions
engineering in Cambodia. In FY2016, a seminar on the
international aviation law was implemented in Thailand.
The invitation program involves inviting practitioners
from the recipient country to Japan, providing opportunities
for them to view facilities and undergo training. To
date, the MOD/SDF has invited military offi cials from
Vietnam, Mongolia, Indonesia, Timor-Leste, Cambodia,
the Philippines, Myanmar and Papua New Guinea. During
FY2015, the following dispatch programs were conducted:

SDF personnel providing training on road construction in Mongolia


**(1) Signifi cance of the Implementation of Capacity**
**Building Assistance**

In recent years, the importance of capacity building
assistance has received increasing recognition. Capacity
building assistance is an initiative with a purpose to
actively create stability within the region and improve the
global security environment by enhancing the ability of
countries eligible for support through continuous human
resource development and technical support in security
and defense fi elds[8] during peacetime. Providing support
for capacity building has the following objectives:
(1) enabling the countries receiving such support to
contribute to improving the global security environment;
(2) strengthening bilateral relationships with the
countries receiving such support; (3) strengthening the
relationships with other supporting countries such as the
United States and Australia; and (4) promoting Japan’s
efforts to work proactively and independently to realize
regional peace and stability, thereby increasing trust in
the MOD/SDF, as well as Japan as a whole.
In addition, these initiatives also facilitate the
improvement of the SDF capabilities.

**(2) Specifi c Activities**
The long-term dispatch program involves dispatching a
team composed of defense offi cials, SDF personnel, and
staff from knowledgeable private sector groups such as
NGOs for a long period in order to conduct large-scale,
and systematic human resource development, such as
lectures and practical training. This program has so far
been conducted in Timor-Leste, Cambodia, and Mongolia.
In FY2015, a long-term dispatch program took place in
Mongolia, in the fi eld of road-construction engineering.
The short-term dispatch program involves
activities such as lectures and seminars, undertaken by
knowledgeable SDF personnel. To date, the MOD/SDF
has dispatched SDF personnel to Mongolia, Vietnam,
Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, Myanmar, the Philippines,


SDF personnel conducting a seminar on international aviation law in the Philippines


-----

**(3) Cooperation with Relevant Countries**
In efforts to stabilize the regional security environment,
cooperation with other support countries is essential. In
particular, capacity building cooperation between Japan,
the United States and Australia is considered to be a
priority area of engagement.
At the joint announcement of the Japan-U.S.
Foreign and Defense Ministerial Consultation (“2+2”)
in April 2015, the ministers announced the strengthening
of continuous and close bilateral cooperation through
capacity building assistance between the two countries
to realize the peace, stability and prosperity of the region.
This was also confirmed at the Japan-U.S. Summit
Meeting during the same month as well as at the JapanU.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting in November 2015.
At the Japan-U.S.-Australia Defense Ministerial
Meeting in May 2015, the ministers agreed to further
continuous trilateral capacity building cooperation in the
field of maritime security. In particular, from October to
November 2015, the SDF and the U.S. Armed Forces
participated in the Australian Defence Force-led Exercise
“HARII HAMUTUK” as part of capacity building assistance
to the engineering unit of Timor-Leste Defense Force, and
provided technical guidance in engineering and construction.
In May 2013, March 2015, and March 2016, experts from


SDF personnel conducting a seminar on underwater medicine

military music training with personnel from Papua New
Guinea, the areas of aviation meteorology underwater
medicine, and humanitarian assistance and disaster relief
with personnel from Myanmar, PKO with the personnel
from Vietnam, and road construction engineering with
personnel from Mongolia. In FY2016, aviation safety
training was conducted with personnel from Thailand.

See>> Fig. III-2-1-7 (Status of Capacity Building Assistance Program)
See>> Reference 52 (Status of Capacity Building Assistance)
See>> Reference 53 (Status of Invitation Program)

|1-7 Status of Capacity Building Assistance Program|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|1. Human resourc engineering Period: July – Sept Target: Mongolian from the D Dispatched person 2 GSDF per 1 administrat 2. Sem 9. Seminar on underwater medicine Mongolia med Period: December 2015 Period: Target: Medical officers and divers etc., of Target: the Myanmar Army and Navy 7. Human resource development regarding civil Dispat Dispatched personnel: engineering 4 MSDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau Period: November 2015 administrative officials Target: National Centre for Peacekeeping Forces, Mines and ERW Clearance in Cambodia. Dispatched personnel: 3. Sem 10. Seminar on humanitarian assistance and 3 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau Period: disaster relief administrative official Target: Period: March 2016 Target: Staff and personnel of the Myanmar Dispat Armed Forces Dispatched personnel: 3 MSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official 9–10 11–12 Myanmar LLaaooss 1 1. dS ie sm asin tea rr ro en li eh fumanitarian assistance and 17 3 P Tae rr gio ed t:: F Se tab fr fu aa nry d 2 p0 e1 rs6 onnel from the Laos Ministry of Thailand 7 2 National Defense and Royal Lao Armed Forces Dispatched personnel: Cambodia Vietnam 1 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official 13 MMaallaayyssiiaa r on international aviation law 13. Seminar on international aviation law l 2016 Period: June 2015 f and personnel from Target: Royal Malaysian Air Force. Royal Thai Armed Forces. Dispatched personnel: personnel: 3 ASDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau SDF personnel, 2 Internal administrative official 8 eau administrative officials 8. Seminar on oceanography Indonesia Period: March 2016 Target: Oceanography Office, Indonesian Navy, etc. Dispatched personnel: 6. Technical guidan 2 MSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau (hosted by the Au administrative official Period: October - No (2 coast guard officers) Target: Timor-Leste Dispatched personn 8 GSDF pers administrativ||


Fig. III-2-1-7 Status of Capacity Building Assistance Program

1. Human resource development regarding civil engineering [Legend]
Period: July – September 2015 : Collaboration program with
Target: Mongolian Armed Forces, teaching staff other assisting countries
Dispatched personnel: from the Defense University of Mongolia : Long-term dispatch program
2 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau : Short-term dispatch program

1 administrative official

2. Seminar on aviation safety and aviation

9. Seminar on underwater medicinePeriod: December 2015 Mongolia medicinePeriod: November 2015
Target: Medical officers and divers etc., of Target: Vietnam Air Defense and Air Force.
the Myanmar Army and Navy 7. Human resource development regarding civil Dispatched personnel:
Dispatched personnel: engineering 5 ASDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau
4 MSDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau administrative officials Period: November 2015Target: National Centre for Peacekeeping Forces, Mines and ERW Clearance in Cambodia. administrative official 12. Seminar on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief

10. Seminar on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief Dispatched personnel: 3 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official 3. Seminar on underwater medicinePeriod: March 2016Target: Medical officers in the Vietnamese Period: June 2016Dispatched personnel: 3 Target: Staff and personnel from the Laos Ministry of National Defense
Period: March 2016 Navy, etc. GSDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau
Target: Staff and personnel of the Myanmar Dispatched personnel: administrative officials
Armed Forces 3 MSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau
Dispatched personnel: 3 MSDF personnel, administrative official
1 Internal Bureau administrative official 9–10 14. Seminar on international aviation law

11–12 Period: June 2015

Target: Philippine Air Force.

11. Seminar on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief Myanmar LaosLaos17 3 1614–15 Dispatched personnel: 3 ASDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau administrative official
Period: February 2016Target: Staff and personnel from the Laos Ministry of National Defense and Royal Lao Armed Forces Thailand 7 2 Philippines 15. Seminar on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief
Dispatched personnel: 1 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau Cambodia Vietnam Period: June 2016Target: Staff and personnel from the Armed
administrative official Forces of the Philippines

13 Dispatched personnel:

2 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau

17. Seminar on international aviation law 13. Seminar on international aviation law MalaysiaMalaysia administrative official
Period: April 2016 Period: June 2015
Target: Staff and personnel from Target: Royal Malaysian Air Force.
the Royal Thai Armed Forces. Dispatched personnel: 16. Japan-U.K. joint seminar on humanitarian
Dispatched personnel: 3 ASDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau assistance and disaster relief
3 ASDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau administrative officials administrative official 8 6 4–5 Period: January 2016Target: Staff and personnel from the Armed Forces of ASEAN countries

Dispatched personnel:

8. Seminar on oceanography Indonesia 2 Internal Bureau administrative officials
Period: March 2016 Timor-Leste
Target: Oceanography Office, Indonesian
Navy, etc.
Dispatched personnel: 6. Technical guidance regarding civil engineering 4. On-site guidance regarding vehicle 5. On-site guidance regarding vehicle
2 MSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau (hosted by the Australian Defense Forces) maintenance and management maintenance and management
administrative official Period: October - November 2015 Period: July 2015 Period: February 2016
(2 coast guard officers) Target: Timor-Leste logistic support troops Target: Timor-Leste logistic support component Target: Timor-Leste logistic support component

Dispatched personnel: Dispatched personnel: Dispatched personnel:
8 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau 5 GSDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau 4 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau
administrative official administrative officials administrative official


-----

**VOICE**

**Capacity Building in Timor-Leste: Assistance by Japan, the United States** **Column**
**and Australia**

**Second Lieutenant Julia Da Costa, Supply Section, Material Division Timor-Leste Defense Force Headquarters**

I participated in exercise “HARII HAMUTUK”, an Australian Defense Force
led engineering capacity building activity in Timor-Leste, together with GSDF
personnel, as a Japanese-Tetum interpreter.
“HARII HAMUTUK” means “building together” in the Tetum language,
the offi cial language of Timor-Leste. In this project, approximately 100
participants from Japan, the United States, Australia, and Timor-Leste, joined
forces and conducted a construction work to build accommodation buildings
and classrooms for the Timor-Leste Defence Force and wider community.
In 2010 I started my study as a foreign student at the Japan National
Defense Academy, and in the spring of 2015 I graduated as one of the
fi rst female foreign students. I currently work in the supply section at the
Timor-Leste Defense Force Headquarters. However, I greatly appreciated
the opportunity to participate in the project as a Japanese-Tetum interpreter,
using the Japanese language skills acquired whilst studying at the National Second Lieutenant Julia Da Costa(center) translating for her colleagues
Defense Academy. I also enjoyed the opportunity to work alongside GSDF, the
United States Armed Forces and the Australian Defence Force in the fi eld of capacity building cooperation.
I was impressed by the construction work skills of the military personnel from Japan, the United States, and Australia, sweating together
with the engineering unit of the Timor-Leste Defense Force. Through the interaction between our four countries on the project site, I knew that
our efforts would positively impact Timor-Leste and our cooperative relationships with Japan, the United States, and Australia.
In the future, I hope to continue to serve as a bridge between Japan and Timor-Leste, not only through “HARII HAMUTUK” but also other
opportunities for defense cooperation and exchanges.


both the United States and Australia participated in seminars
on underwater medicine in Vietnam.
In the Japan-U.K. Joint Statement of January 2016, it
was agreed that further cooperation for capacity building
in the areas of, maritime security, maritime safety,
marine conservation, and cyber security in Southeast
Asian countries would be pursued. In the same month,
the two countries jointly held a seminar on humanitarian
assistance and disaster relief for the ASEAN countries
in the Philippines, and the MOD’s achievement from
international disaster relief activities and capacity
building assistance in the same area were shared.
It is important that close coordination between
relevant countries of capacity building assistance is
promoted whilst being complementary and ensuring that
such assistance is carried out effectively and effi ciently.

- 2  Pacifi c Partnership


has dispatched SDF medical personnel and units, amongst
others, as part of this initiative, In 2016, it is planned that
SDF medical personnel, GSDF engineering personnel, and
MSDF vessels will be dispatched to Timor-Leste, Vietnam,
Palau and Indonesia to conduct support activities.

- 3  Multilateral Joint Training


**(1) Signifi cance of Multilateral Joint Training in the Asia-**
**Pacifi c Region**

Since 2000, in the Asia-Pacifi c region, in addition to
traditional training conducted in preparation for combat
situations, multinational training in non-traditional
security fi elds, such as humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief, as well as Non-combatant Evacuation
Operation (NEO), has been conducted.
It is important to participate in such multinational
training exercises so as not only to raise the skill level of
the SDF, but also to create a cooperative platform with
the countries involved. In light of this perspective, the
MOD/SDF continues to actively engage in such training.

See>> Reference 54 (Participation in Multilateral Training (Last Three Years))

**(2) Initiatives toward Multilateral Training**
a. Participation in, and Hosting of, Multilateral Joint
Training and Exercises
In April 2002, the MSDF hosted the second Western
Pacific submarine rescue exercise its first time hosting the


The Pacifi c Partnership (PP), which started in 2007, is an
initiative in which naval vessels, primarily those from the
U.S. Navy, visit countries in the region to provide medical
care, to conduct civil engineering business, and to engage
in cultural exchange, as well as to seek to strengthen
collaboration with the participating countries and facilitate
international disaster relief activities, through cooperation
with the government, military, international organizations,
and NGOs in each of those countries Since 2007 Japan


-----

exercise. Following this, in October 2002, the MSDF also
hosted a multilateral search and rescue exercise as well
as the sixth Western Pacific submarine rescue exercise in
September 2013. Meanwhile, in March 2011, Japan and
Indonesia co-hosted ARF-DiREx2011, the second time
the exercise was held, within the framework of the ARF.
Moreover, since 2005, the SDF has also been involved
in the annual Cobra Gold exercise, a multinational joint
training exercise co-hosted by the United States and
Thailand. In Cobra Gold 16 held in February 2016,
the SDF participated in the command post exercises,
conducted training in transporting Japanese nationals
overseas, and also participated in the public health section
and the construction section of humanitarian and civic
assistance activities. Since 2010, the SDF has participated
in the Global Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI) Capstone
Exercise, a multinational exercise for U.N. peacekeeping
operations launched by the United States. In August 2015,
the SDF participated in staff exercises and field training as
part of the Exercise Keris Aman held in Malaysia.
The GSDF participated in the multilateral exercise,
KHAAN QUEST 16, co-hosted by the United States
and Mongolia from May to June 2016. The MSDF
participated in the U.S.-Indo Naval Exercises (Malabar
2015) jointly hosted by the two countries in the waters


around eastern India in October 2015, the Indonesiahosted multilateral joint naval exercise Komodo 16
in the waters around Indonesia and the U.S.- hosted
International Minesweeper Training conducted in the
waters around the Arabian Peninsula in April 2016, and
the Exercise Malabar 2016 in the waters between Sasebo
and the area to the east of Okinawa in June of the same
year. The ASDF participated in the exercise “Corp North
Guam 16,” which was hosted jointly by Japan, the United
States and Australia and was held in Guam in February
2016. The ASDF also participated in the multilateral
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief exercises.
b. Multinational Tabletop Exercises, etc.
Initiatives have also been made to invite observers from
other foreign countries since September 2001, when
observers from eight Asia-Pacific countries participated
in the fourth Japan-Russia Search and Rescue training
hosted by Japan.
In addition, the GSDF has hosted the Multinational
Cooperation Program in the Asia Pacific (MCAP) every
year since 2002 as part of its multilateral cooperative
initiatives, inviting officers from the respective countries
involved. In 2015, 21 countries and international
organizations participated in the event where discussions
and training were carried out.


SDF personnel engaging in construction activities in the Pacific Partnership SDF personnel explaining the situation during the Global Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI)
Capstone Exercise (Keris Aman)


The MSDF destroyer Ise and vessels from other countries participating in the Exercise
Komodo 2016


SDF personnel participating in the Kahn Quest multinational joint exercises


-----

**4 Promotion of Defense Cooperation and Exchanges**


In promoting cooperation and exchanges in the area
of security, it is necessary to strengthen them based on
a combination of the most optimal means, whilst also
taking into account the actual situation of the partner
countries and their relationship with Japan. Therefore,
not only comprehensive efforts based on a multilateral
framework but also bilateral defense cooperation and
exchanges also plays an important role to realize them.

- 1  Japan-Australia Defense Cooperation and Exchanges


September 2012, both countries issued a joint statement
entitled Common Vision and Objectives agreeing to further
expand defense cooperation between Japan and Australia.

**(2) Recent Major Achievements in Defense Cooperation**
**and Exchanges**

At the Japan-Australia Summit Meeting in July 2014,
Prime Minister Abe described the relationship between
the two countries as a “Special Strategic Partnership for
the 21st Century” and signed the Agreement between the
Government of Japan and the Government of Australia
concerning the Transfer of Defence Equipment and
Technology as well as approved the proposal[11] for JapanAustralia defense cooperation that was agreed upon at the
fi fth Japan-Australia “2+2” held in June 2014.
In May 2015, at the Japan-Australia Defense
Ministers Meeting held at the timing of the 14th
Shangri-La Dialogue, Minister of Defense Nakatani and
Minister for Defence Kevin Andrews agreed to further
strengthen Japan-Australia defense cooperation through
joint exercises and other initiatives. Furthermore, at the
Defense Ministerial Talks held in Tokyo in June 2015, the
two ministers exchanged opinions regarding the future
defense cooperation between the two countries, and at
the same time agreed to strongly oppose any unilateral
attempts to change the status quo by force in the South
China Sea, and to resolve the situation in accordance with
international law. At the sixth Japan-Australia “2+2” held
in November 2015, further strengthening the “Special
Strategic Partnership” between the two countries was
confi rmed and new initiatives for strengthening bilateral
security and defense cooperation were specifi ed.
In this trend, at the Japan-Australia Summit Meeting
in December 2015, two leaders reconfi rmed the “Special
Strategic Partnership” between the two countries and
emphasized the importance of deepening their special
relationship based on the view of taking responsibility for
the peace and prospects of the Asia-Pacifi c region and the
international community. The two leaders also approved
the new initiatives agreed at the Japan-Australia “2+2”
Meeting in November.
The two countries also actively conduct service-toservice exchanges in which the enhancement of mutual
understanding as well as the trust and friendly relationship


**(1) Signifi cance of Defense Cooperation and Exchanges**
**with Australia**

Australia is an important partner for Japan in the AsiaPacifi c region: Both Japan and Australia are allied with
the United States and share not only universal values[9]
but also strategic stakes and interests. In particular,
in recent years, as responsible countries in the Asia
Pacifi c region, Japan and Australia are strengthening
mutual cooperation focused primarily on areas such as
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief activities. In
terms of Japan-Australia bilateral defense cooperation
and exchanges, the Japan-Australia Joint Declaration
on Security Cooperation, the fi rst such joint declaration
in the realm of security with a country other than the
United States, was announced at the Japan-Australia
Summit Meeting in March 2007. It has been making
steady progress since then and has now reached the
stage of more concrete and practical cooperation.
In May 2010, the Japan-Australia Acquisition and
Cross-Servicing Agreement (ACSA)[10] and its Procedural
Arrangement were signed at the third Japan-Australia
Foreign and Defense Ministerial Consultations (“2+2”),
and they entered into force in January 2013. The
ACSA enabled the reciprocal provision of supplies and
services by the SDF and the Australian Defence Force
(ADF) during international peace cooperation and
other activities. Moreover, due to the Japan-Australia
Information Security Agreement that entered into
force in March 2013 and the foundations for sharing
information that have been developed between the two
countries, it is expected that bilateral cooperation will
be further strengthened.
Furthermore, at the fourth Japan-Australia “2+2” in


9 Universal value: The National Security Strategy stipulates, “freedom, democracy, respect for fundamental human rights, and the rule of law” as universal values.

10 Offi cial title: The Agreement between the Government of Japan and the Government of Australia concerning reciprocal provision of supplies and services between the SDF of Japan and the ADF of Australia

11 This proposal deepened the bilateral security and defense relationship through the expansion and enhancement of training and exercises, extension of human exchanges, humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief, maritime security, peacekeeping and capacity building as well as Japan-Australia-U.S. trilateral cooperation. At the same time, it also determined the commencement of negotiation towards the


-----

is promoted through, for example, the participation of the
ASDF Chief of Staff in the Air Power Conference (APC)
organized by Australia.
Facilitation and strengthening of Japan-Australia
cooperation have contributed to the formation of the order
within the region and the effort towards international
peace centered on the United Nations. For example, in
August 2012, two Australian military personnel began to
undertake coordination activities with the SDF’s deployed
unit for the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan (UNMISS).
Japan-Australia joint exercises were conducted in
Japanese coastal waters in October 2015 and in the sea areas
surrounding Australia in April 2016 to further strengthen
the bilateral cooperation in training and exercises.
In addition, Japan has been working on the review
of multifaceted defense equipment and technology
cooperation with Australia. For example, Japan commenced
joint research in the field of marine hydrodynamics in
December 2015. Meanwhile, Japan submitted a proposal
regarding cooperation for the Australian Future Submarine
Program in November 2015, but the Australian Government
announced in April 2016 that they had selected a French
company as their international partner.

See>> Part III, Chapter 3, Section 3-3 (Building New Defense Equipment and

Technology Cooperation)

See>> Reference 55 (Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with
Australia (Past Three Years))

**(3) Cooperative Relationship between Japan, the United**
**States, and Australia**

Japan and Australia are both allied with the United States,
and share universal values. They cooperate closely in
order to resolve the various challenges the Asia-Pacific
region and the international community are facing.


In order to ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of
such cooperation, it is important to promote trilateral
cooperation with the United States, whose presence is
indispensable for regional peace and stability.
The Security and Defense Cooperation Forum
(SDCF), which is a Director General-level meeting
among the three countries, has been held six times since
April 2007.
With regard to training and exercises, the GSDF
participated in the U.S.-Australia joint exercise (Exercise
Talisman Saber) for the first time in July 2015. In addition,
an MSDF vessel participated in Japan-U.S.-Australia
joint cruise training in January and April 2016.

- 2  Japan-Republic of Korea Defense Cooperation
**and Exchanges**


**(1) Significance of Defense Cooperation and Exchange**
**with the Republic of Korea**

For Japan, the Republic of Korea (ROK) is the most
important neighboring country, which shares strategic
interests, and is extremely vital to Japan in geopolitical
terms. In addition, the two countries share many strategic
interests as allies of the United States. Therefore, even
if difficult issues occasionally arise, close collaboration
between the two countries on the security front has
enormous significance for the peace and stability of the
Asia-Pacific region.
Both Japan and the ROK are confronted with wideranging and complex security challenges including not
only the North Korean nuclear and missile issues, but also
counter-terrorism, peacekeeping operations, large-scale
natural disasters, antipiracy measures, maritime security and
so on. In order for the two countries to deal effectively with
such challenges related to security, it is important to carry
out not just exchanges for increasing mutual understanding
and trust building but more broad-ranging and concrete
defense cooperation. For this aim, it is important to conclude
the Information Security Agreement and the Acquisition
and Cross-Servicing Agreement (ACSA).

**(2) Recent Major Achievements in Defense Cooperation**
**and Exchange**

In April 2015, the Japan-ROK Security Dialogue at the
foreign and defense working-level was held in Seoul
for the first time in nearly five years where the security
policies and defense policies of the two countries were
discussed. In May 2015, Defense Minister Nakatani held
the first Japan-ROK Ministerial Dialogue in four years
with Defense Minister Han Min-koo on the sideline of
the 14th Shangri-La Dialogue. The two ministers shared
a common recognition regarding the security environment


The Chief of Staff of the GSDF, Iwata (center), having an exchange opportunity with the
Commander of the United States Special Operations Command (left), the Commander of the
United States Marine Corps Forces, Pacific (second from left), Chief of the Australian Ground i


-----

The Japan-ROK Defense Ministerial Meeting in the ROK (October 2015) MSDF vessel (back) conducting training with a ROK Navy vessel (front)


surrounding the two countries and exchanged opinions
concerning the defense policies of Japan and the ROK.
They also consulted each other regarding specific defense
cooperation and exchange such as the participation of
ROK naval vessels in the SDF naval review and the
implementation of the Japan-ROK joint search and rescue
bilateral exercise within this year, to which the ROK side
responded positively. During the defense ministers meeting
in Seoul in October of the same year, two ministers had
the same understanding, regarding the security concerns
between the two countries, that cooperation between Japan
and the ROK as well as among Japan, the United States
and the ROK would be important. The two ministers
also agreed to strengthen defense exchanges in various
areas such as human exchanges, exchanges between
units, education and research exchange, and to promote
cooperation in the areas of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations, anti-piracy activities, humanitarian activities
and disaster relief activity. In June 2016, the Japan-ROK
Ministerial Dialogue was held on the sideline of the 15th
Shangri-La Dialogue, and the Ministers affirmed the
necessity of further advancing the Japan-ROK and JapanU.S.-ROK security and defense cooperation. In addition,
the two ministers agreed to strengthen the emergency
communication system between the MOD and the Ministry
of National Defense of the ROK in order to communicate
and coordinate appropriately in case of emergency such
as the North Korea nuclear and missile issues. Regarding
defense cooperation and exchanges, the two ministers
also appreciated the reactivation of defense cooperation
at various levels and agreed to continue advancing the
cooperation between the two countries going forward as
they seize all available opportunities.
In October 2015, the SDF enhanced coordination with
the ROK Navy through the participation of ROK naval vessels
in the SDF naval review and the continuous implementation


of the Japan-ROK search and rescue bilateral exercise, while
in November the ROK Navy military band participated in the
SDF Marching Festival. Also in the same month, the ASDF
Chief of Staff participated in the Aerospace & Defense
Exhibition (ADEX) in Seoul and exchanged opinions with
the Chief of Air Staff for the first time in six years. In March
2016, the Chief of Maritime Staff visited the ROK and had
an opinion exchange opportunity with the Chief of Staff of
the ROK Navy, while in April of the same year the Chief
of Staff of the ROK Army visited Japan and carried out
opinion exchanges with the Chief of Ground Staff. As these
interactions and activities indicate, the exchanges between
the Chiefs of Ground, Maritime, and Air Staff of the two
countries have resumed.
With respect to the Kumamoto Earthquake that occurred
in April of the same year, Japan received relief supplies
provided by the ROK Air Force C-130 transport aircraft,
which showed close cooperation between Japan and the ROK.

See>> Reference 56 (Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with the

ROK (Past Three Years))

**(3) Cooperative Relationship between Japan, the U.S.,**
**and the ROK**

As both Japan and the ROK are allies of the United States,
which are indispensable to the peace and stability of the
Asia-Pacific region, policy consultation among the defense
authorities of Japan, the United States, and the ROK mainly
at the working level has been conducted since 1994, and
the “Information Sharing Arrangement among the Defense
Authorities from Japan, the United States, and the ROK”[12]
was signed in December 2014. This arrangement has
worked to develop more concrete cooperation by enabling
the defense authorities from the three countries to share
classified information regarding the threat of the North
Korea’s nuclear weapons and missiles. In addition, in a
trilateral summit meeting held in March 2016, the leaders


12 Official name: Trilateral Information Sharing Arrangement Concerning the Nuclear and Missile Threats Posed by North Korea Among the Ministry of National Defense of the Republic of Korea, the Ministry of


-----

affirmed necessity of further advancing the cooperation
among Japan, the United States, and the ROK in the
security area. Based on the agreement reached between
the foreign and defense ministries of the three countries
instructions would be given to the administrative officials
in their countries in order to advance specific security
and defense cooperation. In this context, it is necessary
to further deepen collaboration and cooperation among
Japan, the United States, and the ROK.
Since 2009, Japan, the United States, and the ROK
have conducted Trilateral Defense Ministers’ Meetings on
the sidelines of the Shangri-La Dialogue, and at the Meeting
in June 2016, a Joint Press Statement was issued following
discussion on the regional situations including North Korea
and trilateral defense cooperation. During the meeting, the
Ministers and the Secretary strongly condemned North
Korea’s provocative actions, while they appreciated the
close trilateral communication and cooperation that took
place at various levels before and immediately after a
nuclear test and ballistic missile launches and agreed to
continue such efforts. The three ministers also directed their
respective staff to explore ways to improve communication
and coordination among the three defense authorities. At
the same time, the Ministers discussed the first Japan-U.S.ROK missile warning exercise, Pacific Dragon 2016, and
other topics such as defense medical related events and
other cultural exchanges, enhancement of information
sharing, and maritime security.
At the working level, based on the framework of
the Japan-U.S.-ROK Defense Trilateral Talks (DTT),
close cooperation is conducted at various levels such as
the Director-General level and the Director level. Most
recently, in response to the nuclear test in January 2016
and multiple ballistic missile launches that were called
“artificial satellites” in February of the same year, the
Director-General level video teleconferences were held
to share information and exchange views. They agreed to
continue close cooperation.
Japan, the United States, and the ROK also promote
close service-to-service cooperation. In July 2014, the
Chief of Joint Staff of Japan, the Chairman of the U.S.
Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Chairman of the ROK Joint
Chiefs of Staff held the first chief-of-staff-level meeting
in Hawaii to discuss a broad range of issues, including the
increasingly strained security situation, such as nuclear
and missile threats from North Korea, and measures to
enhance trilateral coordination among Japan, the United
States and the ROK. The chief-of-staff-level video
teleconference was held again in February 2016 where
information sharing and cooperation among the three


countries in response to North Korea’s nuclear test etc.
were discussed.

- 3  Japan-India Defense Cooperation and Exchanges


**(1) Significance of Defense Cooperation and Exchanges**
**with India**

India, which is becoming increasingly influential against
a backdrop of what is projected to become the world’s
largest population as well as its high economic growth
and latent economic power, is located in the center of sea
lanes that connect Japan with the Middle East and Africa,
making it an extremely important country geopolitically
for Japan. Furthermore, Japan and India, which share
universal values[13] as well as have a common interest in the
peace, stability, and prosperity of Asia and the world, have
established the “Special Strategic and Global Partnership.”
In this context, Japan and India have also been strengthening
their relations in the area of security in recent years.
In October 2008, the prime ministers of Japan and
India signed the Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation
between Japan and India. India is the third country with
which Japan signed a joint declaration specializing in
security, following those with the United States and
Australia. In December 2009, the prime ministers of
Japan and India also formulated the Action Plan to
advance security cooperation between the two countries.
The declaration deepened the initiatives in various
areas - meetings and dialogues at various levels such as
the ministerial and Chief of Staff level, service to service
exchanges including bilateral and multilateral exercises,
and promotion of cooperation in maritime security such as
cooperation in anti-piracy operations. This in turn served
as a subsequent guideline for cooperation in the field of
security between Japan and India. Moreover, in September
2014, Memorandum on Japan-India defense cooperation
and exchanges were signed, which strengthened the

The Chief of Staff of the MSDF Takei having an exchange meeting with the Chief of Staff
of the Indian Navy


-----

relationship as partners that are capable of dealing with
regional and global issues together.

**(2) Recent Major Achievements in Defense Cooperation**
**and Exchanges**

During the Japan-India Summit Meeting with Prime
Minister Modi held in September 2014, both prime
ministers agreed on a number of approaches to be
taken in order to upgrade the relationship between the
two countries to a special strategic global partnership,
including strengthening of the Japan-India “2+2,”
continuous participation of Japan in the U.S.-Indo Naval
Exercises (Malabar),launch of working level consultations
between the two countries with a view to promoting
defense equipment and technology cooperation.
At the Japan-India Ministerial Meeting in March
2015, both ministers agreed that the two countries would
hold continuous discussions regarding defense equipment
cooperation concerning the US-2 amphibian rescue
aircraft, and the regular continuation of not only bilateral
maritime training but also cooperation involving the
ground and air forces. During the Japan-India Defense
ministerial Meeting conducted during the ADMM Plus
Meeting in November 2015 and the Shangri-La Dialogue
in June 2016, the two ministers confirmed the importance
of promoting defense cooperation and exchanges
between Japan and India including the discussions on the
strengthening of cooperation in the maritime security field
through Japan’s participation in Malabar on a regular basis
and the defense equipment cooperation concerning the
US-2 amphibian rescue aircraft. The two ministers also
agreed upon working on building more exchanges in a
wide range of fields to strengthen the bilateral cooperation.
Furthermore, during the Summit Meeting in December
2015, the two Prime Ministers agreed to transform the key
relationship between Japan and India into “a deep, broadbased and action-oriented partnership, which reflects a
broad convergence of their long-term political, economic
and strategic goals.” Moreover, the two Prime Ministers
concluded the Agreement concerning the Transfer of the
Defence Equipment and Technology and the General
Security of Military Information Agreement in order to
further strengthen the foundation of deep strategic ties.
These agreements have enabled the two countries further
deepening the bilateral defense equipment cooperation and
information exchanges, which served as the foundation for
the future development of Japan-India defense cooperation
and exchanges.
With regard to exercises and training, responding
to the agreement related to Japan’s regular participation
in Malabar, the MSDF participated in Malabar 2015 in
the waters east of India in October 2015 and Malabar


2016 in the waters between Sasebo and Okinawa in June
2016 to practice anti-submarine warfare as well as search
and rescue activities. Also in October 2015, an Indian
Navy vessel participated in the SDF naval review, while
the MSDF vessel participated in the International Fleet
Review organized by the Indian Navy in February 2016.
Furthermore, service-to-service exchanges have become
activated as well, for example, through expert exchanges
in the area of test pilot involving both the Indian Air
Force and the ASDF, and exchange between airlift units
of the two countries.

See>> Part III, Chapter 3, Section 3-3 (Building New Defense Equipment and

Technology Cooperation)

See>> Reference 57 (Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with
India (Past Three Years))

- 4  Japan-China Defense Exchanges and Cooperation


**(1) Significance of Defense Exchange and Cooperation**
**with China**

Stable relations between Japan and China are an
essential factor for the peace and stability of the AsiaPacific region. From a broad and a medium- to long-term
perspective, Japan it is necessary for both countries to
strive to construct and enhance a “Mutually Beneficial
Relationship Based on Common Strategic Interests with
China” in all areas, including security. In particular, Japan
will continue to encourage China to play a responsible
and constructive role for the sake of regional peace,
stability and prosperity, to comply with international
norms of behavior, as well as to improve transparency
with regard to its advancing military capabilities in the
context of its rapidly increasing military budget. As
part of such efforts, through continuing and promoting
defense exchange, Japan will urge China to demonstrate
greater transparency in its military and security policies,
and promote measures such as establishing a framework
to avert or prevent unexpected situations.

**(2) Recent Major Achievements in Defense Exchanges**
Japan-China defense exchanges became stagnated
following Japan’s acquisition and ownership of the
Senkaku Islands in September 2012, but it has gradually
been resumed since the latter half of 2014.
The Japan-China Summit Meeting was held in
November 2014, while a Japan-China Security Dialogue
was held in March 2015 in which strengthening of the
bilateral exchanges between the two countries was agreed.
In May 2015, Japan-China defense director-general-level
consultations were held and the promotion of defense
exchanges between the two countries was confirmed.
The second, third and fourth meetings of the HighLevel Consultation on Maritime Affairs were conducted


-----

in September 2014, January 2015, and December
2015 respectively.
In November 2015, the Japan-China Defense
Ministerial Meeting was held for the fi rst time in four
years and fi ve months during the ADMM Plus Meeting.
The two ministers had a frank exchange of views
regarding various issues standing between the two
countries, and agreed to recognize the importance of


early commencement of the operation of the “Maritime
and Air Communication Mechanism between Japan and
China’s defense authorities” as well as the development
of Japan-China defense exchanges. The “Maritime and
Air Communication Mechanism between Japan and
China’s defense authorities” aims to avoid unexpected
collisions and prevent unforeseen consequences in
waters and airspace from escalating into military clashes


**VOICE**

**Japan-India Exchanges in Progress** **Column**
**– Participated in the Indian Navy Fleet Review**

**MSDF Maizuru District (Maizuru City, Kyoto Prefecture)**
**Commander Satoshi Takaoka, Captain of destroyer Matsuyuki, Escort Division 14 (Maizuru)**

Destroyer Matsuyuki participated in the international fl eet review held in Visakhapatnam, a port city in the central southern area on the
east coast of India in February 2016. It was a lavish fl eet review in which the Navies from 52 countries participated and over 150 vessels
gathered together. During the visit, various relevant events were held such
as a troop review by the Prime Minister of India, Indian cultural heritage
training, International Maritime Conference, a parade by the crew within the
city. With the purpose of promoting mutual understanding and friendship
with other participating countries in the international fl eet review, all the
Japanese crews attended each event having a strong spirit that “each and
every one of us represents Japan.” In addition, during the outward voyage to
the fl eet review, the MSDF also conducted joint exercise with the U.S. Navy
and the Royal Australian Navy, while in the return path it participated in a joint
exercise with Thailand.
India and other countries around the Indian Ocean that participated in
this fl eet review are geopolitically important to Japan. I consider that the
international cooperation with these countries through defense exchanges
has a deep signifi cance in the situation in which ensuring maritime security
is increasingly required. The author (left) manning the rails at the International Fleet Review


**VOICE**

**Japan-India Exchanges in Progress** **Column**
**– My Experience Visiting the Indian Air Force as a Test Pilot**

**ASDF Ashiya Air Base (Ashiya-cho, Onga District, Fukuoka Prefecture)**
**Colonel (ASDF) Hiroshi Senba, Commander of Flying Training Group, 13th Flying Training Wing**

In January 2016, three personnel (two test pilots and one Research and Development offi cer) from the Air Development and Test Command
visited the test fl ight unit and test evaluation organization of the Indian Air Force. At the site in India, we exchanged opinions regarding
the process of developing aircraft, education of test pilots, test procedure of aircraft, and the safety of test fl ights with the test pilots and
experts in fl ight tests from the Indian Air Force, and we were able to learn the
differences between the ASDF and the Indian Air Force.
The Indian Air Force operates aircraft with different operational ideas
such as adopting Russian-made and European-made aircraft. We were able
to see the condition in which test pilots serve as a bridge between operators
and engineers to make signifi cant contributions to the stable operation of the
Indian Air Force’s aircraft. In addition, we also had an interesting opportunity
to learn about the unit centrally in charge of software development of
equipment, which the ASDF does not have. Going forward, I will refl ect the
knowledge and experience gained in this visit training on to the research and
development as well as aviation safety in the ASDF. At the same time, I intend
to make contributions to the promotion of the defense exchanges between
the ASDF and the Indian Air Force. A scene of interaction between the author and an offi cial of the Indian Air Force


-----

also taken this into account in its exchanges with Russia.
Simultaneously, it is important to maintain constant
contact at the working level in order not to cause any
unforeseen circumstances and unnecessary conflicts
with Russia, a neighboring country. The MOD considers
these points in a comprehensive manner and advances
exchanges with Russia accordingly.

**(2) Recent Major Achievements in Defense Exchange**
At the Japan-Russia Summit Meeting in April 2013,
the two leaders affirmed the importance of expanding
cooperation between Japan and Russia in the field of
security and defense, amid the growing role of the AsiaPacific region and major changes in the international
security environment, and agreed to set up a meeting
between foreign and defense authorities at the ministerial
level (the “2+2” Meeting). At the first Japan-Russia “2+2”
Meeting in November 2013, the two countries agreed to
conduct ground-to-ground unit exchanges between land
forces and mutual dispatch of exercise observers on a
regular basis, and bilateral exercises between counter
piracy units of the MSDF and Russian Navy in the Gulf
of Aden, as well as regular hosting of the Japan-Russia
Cyber Security Meeting.
In October 2014, the MSDF carried out the 15th
bilateral Japan-Russia search and rescue exercises. In
addition, Japan-Russia bilateral talks were held at the
Vice-Ministerial level at the timing of the 14th ShangriLa Dialogue, which took place in May 2015, and defense
exchange between two countries was discussed.

See>> Reference 59 (Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with
Russia (Past Three Years))


The Japan-China Defense Ministerial Meeting in Malaysia (November 2015)

or political problems. It was agreed that the mechanism
would be comprised of: (1) regular meetings; (2) hotlines
between the defense authorities of Japan and China; and
(3) direct communications between naval vessels and
aircraft, while the specific contents of it are in the process
of adjustment with the Chinese side.
As part of initiatives to construct a “Mutually
Beneficial Relationship Based on Common Strategic
Interests,” it will be essential to strive to promote mutual
trust and understanding between Japan and China through
dialogue at various levels and in a range of areas, while also
actively promoting concrete cooperation in non-traditional
security areas, such as counter-piracy measures.

See>> Reference 58 (Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with
China (Past Three Years))



- 5  Japan-Russia Defense Exchanges and Cooperation

**(1) Significance of Defense Exchange and Cooperation**
**with Russia**

Russia has great influence on the security of Europe,
Central Asia, and the Asia-Pacific region, and is an
important neighboring country of Japan. It is therefore
very important for Japan to promote mutual trust with
Russia through defense exchanges. As Japan-Russia
relations have continuously been developing in a wide
range of areas, the MOD/SDF continuously conducts,
in accordance with the Memorandum on Japan-Russia
Defense Exchanges drawn up in 1999 (revised in 2006),
various dialogues between defense authorities, annual
meetings based on the Japan-Russia Agreement on
Prevention of Incidents On and Over the High Seas, and
bilateral search and rescue exercises.
Regarding Japan’s relationship with Russia, the
Government of Japan intends to take an appropriate
response whilst emphasizing the solidarity of the G7
(Group of Seven),[14] taking the Ukrainian situation and
other factors into account. In light of this, the MOD has



- 6  Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with
**ASEAN Countries**

ASEAN countries, which continue to experience rapid
economic growth and are expected to play a role as a
center of growth that is open to the world, and Japan are
traditional partners with history of exchanges and a close
economic relationship more than 40 years. In addition,
ASEAN countries are located in geopolitically important
areas occupying strategic points for the maritime traffic
for Japanese sea lanes, are also playing an important
role in ensuring the peace and prosperity of Japan as
well as the entire region. Therefore, it is important
that Japan strengthens cooperation in the security and
defense areas and enhance the relationship of trust with
ASEAN countries. In particular, since Japan and ASEAN
countries share a number of issues in the non-traditional
security areas such as maritime security and humanitarian


-----

assistance and disaster relief, they promote cooperation
based on multinational frameworks such as the ADMM
Plus and the ARF, as well as strengthening bilateral
cooperation and exchanges to enhance cooperation for
the capacity building in the entire region with a focus on
the future.
In November 2015, ASEAN launched the ASEAN
Community, which is comprised of three pillars, namely
the ASEAN Political-Security Community, ASEAN
Economic Community, and ASEAN Socio-Cultural
Community. Japan promotes substantial cooperation
by conducting defense equipment and technology
cooperation, capacity building assistance, joint exercises,
and other initiatives with ASEAN, which promotes the
regional integration.

See>> Part III, Chapter 3, Section 3-3 (Building New Defense Equipment and

Technology Cooperation)

**(1) Indonesia**
Indonesia is the world largest island nation with its land
and population consisting of nearly 40% of the entire
Southeast Asia, and maintains close defense exchanges
and cooperation with Japan. During the Japan-Indonesia
Summit Meeting in March 2015, President Joko Widodo of
the Republic of Indonesia and Prime Minister Abe agreed
to strengthen the Strategic Partnership underpinned by sea
and democracy, and also re-affirmed their intention to hold
the “Japan-Indonesia Foreign and Defense Ministerial
Consultation” (“2+2” Meeting). At the “2+2” Meeting
held in Tokyo for the first time in December of the same
year, four ministers agreed to commence negotiations on
the Agreement on the transfer of defense equipment and
technology, actively participate in the multilateral naval
exercise (Komodo 2016), and develop capacity building
assistance, and other points. Similarly, at the working
level, exchanges at various levels have been carried out,
including consultations between foreign and defense
authorities, consultations between defense authorities, and
various educational and academic exchanges.


With regard to training and exercise, following 2014,
the MSDF participated in the Komodo Exercise 2016 in the
waters around Indonesia in April 2016, and conducted search
and rescue as well as humanitarian assistance exercises.
Japan and Indonesia have also been working on
strengthening cooperation through capacity building assistance.

See>> Fig. III-2-1-7 (Status of Capacity Building Assistance Program)

**(2) Vietnam**
Vietnam is a coastal country of the South China Sea.
At the Japan-Vietnam Summit Meeting held in March
2014, President Truong Tan Sang of Vietnam and
Prime Minister Abe agreed to elevate the relationship
between the two countries to an “Extensive Strategic
Partnership.” In addition, in September 2015, Dr. Nguyen
Phu Trong, General Secretary of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of Vietnam, visited Japan and
the Japan-Vietnam Summit Meeting was held in which
the two leaders agreed to strengthen cooperation in the
security and defense areas.
During the Defense Ministerial Meeting in November
2015, the two ministers agreed to strengthen the defense
cooperation between the two countries through a
number of initiatives such as: port calls of the MSDF at
the Cam Ranh Bay International Port situated at a key
strategic location in the South China Sea; continuation
of cooperation in the PKO area; implementation of
naval exercises regarding humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief; expansion and enhancement of capacity
building assistance; commencement of administrativelevel consultations regarding defense equipment and
technology cooperation.
As for vice-ministerial consultation, three of
such consultations were held by January 2015, During
these consultations, the two vice-ministers exchanged
opinions regarding regional situations and discussed
cooperation in the field of capacity building assistance,
and in September 2015 they signed the Memorandum
declaring the promotion of cooperation in the PKO area.


The first Japan-Indonesia Foreign and Defense Ministerial Meeting (“2+2”) in Tokyo
(D b 201 )


Minister of Defense Nakatani receiving an honor guard and a ceremonial weapon at


-----

MSDF destroyers Ariake and Setogiri made a port call at the Cam Ranh Bay international port The Chief of Staff of the ASDF Sugiyama (left) having an exchange meeting with the Chief of
Staff of the Singaporean Air Force (right)


In February 2015, the Vietnamese Naval Commander
visited Japan and with the Chief of Staff of the MSDF
agreed to strengthen Japan-Vietnam service-to-service
exchanges. In May 2015, the Chief of Staff of the ASDF
visited Vietnam and exchanged views on future defense
cooperation and exchanges, etc. with Vietnamese Air
Force Commander and others. Furthermore, progress of
defense exchanges has been made through the following
activities: In February 2016 the MSDF patrol aircraft unit
conducted a table-top exercise with an assumption of
search and rescue with Vietnam People’s Navy and Air
Force officers in Da Nang, and the ASDF transport unit
carried out exchange activities with the Vietnam People’s
Air Force, while in April 2016, an MSDF vessel for the
first time made a call at the Cam Ranh Bay.
It will continue to be vital to strengthen relationships in
order to achieve more concrete, practical cooperation, based
on the memorandum on defense cooperation and exchange
as the cornerstone of our cooperation and exchanges.

See>> Fig. III-2-1-7 (Status of Capacity Building Assistance Program)

**(3) Singapore**
In December 2009, Singapore became the first country in
Southeast Asia with which Japan signed a memorandum
on defense cooperation and exchange, and a cooperative
relationship is progressing steadily based on the
memorandum. In particular, discussions between the
defense authorities of Japan and Singapore have the longest
history of any of Japan’s defense discussions with the
countries of Southeast Asia, with 14 rounds of talks in the
history. Moreover, the Minister of Defence from Singapore
participates in the Shangri-La Dialogue organized by the
International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) almost
every year, and high-level exchanges between the Japanese
and Singaporean defense ministers are carried out in which
Japan’s security policy is also explained.
At the 15th Shangri-La Dialogue held in June
2016, Minister of Defense Nakatani held a meeting with
Singaporean Defense Minister Dr Ng The ministers


exchanged opinions on regional situations, defense
cooperation and exchanges, and other topics and
confirmed that the two countries continue to work on the
strengthening of the bilateral relationship.
Additionally, port calls at the time of conducting
international cooperation operations such as the United
Nations PKO and anti-piracy activities, and service-toservice exchanges are also actively conducted.

**(4) The Philippines**
Between Japan and the Philippines, as well as highlevel exchanges, there have been frequent workinglevel exchanges including visits by naval vessels and
consultations between the two defense authorities and
service-to-service exchanges. At the defense ministerial
meeting held in January 2015, the two defense ministers
signed a memorandum on defense cooperation and
exchanges. This memorandum shows the intentions of the
two countries to conduct cooperation in non-traditional
security areas such as maritime security; in addition to
holding defense ministerial meetings and vice-ministerial
consultations on a regular basis; reciprocal visits between
the Chief of Staff of the Joint Staff, Chiefs of Staff of
the SDFs, Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the
Philippines and the Commanders of each services; and
participation in trainings and exercises. In addition,
during the Summit Meeting with President Aquino in
November 2015, the two leaders mostly agreed upon the
Defense equipment and technology transfer agreement,
which was later signed in February 2016.
Furthermore, during the Japan-Philippines Defense
Ministerial telephone conference in May of the same
year, the two ministers confirmed to embody the transfer
of up to five MSDF TC-90 training aircrafts to the
Philippine Navy in order to enhance the capabilities of
the Philippine concerning humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief, transportation, and maritime situational
awareness. At the same time, the ministers also agreed
to strengthen the cooperation between the two countries


-----

**VOICE**

**My Experience of Participation in the Ship Rider Program** **Column**

**Lieutenant Junior Grade Mckleen Gil Parejo, the Philippine Navy**

Having participated in the Ship Rider Program* organized by the MSDF at this
time, I learned many things required of a Navy offi cer. I think that the program
worked to promote a multilateral cooperation posture very effectively not
only through various kinds of technical training, such as operational training
for ships, but also through opinion exchanges with Navy offi cers from other
countries regarding maritime security and measures to deal with large-scale
disasters. I believe that the experience of having interaction with offi cers from
various countries and touching on diverse cultures on the MSDF destroyer Ise
for a long period of time will surely have a positive effect when cooperating
with foreign Navies in the future.
Initially, until the mid-through to this program, I had only a little
awareness of working in cooperation with the Navy of other countries within
the international community, and had a focus only on what the Philippine
Navy would do. However, this program enabled me to gain many things, The author (center) checking the use of a compass for operational training
which I would not have gained through training in my own country alone. This
experience seems to have expanded my fi eld of view a lot and also changed my ways of thinking.
I intend to actively spread information about this experience of mine not just as my own personal experience but also as an organizational
experience. If there is another opportunity like this, I would like to participate in it, and even if I cannot participate I would like the Philippine
Navy offi cers younger than myself to participate in it. This program enabled me so much both in terms of improving my ability as a Navy offi cer
and growing as a human.
I believe that this program will strengthen the future cooperation posture between the Philippine Navy and the MSDF, and will help to bring
stability and peace to the region.

-  The Ship Rider Program is an exchange program for the next generation offi cers hosted by the MSDF with the aims to promote mutual understanding with countries
participating and to build human networks. The program conducted an opinion exchange meeting, operational training, a training tour, and other contents on the
MSDF destroyer Ise, which participated in the multilateral joint exercise between Wednesday April 13 and Tuesday April 26, 2016, inviting offi cers (19 offi cers from 19
countries) from the member countries of the Western Pacifi c Naval Symposium (WPNS).


including sharing recognition of the regional situation
centering on the South China Sea.
As for service-to-service exchanges, the MASF
vessels and the MSDF patrol aircraft unit in May and June
2015, respectively, conducted joint exercise concerning
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief using the Code for
Unplanned Encounters at Sea (CUES)[15] in the Philippines.

**(5) Thailand**
With Thailand, Japan has a long history of defense
cooperation and exchanges under the traditionally good
relationship between the two countries, and the dispatching
of Defense Attachés and consultations between defense
authorities were initiated at an early stage. As for the
acceptance of foreign students to the National Defense
Academy, it was a Thai student who was accepted as
the fi rst foreign student in 1958, and since then Thailand
has sent the largest cumulative number of students. The
MOD/SDF, since 2005, has been participating in the
multilateral military exercise Cobra Gold hosted by the
United States and Thailand. Furthermore, in April 2016,
a human resources development seminar covering the area


of international aviation law was carried out as the fi rst
capacity building assistance for Thailand, while in May, an
invitation project regarding aviation safety was conducted
for the Royal Thai Air Force Safety Center. In June 2016,
Minister of Defense visited Thailand, paid a courtesy call
to Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha, and had a meeting
with Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defense,
Mr. Prawit Wongsuwon, and agreed to strengthen the
bilateral defense cooperation and exchange.

See>> Fig. III-2-1-7 (Status of Capacity Building Assistance Program)

**(6) Cambodia**
Cambodia is the fi rst country to which Japan dispatched
the SDF for U.N. peacekeeping operations in 1992. Since
then, defense cooperation and exchanges between the two
countries have been continuously improving: in 2008, the
Defense Attaché to Vietnam was also appointed as Defense
Attaché to Cambodia, and support for capacity building
was started in 2013. At the Japan-Cambodia Summit
Meeting in December 2013, the bilateral relationship was
upgraded to “strategic partnership.” After the summit, the
Minister of Defense signed the Memorandum on Defense


-----

**(8) Laos**
Regarding Japan’s relations with Laos, defense cooperation
and exchanges have been gradually developing since 2011,
when the Defense Attaché to Vietnam was also appointed
as Defense Attaché to Laos. In April 2013, the National
Defense Academy accepted students from Laos for the
fi rst time, and in August 2013, the fi rst Japan-Laos Defense
Ministerial Meeting was held. The fi rst Japan-Laos Security
Dialogue was realized in April 2014. In addition, in January
2014, the Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense visited
Laos for the fi rst time, and as the co-chair countries of the
EWG on Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief
(HA/DR) of the ADMM Plus, the two countries agreed
to enhance their cooperation in the area of HA/DR. At
the Defense Ministerial Meeting in November 2015, the
two ministers agreed to develop the defense cooperation
and exchanges between the two countries. Furthermore,
during the visit by the Vice-Minister of Defense for
International Affairs to Laos in February 2016, views and
opinions were exchanged regarding the commencement of
capacity building assistance in the areas of humanitarian
assistance and disaster relief as well as plans for further
defense cooperation. In March of the same year, the ASDF
transport unit visited Laos and carried out service-toservice exchanges with the Loyal Lao Air Force.

**(9) Malaysia**
Regarding Japan’s relations with Malaysia, Japan-Malaysia
Defense Ministerial Meeting was held at the timing of the
14th Shangri-La Dialogue in May 2015 and also during
the Third ADMM Plus in November of the same year.
The two Ministers exchanged views regarding bilateral
defense cooperation and exchanges, and agreed to continue
cooperation in this area between Japan and Malaysia.
As for service-to-service exchanges, in August 2015
vessels from the MSDF and the Royal Malaysian Navy
conducted a goodwill exercise in waters west of Kota
Kinabalu, and in November 2015 the Commander of the
Malaysian Armed Forces visited Japan to have a meeting


Cooperation and Exchanges between the Ministry of
Defense of Japan and the Ministry of National Defence
of the Kingdom of Cambodia.

See>> Fig. III-2-1-7 (Status of Capacity Building Assistance Program)

**(7) Myanmar**
Regarding Japan’s relations with Myanmar, Japan has
been promoting exchanges since Myanmar’s transition
from military rule to democratic government in March
2011, such as realizing the Administrative Vice-Minister
of Defense’s fi rst visit to the country, and inviting
Myanmar to participate in multilateral conferences
hosted by Japan. In November 2013, the fi rst consultation
between defense authorities was held in the capital city
Naypyidaw, during which the two countries exchanged
opinions regarding the procedures for future defense
exchanges between the two nations and agreed to further
promote exchanges. Furthermore, in November 2014, then
Minister of Defense Eto held a meeting with Minister for
Defense Wai Lwin of Myanmar, the chair country, whilst
attending the Japan-ASEAN Roundtable and confi rmed
their intention to promote defense exchanges. In July and
August 2015, the Commander of Air Force, and the Vice
Commander of the Armed Forces of Myanmar and the
Commander of Myanmar Army visited Japan respectively.
In addition, Minister of Defense Nakatani is scheduled
to visit Myanmar in June 2016 to have meetings with
the Commander-in-Chief of Defence Services and the
Minister of Defense separately and to pay a courtesy call
to State Counselor and Foreign Minister Aung San Suu
Kyi. All of these activities have further advanced highlevel exchange between the two countries. Moreover, in
March 2016, the ASDF transport unit visited Myanmar
and carried out their fi rst service-to-service exchange with
the Myanmar Air Force, while Japan is also working on the
strengthening of bilateral cooperation through its capacity
building assistance to Myanmar.

See>> Fig. III-2-1-7 (Status of Capacity Building Assistance Program)


Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Mimura (left) having a meeting with The Chief of Joint Staff Kawano (right) having a meeting with the Commander of


-----

with the Chief of Joint Staff. Based on the cooperation
relationship between Japan and Malaysia developed
through the search operation in the missing Malaysian
Airplane case occurred in 2014, the relationship between
the SDF and the Malaysian Armed Forces has been
strengthening in various fields such as humanitarian
assistance and disaster relief.

**(10) Brunei**
Regarding Japan’s relations with Brunei, during the 2nd
ADMM Plus meeting held in Brunei in August 2013, the
Minister of Defense held talks with Brunei’s Minister
of Energy Mohammad Yasmin Umar and exchanged
views on the initiatives of the ADMM Plus. In addition,
SDF aircraft from all of its three forces participated in
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance as well as
a joint exercise of the EWG on military medicine held
in June 2013 in Brunei for the first time based on the
framework of the ADMM Plus, while in May 2016 the
MSDF destroyer Ise participated in a joint exercise held
in Brunei, which serves as a co-chair of the EWG on
maritime security of the ADMM Plus.

See>> Reference 60 (Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with

ASEAN Countries (Past Three Years))


assistance. At the same time, the two countries have been
working on the enhancement of cooperation through
support for capacity building. In addition, at the 14th
Shangri-La Dialogue in May 2015, the Japan-Mongolia
Defense Ministerial Meeting was held and opinions were
exchanged regarding bilateral defense cooperation and
exchanges. At the meeting held between the Chief of
Joint Staff and the Chief of Defense in October of the
same year, promotion of security cooperation in the area
of peacekeeping operation was agreed.

See>> Fig. III-2-1-7 (Status of Capacity Building Assistance Program)

**(3) Republic of Timor-Leste**
With the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste to which the
SDF had been dispatched as part of the U.N. peacekeeping
operations to support the country’s independence since
2002, a ministerial meeting with the Minister of Defence
Mr. Cristovão was held when he visited Japan in March
2015, during which both ministers agreed to continue
exchanges between their defense authorities through
educational exchanges and support for capacity building.
In addition, the Defense Minister of Japan visited TimorLeste for the first time in 14 years in June 2016. Between
the Japanese Defense Minister and Minister Cristovão,
it was agreed that the two countries would continue and
deepen the exchanges between the defense authorities
through capacity building assistance, dispatch of students
from Timor-Leste to the National Defense Academy and
other schools, and port calls by the MSDF vessels.

See>> Reference 61 (Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with

Other Asia-Pacific Countries (Past Three Years))



- 7  Defense Exchanges and Cooperation with Other
**Asia-Pacific Countries**

**(1) New Zealand**
With New Zealand, a memorandum of Japan-New
Zealand defense cooperation and exchange was signed in
August 2013. During the Summit Meeting in July 2014,
the two countries agreed to conduct studies on an ACSA.
Also, two SDF personnel participated in the Proliferation
Security Initiative interdiction exercise (Exercise MARU
2015) organized by New Zealand in November 2015.
In June 2016, at the Japan-New Zealand Defense
Ministerial Meeting held at the timing of the 15th ShangriLa Dialogue, two ministers positively evaluated the
frequent human exchanges at various levels between the
two countries such as defense ministerial meetings and
mutual visits by vice-ministers, and then agreed to develop
the bilateral relationship between Japan and New Zealand
that are “strategic partners” in the Asia-Pacific region.



- 8  Significance of Defense Exchange and
**Cooperation with European Countries**

Europe shares universal values with Japan and plays a central
role in working to address common challenges to global
security, focusing primarily on non-traditional security
areas such as counter-terrorism and combating piracy, as
well as international peace cooperation activities. In this
regard, promoting defense cooperation and exchanges with
European countries provides the foundations for Japan to
become actively involved in dealing with these challenges,
and is important for both Japan and Europe.


**(2) Mongolia**
Following the signing of a memorandum on JapanMongolia defense cooperation and exchanges in January
2012, Japan and Mongolia promoted high-level exchanges
such as the Defense Vice-ministerial Level Meeting and
service-to-service exchanges, as well as working on the
strengthening of cooperation through capacity building


**(1) The United Kingdom**
The United Kingdom, being a major power that has
influence not only in Europe but also in the rest of the
world, has historically maintained close relations with
Japan. On the security front, Japan shares the same
strategic interests as the United Kingdom, as both
countries are important allies of the United States Given


-----

relation to defense equipment and technology cooperation,
along with the progress of two joint research, commencing
joint research regarding a new personnel vulnerability
evaluation; (2) Pursuing Eurofighter Typhoon’s visit to
Japan by the end of 2016 and the Japan-U.K. joint exercise
during the International Mine Countermeasures Exercise in
the Persian Gulf; (3) Promoting bilateral cooperation in the
capacity building assistance for Southeast Asian countries;
(4) Aiming to conclude ACSA as soon as possible.
In June 2016, the Japan-U.K. Defense Ministerial
Meeting was held at the timing of the 15th Shangri-La
Dialogue. Both ministers welcomed the progress in the
Japan-U.K. defense cooperation in each area including
defense equipment and technology cooperation, joint
exercises, and capacity building assistance, and agreed to
work closely to realize the Typhoon Fighter Aircraft Unit’s
visit to Japan and holding of a joint exercise during the visit.
As for service to service exchanges, in July 2015,
unit-to-unit exchanges in which MSDF patrol aircraft P-1
participated in the Royal International Air Tattoo (RIAT)
was held in the United Kingdom. In September of the same
year, the Chief of Staff, MSDF, visited the United Kingdom
and conducted opinion exchanges with the British Secretary
of State for Defence and other officials. Thus, we have
been seeing a steady development of exchanges including
the visit of, Royal Air Force transport aircraft A-400 to the
ASDF’s Miho Air Base in October 2015.

See>> Part III, Chapter 3, Section 3-3 (Building New Defense Equipment and

Technology Cooperation)

**(2) France**
France is a major power that has influence not only in
Europe and Africa, but also in the world. Historically it
has had a close relationship with Japan, and is positioned
as a special partner in various international organizations.
The defense authorities of the two countries have
held consultations annually since 1994 to exchange a
wide range of opinions regarding regional situations
and security issues. In addition, in October 2011, the
Japan-France Information Security Agreement came into
effect, establishing a foundation for information-sharing
between the two countries.
In June 2013, French President Francois Hollande
visited Japan, and the two countries issued a joint statement
regarding cooperation in three fields, namely politics
and security, economy, and culture. In May 2014, Prime
Minister Abe visited France and held talks with President
Hollande. The two leaders agreed to launch dialogue on
cyber security and strengthen bilateral cooperation in
maritime security. In July of the same year, the French
Minister of Defense visited Japan to hold the Japan-France
Defense Ministerial Meeting and the two ministers signed


The second Japan-U.K. Foreign and Defense Ministerial Meeting (“2+2”) in Tokyo
(January 2016)

this relationship, it is extremely important for Japan to
promote cooperation through working together on global
issues such as international peace cooperation activities,
anti-terrorism and anti-piracy operations, and through
exchange of views on regional situations.
With regard to Japan’s relationship with the United
Kingdom, in April 2012, a joint statement was issued by
the prime ministers of both countries, entitled “A Leading
Strategic Partnership for Global Prosperity and Security,”
which stated that the two nations would begin negotiations
for a government-to-government information security
agreement, endorse the signing of Memorandum of
Defense Cooperation and Exchange by defense ministers
of both countries, and promote the identification of
appropriate defense equipment for joint development and
production. Based on this joint statement, Memorandum
of Defense Cooperation and Exchange was exchanged
in June 2012 between the defense authorities of the
two countries. In addition to the Transfer of Defense
Equipment and Technology Agreement, which came into
effect in July 2013, the Japan-UK Information Security
Agreement entered into force in January 2014, leading to
the development of a foundation for defense equipment
and technology cooperation as well as informationsharing between the two countries.
At the Japan-U.K. Summit in May 2014, in order
to enhance their cooperation in security fields two
prime ministers agreed to hold the Foreign and Defense
Ministerial Meeting, to begin negotiations toward
the conclusion of an Acquisition and Cross-Serving
Agreement (ACSA), and to promote joint exercises
between the SDF and the British Armed Forces. Following
this, the first Foreign and Defense Ministerial Meeting
was held on January 21, 2015. At the meeting, the four
ministers agreed to strengthen cooperation in the security
and defense fields, and at the same time, shared strategic
situational awareness. In addition, during the second
Foreign and Defense Ministerial Meeting in January
2016 four ministers confirmed the following points: (1) In


-----

the statement of intent to promote defense cooperation and
exchanges. Furthermore, during the second Foreign and
Defense Ministerial Meeting held in Tokyo in March 2015,
the four ministers discussed the threat of terrorism. It was
confi rmed that the two countries strengthen information
exchange and cooperation in Africa and the Middle East
to work on the fi ght against terrorism in cooperation with


the international community and that they would also
strengthen cooperation in the fi elds of defense equipment
and technology cooperation, maritime security, and other
fi elds. Moreover, the four ministers signed the agreement
regarding the transfer of defense equipment and technology
between the Government of Japan and the Government
of France. Based on these agreements, the two countries


**VOICE**

**Japan-U.K. Exchanges in Progress** **Column**
**– MSDF Patrol Aircraft P-1’s fi rst visit to the United Kingdom**

**MSDF Atsugi Air Base (Ayase City, Kanagawa Prefecture)**
**Commander (MSDF) Shinichi Chiba, Air Development Squadron 51**

I work as a P-1 pilot for the MSDF Air Development Squadron 51, which is in charge of aircraft testing, research and studies, and training
guidance, etc. In July 2015, I had an opportunity to participate in the Royal International Air Tattoo (RIAT), an international airshow in the United
Kingdom, together with other personnel including crews and maintenance
personnel, in a group of 40.
Partly due to the fact that it was the fi rst visit of the MSDF fi xed wing
patrol aircraft to the United Kingdom, I had an actual feeling that our ground
exhibition attracted a high degree of attention from the personnel of other
countries to the P-1 aircraft. Although we had only limited time, I believe that
at the fl ight exhibition we were successful in demonstrating part of P-1’s
capabilities including quietness and mobility to other countries.
During the visit to the United Kingdom, we shared our perceptions
concerning the importance of the role that fi xed wing patrol aircraft play
through opinion exchanges with the Royal Navy personnel. We were also
able to have deeper recognition on some conditions related to Japan and the
United Kingdom such as the fact that the two countries share common values
as maritime nations, and that the maritime security could not be achieved Royal Air Force members, author’s colleagues, and the author
without cooperation with other countries. (third from left in the front row)


**VOICE**

**Japan-U.K. Exchanges in Progress** **Column**
**– Accepting the Royal Air Force (RAF) Transport Aircraft**

**ASDF Miho Air Base (Sakaiminato City, Tottori Prefecture)**
**Captain (ASDF) Kosaku Hiraki, 403rd Squadron, 3rd Tactical Airlift Group**

In October 2015, the RAF’s A400M transport aircraft visited the ASDF Miho Air Base as the fi rst foreign military aircraft.
The A400M transport aircraft is the RAF’s state-of-the-art transport aircraft, which has a maximum payload capacity of 37 tons and
116 transporting personnel, and is almost the same size as the ASDF’s C-2 transport aircraft. The RAF crew members who arrived at the
Miho Air Base carried out various activities including a courtesy call on the
commander of the Miho Air Base, opinion exchanges with the members of
the 403rd Squadron, and a tour to view each other’s aircraft.
In the opinion exchange, there were many parts that I could sympathize
with as we were all members of the transport unit in the air force such as
attitudes and ways of thinking for carrying out missions. We also received
warm gratitude from the British crew members. The United Kingdom is a
country very far away from Japan, but I feel that it is quite close due to
this experience.
From now on, the importance of unit exchanges at the fi eld level, like
the one I experienced, will increase and help to further construct the trust
relationship. As a C-2 transport aircraft will be deployed at the Miho Air Base
in the FY2016, I am looking forward to the opportunity that the ASDF’s C-2 Offi cials of the Miho Air Base sending off the Royal Air Force crew members
transport aircraft will visit the United Kingdom in the near future. who are departing from the Air Base following the exchange


-----

have been promoting defense equipment and technology
cooperation including the establishment of Defense
Equipment and Technology Cooperation Committee.
In June 2016, the Japan-France Defense Ministerial
Meeting was held at the timing of the 15th Shangri-La
Dialogue. Minister of Defense Nakatani expressed that
he welcomes the presence of France to be strengthened in
the Asia-Pacific region, for France is the only European
country maintaining a constant and continuous presence
in the region. In response, Minister of Defense Le Drian
expressed his intention to continue maintaining their
presence in the region. Also, the two ministers agreed to
promote defense cooperation and exchange between the
two countries in the various fields including joint exercises,
port calls, defense equipment and technology cooperation.
The SDF has been participating in the Humanitarian
Assistance/Disaster Relief (HA/DR) training hosted by
French Forces in New Caledonia (Exercise Équateur/
Croix du Sud) since 2014.

See>> Part III, Chapter 3, Section 3-3 (Building New Defense Equipment and

Technology Cooperation)

**(3) North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)**
At the timing of Prime Minister Abe’s visit to Europe in
April 2014, he had a meeting with the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) Secretary General Rasmussen
at the NATO Headquarters and signed the Individual
Partnership and Cooperation Programme (IPCP). Prime
Minister Abe made an address before the North Atlantic
Council,[16] drawing appreciation and support from
European countries for Japan’s security policy, which is
based on the concept of proactive contribution to peace. He
also exchanged views with the permanent representatives
of NATO’s 28 member countries, developing a common
recognition of the security environment between Japan
and Europe. Furthermore, Prime Minister Abe agreed on
continued and expanded cooperation with NATO and the
EU relating to counterpiracy operations off the coast of
Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden, as well as cooperation
in the field of defense equipment and technology with the
United Kingdom and France. Following this, the MSDF
has been conducting joint exercises with participating
units of NATO’s Operation Ocean Shield and the EU’s
Operation Atlanta since September 2014.
In addition, based on the agreement between Prime
Minister Abe and NATO Secretary General Rasmussen
reached in May, female GSDF personnel were dispatched
to NATO Headquarters for the first time in December
2014 as part of Japan-NATO cooperation in the field of
women, peace and security. At the same time, in June


2015, three female SDF personnel from the GSDF,
MSDF, and ASDF participated in the annual meeting of
the NATO Committee on Gender Perspectives (NCGP).
Japan concluded the information security agreement
with NATO in June 2010.

**(4) Other European Countries**
With regard to Japan’s relationship with Germany, at the
timing of the 14th Shangri-La Dialogue held in Singapore
in May 2015, the Japan-Germany Defense Ministerial
Meeting with Minister of Defense von der Leyen was
held for the first time in six years, and opinions were
exchanged mainly on Japan-Germany bilateral defense
cooperation and exchanges, the Japanese Peace and
Security Legislation, and the situation in Ukraine.
With Italy, Senior Vice-Minister of Defense
Wakamiya and Minister of Defense Pinotti had a talk
during the 52nd Munich Security Conference in February
2016, and they shared views for further promoting defense
cooperation and exchanges between the two countries
including the strengthening of defense equipment and
technology cooperation and the activation of high-level
exchanges. Also, the Japan-Italy Information Security
Agreement was signed in March 2016. In June 2016, the
Japan-Italy Defense Ministerial Meeting was held at the
timing of the 15th Shangri-La Dialogue. Welcoming the
year of milestone to celebrate the 150th anniversary of the
establishment of diplomatic relations between Japan and
Italy, the two ministers agreed to advance the Japan-Italy
defense cooperation and exchanges including a port-call
by the MSDF Overseas Training Cruise Unit to Italy, and
defense equipment and technology cooperation.
With the Czech Republic, in December 2015,
Minister of Defense Stropnicky visited Japan and had the
first Japan-Czech Republic Defense Ministerial Meeting.
Two defense ministers agreed to find opportunities to
continue exchanging views and share the interest of both
parties. Meanwhile, with the Netherlands, General Chief
of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Netherlands visited
Japan in October 2015 to have a talk with the Chief of
Joint Staff, and they agreed to cooperate with respect to
peacekeeping operations and anti-piracy operations.
Japan has conducted Military-Military Talks (MM)
at the director -general level with Scandinavian countries.
Most recently, in October 2015, talks were conducted
with Sweden, Norway, and Finland, and a wide range of
discussions such as on the regional situations and future
defense exchanges were carried out.

See>> Reference 62 (Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with

European Countries (Past Three Years))


-----

State Minister of Defense Wakamiya (second row, second from right) participating in MSDF vessels (center and back) conducting goodwill training with the Sri Lankan Navy (front)
the 52nd Munich Security Conference



- 9  Other Countries

With regard to Japan’s relationship with Canada, high-level
exchanges, talks between defense authorities, and other
exchanges have been conducted. In August 2011, the first
Japan-Canada Vice-Ministerial “2+2” was held and both
sides agreed to commence the negotiation to conclude an
ACSA. In June 2016, the Japan-Canada Defense Ministerial
Talks was held at the timing of the 15th Shangri-La Dialogue.
The two ministers confirmed that both Japan and Canada
are Pacific nations and partners sharing fundamental values.
The ministers welcomed the fact that the defense exchanges
between the two countries including regular consultations
and mutual visits of vessels have steadily been carried out,
and agreed to continue advancing the bilateral exchanges
further under the new Canadian administration.
In March 2015, the first Defense Ministerial Meeting
with Minister of Defense Pinzón of the Republic of
Colombia was held during his visit to Japan. The two
ministers agreed to move forward with coordination
aimed at signing a memorandum on defense cooperation
exchange, and also to continue opinion exchanges
concerning areas such as humanitarian assistance,
disaster relief, and cyber issues.
With Brazil, the Chief of Staff of Joint Staff Office,
GSDF, made his first visit to the country in February
2016 and agreed to gain momentum over the exchange
between the GSDF and the Brazilian Army.
With Georgia, Minister of Defense Khidasheli visited
Japan in November 2015 to hold the first Japan-Georgia
Defense Ministerial Meeting in which a Memorandum
regarding Japan-Georgia defense exchange was signed
by the two ministers.
The Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense
visited Kazakhstan for the first time in July 2012, and
both Japanese and Kazakhstan sides concurred regarding
the necessity of developing exchange between the two
countries in the field of defense.


Regarding Japan’s relationship with Middle Eastern
countries, the Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense
conducted talks with the Undersecretary of the Ministry
of National Defence Ümit Dündar in July 2012, where he
signed a Statement of Intent to promote defense cooperation
and exchanges between Japan and Turkey. In March 2013,
Minister of National Defence Yilmaz visited Japan and
held a defense ministerial meeting. At this meeting, the two
ministers agreed to hold discussions between the defense
authorities of the two countries (at the director general
level) at the earliest possible date, and to push forward with
various forms of defense exchange. Japan-Saudi Arabia
Summit Meetings were held in April 2013 and February
2014. During the meetings, the two leaders reconfirmed their
intention to promote dialogue and exchange in the security
field, and continue engaging in consultation and cooperation
at various levels including the commencement of a dialogue
between the National Security Councils (NSC) of the two
countries in order to enhance the comprehensive partnership
between the two countries. Prime Minister Abe visited the
United Arab Emirates, with Bahrain, Kuwait and Qatar in
succession in May and August 2013, and shared a recognition
of the necessity of promoting cooperation in the security
and defense field. In December 2012 and February 2015,
Japan-Bahrain and Japan-Qatar memorandum of defence
cooperation and exchange, respectively, were signed. With
Oman, Prime Minister Abe held a meeting with His Majesty
Qaboos bin Said, the Sultan of Oman, in January 2014,
and both leaders agreed to enhance cooperation in the field
of maritime security, including counter-piracy measures
for ensuring the security and safety of maritime routes, as
well as promoting defense exchanges. Meanwhile, MSDF
vessels and Sri Lanka Navy vessels carried out goodwill
training based on the comprehensive partnership agreed at
the Summit Meeting in October 2015.

See>> Reference 63 (Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with

Other Countries (Past Three Years))


-----

**Section 2** **Ensuring Maritime Security**


For Japan, a major maritime state, strengthening order on
the seas based on such fundamental principles as the rule
of law and the freedom of navigation, as well as ensuring
safe maritime transport, is the foundation for its peace and
prosperity, which is extremely important. In cooperation
with the relevant countries, the MOD/SDF engages in
anti-piracy operations, as well as promoting various

**1 Counter-Piracy Operations**


Piracy is a grave threat to public safety and order on the
seas. In particular, for Japan, which depends on maritime
transportation to import most of the resources and food
necessary for its survival and prosperity as a maritime
nation, it is an important issue that cannot be ignored.


initiatives including assistance for capacity building in
this fi eld for those coastal states alongside the sea lanes,
and making the most of various opportunities to enhance
joint training and exercises in waters other than those in
the immediate vicinity of Japan.

See>> Part III, Chapter 1, Section 2-5 (Initiatives towards Ensuring Maritime
Security)

|Col1|Southeast Asia Somalia and|221188 221199 223377|
|---|---|---|
|surroundings 115588 114411 114477|surroundings||
|112288 110022 111111 110044|||
|8833 7700 5544 7755 4488 7700 8800|||
|1122 2222 5511 4466 1111 1155 0|||


|Fig. III-2-2-1|Piracy Incidents Off the Coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden (Comparison with the number of incidents in Southeast Asia)|
|---|---|
|(Number of incidents) 250 Southeast Asia 221188 221199 223377 200 Somalia and surroundings 115588 114411 114477 150 112288 110022 111111 110044 100 8833 7700 5544 7755 4488 7700 8800 50 1122 2222 5511 4466 1111 1155 0 0 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 (Year) Notes: The data is based on a report by the International Maritime Bureau (IMB) of the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC).||



have dispatched their warships to the waters off the coast
of Somalia and the Gulf of Aden. As part of counterpiracy initiatives, the European Union (EU) has also
commenced Operation Atalanta since December 2008,
and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
has been conducting “Operation Ocean Shield” since
August 2009, in addition to the counter-piracy operations
conducted by the Combined Task Force 151 (CTF)[2] that
was established in January 2009.
Although the number of acts of piracy occurring in
the waters off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden
has hovered at an extremely low level in recent years, the
assumed root causes of piracy such as poverty in Somalia
have still remained unsolved. In addition, considering the
fact that Somalia’s capability to crackdown on piracy is
also still not suffi cient, if the international community



- 1  Basic Approach


The Japan Coast Guard (JCG), one of the law enforcement
agencies in Japan, is primarily responsible for coping with
piracy. However, in cases where it is deemed extremely
diffi cult or impossible for the JCG to cope with piracy by
itself, the SDF is to take action as well.

- 2  Circumstances Surrounding Incidents of Piracy
**and Initiatives by the International Community**


For Japan and the international community, the waters
off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden are
extremely important, connecting Europe and the Middle
East with East Asia. Regarding the waters in this area,
successive United Nations Security Council resolutions[1]
were adopted, such as United Nations Security Council
Resolution 1816, which was adopted in June 2008 in
response to the frequent occurrence of and rapid increase
in the piracy incidents with the purpose of acquiring
ransoms by detaining hostages caused by pirates, who
are armed with machine guns and rocket launchers.
These resolutions have requested that various countries
take actions, particularly the dispatch of warships
and military aircraft, to deter piracy in the waters off
the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden. To date,
approximately 30 countries, including the United States,


Other United Nations Security Council resolutions calling for cooperation in deterring piracy are: Resolutions 1838, 1846, and 1851 (adopted in 2008), Resolution 1897 (adopted in 2009), Resolutions 1918
and 1950 (adopted in 2010), Resolutions 1976 and 2020 (adopted in 2011), Resolution 2077 (adopted in 2012), Resolution 2125 (adopted in 2013), Resolution 2184 (adopted in 2014), and Resolution 2246
(adopted in 2015).


-----

reduces its counter-piracy efforts, the situation could be
easily reversed. Moreover, the Japanese Shipowners’
Association and other entities are continuously requesting
that the SDF continue making every effort in relation to
their counter-piracy operations. Therefore, there is no
great change in the situation in which Japan must carry
out its counter-piracy operations.

See>> Fig. III-2-2-1 (Piracy Incidents Off the Coast of Somalia and in the Gulf
of Aden (Comparison with the number of incidents in Southeast Asia))

- 3  Japanese Initiatives


Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense Fujimaru (left) participating in the returning home event
for the DAPE (Deployment Airforce for Counter-Piracy Enforcement)

MSDF destroyer guarding a private ship


**(1) Legislation Concerning Counter-piracy Operations**
In March 2009, following the order for Maritime Security
Operations for the purpose of protecting Japan-affi liated
vessels from acts of piracy in the waters off the coast of
Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden, two Japanese destroyers
began escorting Japan-affi liated vessels, while P-3C
patrol aircraft also commenced warning and surveillance
operations in June the same year.
In view of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, Japan subsequently enacted the AntiPiracy Measures Act[3] in July the same year in order to deal
appropriately and effectively with acts of piracy. This act
made it possible to protect the vessels of all nations from
acts of piracy, regardless of their fl ag states. Moreover, it
also enabled the use of weapons to a reasonable extent, if no
other means were available, in order to halt vessels engaging
in acts of piracy, such as approaching civilian vessels.
Furthermore, the Act on Special Measures
concerning the Security of Japanese Flagged Vessels in
Areas that Are Highly Susceptible to Acts of Piracy came
into force on November 2013, which made it possible to
have security guards on board a Japanese ship provided
certain requirements are met, enabling them to carry
small arms for the purpose of security operations.

See>> Reference 24 (Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces);
Reference 25 (Statutory Provisions about Use of Force and Use
of Weapons by SDF Personnel); Reference 64 (Outline of a Bill
Concerning Punishment of and Response to Acts of Piracy)

**(2) Activities by the Self-Defense Forces**
a. Participation in CTF 151
Due to the fact that the scope of the area susceptible to acts
of piracy is spreading to areas off the coast of Oman and
the Arabian Sea in recent years, there is a tendency that the
area of activity of the Combined Task Force 151 (CTF 151),
which conducts warning and surveillance activities (zone
defense), has been increasingly spreading. Furthermore,
the number of vessels that are directly escorted by the
SDF surface force per escort operation (a method in which


the destroyers provide direct escort by accompanying the
convoy) was gradually reduced. In light of such a situation,
in July 2013, Japan decided to participate in CTF 151
to commence zone defense in addition to direct escort
missions as before, while coordinating closely with the
units of other countries that are engaged in counter piracy
operations in order to conduct more fl exible and effective
operations. Following this, the surface force started zone
defense in December 2013. In addition, air forces have
been participating in CTF 151 since February 2014. This
participation enabled the force to acquire information
that was previously not accessible. Moreover, it became
possible to conduct more fl exible warning and surveillance
activities. For example, aircraft can be deployed as needed
even to areas that are highly susceptible to acts of piracy,
and as a result, coordination between other countries’ units
was further enhanced.
Moreover, that SDF personnel serving as the CTF
151 commander and command center staff enables Japan
to strengthen coordination with the units of other countries
engaged in counter-piracy operations and enhance the
effectiveness of the SDF’s counter-piracy operations. For
this reason, the SDF has dispatched command center staff
to the CTF151 Headquarters where an offi cer from other


-----

countries serves as a commander since August 2014, and
during the period from May to August 2015 the SDF also
dispatched a CTF 151 commander as well as command
center staff. No member of the SDF has ever served as a
commander of a multinational force since the foundation
of the SDF, and it is believed that active participation in
the CTF151 activities continuously going forward will
enable Japan to further contribute to peace and stability
in the international community.
b. Achievements
Two destroyers currently being dispatched operate based
on two different manners - one destroyer directly escorts
private vessels back and forth across the Gulf of Aden,
while the other destroyer is conducting zone defense in
the allocated marine area within the Gulf of Aden, which
has been allocated in response to specifi c situations. In
addition, there are JCG offi cers aboard the destroyers.[4]

The direct escort method fi rstly places the destroyer
and private vessels to be escorted at the assembly point,
one each designated at the eastern and western ends of
the Gulf of Aden. When the destroyer guards the convoy,


the helicopter carried on the destroyer also watches the
surrounding area from the sky as necessary. In this way, the
ships take around two days to sail approximately 900 km,[5]
all the while making absolutely certain that the convoy
is safe and secure, day and night. Moreover, as for zone
defense, the destroyers conduct warning and surveillance
activities as they are deployed within waters designated
based on coordination with the CTF 151 headquarters, and
strive to ensure the safety of the vessels.
As of May 31, 2016, 3,697 vessels have been
escorted under the protection of the destroyers. Not a
single vessel has come to any harm from pirates and they
have all passed safely across the Gulf of Aden.

See>> Fig. III-2-2-2 (SDF’s Counter-Piracy Operations)

Meanwhile, the maritime patrol aircraft (P-3C)
conduct warning and surveillance operations in the fl ight
zone that is determined based on coordination with the
CTF 151 headquarters. The P-3Cs confi rm any suspicious
boats, and at the same time, they provide information to
the destroyers, the naval vessels of other countries and
civilian vessels, responding by such means as confi rming

|Fig. III-2-2-2|SDF’s Counter-Piracy Operations|
|---|---|
|Direct escort is Carried set under deployment of one vessel for direct One vessel for escort and one vessel for zone defense as a basis direct escort Japan’s original framework is used for escort, while for zone defense it is implemented within the CTF 151 operation *The relationship between the CTF 151 Headquarters and participating units is that of coordination Point C One vessel for Zone Defense A b o u t 2 0 0 K m Point B * Conducting escort between point A A b o u t 1 1 0 0 K m and point B during the monsoon season (June-August, December-February) Conducting warning and surveillance operations, Djibouti and Information collection and provision Point A ● Sharing Gathering Information Information CTF 151 • Established in January 2009 for counter-piracy Merchant ship Escorted ships operations. The United States, Australia, The United Kingdom, Turkey, The ROK, Pakistan, etc. Suspicious vessel participating Deployed Maritime Force for Anti- • Participants are to be engaged in operations Piracy Operations upon liaison coordination on deployment dates, etc. with the Command.||


Direct escort is Carried set under deployment of one vessel for direct One vessel for
escort and one vessel for zone defense as a basis direct escort
Japan’s original framework is used for escort, while for zone defense it
is implemented within the CTF 151 operation

*The relationship between the CTF 151 Headquarters and participating units
is that of coordination Point C

One vessel for
Zone Defense

Point B

*** Conducting escort between point A**
**and point B during the monsoon season**
**(June-August, December-February)**

Conducting warning and surveillance operations,

Djibouti

and Information collection and provision

-  Point A

Sharing

Gathering Information
Information

CTF 151

-  Established in January 2009 for counter-piracy Merchant ship Escorted ships
operations. The United States, Australia, The
United Kingdom, Turkey, The ROK, Pakistan, etc. Suspicious vessel
participating Deployed Maritime

Force for Anti
-  Participants are to be engaged in operations

Piracy Operations

upon liaison coordination on deployment dates,
etc. with the Command.


Eight JCG offi cers are onboard and conduct judicial law enforcement activities, including arresting and interrogating pirates, as required.

During the non-monsoon seasons (March-May, September-November), when the area within which acts of piracy occur grows due to the calmer seas, the escort route is extended by approximately 200 km to


-----

|Commander, Deplo for Counter Pir|yed Maritime Force acy Operations|
|---|---|

|Commander, De for Counter Pir|ployed Air Force acy Operations|
|---|---|
|||
|||

|Col1|yment Support Unit cy Enforcement|Col3|Combined Task Force 151 (CTF 151) Deployed unit at the Headquarters|
|---|---|---|---|
|||Headquarters||
|||||
|||||

|Guard units|Military Police units|
|---|---|

|1 destroyer|1 destroyer|
|---|---|
|Total approx. 400 personnel||

|Squadron (2 P-3Cs)|Support and logistics units|
|---|---|
|Total approx. 60 personnel||

|Fig. III-2-2-3|Structure of the Deployed Forces|
|---|---|
|: Structured by MSDF personnel Commander, Self Defense Fleet : Structured by GSDF personnel : Structured by MSDF and GSDF personnel Commander, Deployed Maritime Force Commander, Deployed Air Force Commander, Deployment Support Unit Combined Task Force 151 (CTF 151) for Counter Piracy Operations for Counter Piracy Operations for Counter Piracy Enforcement Deployed unit at the Headquarters Headquarters Headquarters Total of less than 20 personnel Squadron Support and Operation Military 1 destroyer 1 destroyer Guard units (2 P-3Cs) logistics units units Police units Total approx. 110 personnel Total approx. 400 personnel Total approx. 60 personnel (about 30 maritime, about 80 ground) Coast Guard Officers: 8 officials aboard In addition, transport units comprised of [Deployed Maritime Force for Counter Piracy Operations] C-130H transport aircraft under the Air Escort private ships with two destroyers and conduct zone defense within CTF 151 Special Boarding Unit personnel aboard Support Commander will provide airborne [Deployed Air Force for Counter Piracy Operations] 1 or 2 patrol helicopters, as well as 1 or transportation of supplies etc. when Conduct surveillance flight over the Gulf of Aden by two P-3C patrol aircraft 2 special boats, on each vessel necessary [Deployment Support Unit for Counter Piracy Enforcement] Coast Guard Officers: 8 officials aboard Facilitate communication and coordination with relevant authorities of Djibouti and conduct duties related to necessary support for the Deployed Air Force for Counter Piracy Operations to conduct counter-piracy operations [CTF 151 Deployed Unit at the Headquarters] SDF personnel serving as CTF 151 commander and command center officers facilitate coordination among units of countries participating in CTF 151||


**VOICE**

**At the Completion of the Mission of the 23rd Deployment Surface Force** **Column**
**for Counter-Piracy Enforcement**

**Captain (MSDF) Takeshi Yoshioka, Commander of the 23rd Deployment Surface Force for Counter-Piracy Enforcement**
**(Commander of the Escort Division 3)**

With the Commander of the Escort Division 3 as the commander of the task force, the 23rd Deployment Surface Force for Counter-Piracy
Enforcement was formed based on two destroyers, which have Ominato as their homeport, and the Escort Division 3, and engaged in its duty
for the counter-piracy operations from October 2015 to May 2016. Since many of the task force members were originally from the northern
part of Japan, the heat off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden was
hard on us. Nonetheless, all of us managed to complete our mission without
becoming ill or having any issues, partly due to the fact that the activity period
of our task force happened to fall in a period with relatively cool weather.
As a result of our efforts in conducting warning and surveillance
as well as direct escort day and night throughout the operation period,
we were able to deter acts of piracy and therefore no attacking cases by
pirates occurred. In addition, we also responded to an emergency case that
occurred with a merchant ship and carried out a rescue task of a failed
ship. Through all these activities, I believe that we successfully contributed
to maritime security.
At the opinion exchange with personnel of naval ships from other
countries, Japan’s initiatives were always highly regarded. I am very proud

The author (right front) exchanging opinions with the CTF465 (European Union

that our task group had a chance to play a part in it. task force for counter-piracy operations) commander and personnel


the safety of the surrounding area immediately, if
requested. The information gathered by SDF P-3Cs is
constantly shared with other related organizations, and
contributes signifi cantly to deterring acts of piracy and
disarming vessels suspected of being pirate ships.
Since commencing duties in June 2009, the aircraft
have fl own 1,568 missions as of May 31, 2016, and their
fl ying hours total 12,070 hours. Approximately 130,300
ships conducted identification tasks and information


was provided to vessels navigating the area and other
countries engaging in counter-piracy operations on
around 11,960 occasions. In particular, the activities
conducted by the two MSDF P-3C patrol aircraft account
for approximately 60% of the warning and surveillance
operations in the Gulf of Aden.
Moreover, in order to improve the operational
effi ciency and effectiveness of the Deployment Air Force
for Counter Piracy Enforcement the MOD/SDF has


-----

**y**

**Voice of Gratitude to SDF’s Escort Activities** **Column**

Since March 2009 when the SDF commenced its escort activities in the Gulf of Aden, numerous numbers of messages written by the crews
of private ships and ship operators both from Japan and overseas (the United Kingdom, Norway, Turkey, India, China, the ROK, etc.) that were
escorted by the SDF arrived. One of them is introduced below.

■ One example of appreciation messages
On behalf of the shipping company and the crews of this ship, we would like
to praise the excellent cooperation from the SDF, which escorted us safely.
Despite the fact that we were unable to put out the speed requested by
the SDF, they escorted our ship safely in the dangerous waters. We would
like to thank you once again. This ship passes through the Internationally
Recommended Transit Corridor in the Gulf of Aden frequently. When it
happens, we hope to have your escort again. We would also like to thank the
escort vessel under the SDF that escorted our ship until the end of the route.
Thank you very much. Please give our best regards to the crew.

Activity status of the 23rd Deployment Surface Force for Counter-Piracy
Enforcement (MSDF destroyer Makinami escorting a merchant ship: front)


set up a base in the northwest district of the Djibouti
International Airport In addition, and the Deployment
Support Unit for Counter Piracy, which is formed by
GSDF and MSDF personnel carries out activities for
providing guards and maintenance of facilities, etc., at
this operational base. Furthermore, the ASDF has formed
an airlift squadron to support these activities and is
engaged in transport missions.

See>> Fig. III-2-2-3 (Structure of the Deployed Forces)

- 4  Praise for Japan’s Endeavors


highly praised by the international community. For
example, national leaders and others have expressed
their gratitude and the SDF has also been repeatedly
well-received by the United Nations Security Council
Resolution. Moreover, the destroyers, which are engaging
in counter-piracy operations off the coast of Somalia and
in the Gulf of Aden, has received many messages from
the captains and ship owners of the vessels that its units
have escorted, expressing their gratitude that the ships
were able to cross the Gulf of Aden with peace of mind
and asking them to continue escorting ships there.

**2 Contribution to the Maintenance of Public Safety and Order on the Seas through Maritime Training**


In addition, since October 2014, the SDF has conducted
joint exercises also with counter-piracy units of armed
forces of foreign countries and other forces.[6]

These training exercises conducted in the Gulf
of Aden have an essential signifi cance in that they
strengthened the cooperation between the SDF and
counter-piracy teams from various countries, and
contributed to the maintenance of public safety and order
on the seas.


The counter-piracy operations by the SDF have been

**2**

- 1  Training Conducted by the SDF and Counter-Piracy
**Teams from Various Countries in the Gulf of Aden**


In accordance with the agreement made between Prime
Minister Abe and NATO Secretary General Rasmussen
in May 2014, the SDF deployed forces and NATO’s
counter-piracy unit, with the objective of enhancing
their cooperation and tactical skills required for counterpiracy activities, implemented joint exercises in the Gulf
of Aden in September and November of the same year.


So far, the SDF conducted its fi rst joint exercise with the EU surface forces in October 2014, the second and the third exercises in November of the same year, the fourth exercise in March 2015, and the fi fth
exercise in January 2016. Furthermore, the SDF also conducted joint exercises with the Turkish Naval Forces in November 2014 and December 2015, with the Pakistan Navy in March 2015 and February 2016,


-----

- 2  U.S. Hosted International Mine Countermeasures
**Exercise**

The MSDF has constantly participated in multilateral
mine countermeasures exercise in the waters around the
Arabian Peninsula hosted by the U.S. Navy since its fi rst
exercise in 2012, and this includes its participation in the
Fourth International Mine Countermeasures Exercise
in 2016.[7] Participating in this exercise assists in the
enhancement of the tactical skills of the MSDF and the
strengthening of trust among the participating countries.
At the same time, the exercise also contributes to the
maintenance of maritime security, while also contributing
to the improvement of the global security environment.

See>> Reference 54 (Participation in Multilateral Training (Last Three Years))



- 3  Strengthening of Cooperation in Maritime
**Security through Joint Training, etc.**

In October, 2015, the MSDF conducted a joint navel
exercise (Exercise Malabar 2015) organized by the United
States and India in the waters east of India with the aim of
improving tactical skills and strengthening cooperation
in the area of maritime security.[8] Furthermore, with the
Philippine Navy and the Malaysian Navy in May and
August 2015, respectively, joint exercises including
the communication training using CUES (Code for
Unplanned Encounters at Sea)[9] and tactical maneuvering
were conducted. Strengthening cooperation with other
participating countries through these joint exercises
contributes to the maintenance of maritime security,
which has extremely high signifi cance.


**3 Initiatives in the Asia-Pacifi c Region**


The National Security Strategy and the National Defense
Program Guidelines state that Japan will play a leading
role in maintaining and developing “Open and Stable
Seas,” including maritime security cooperation with
other countries.
As previously described, the MOD/SDF implements
capacity building assistance on maritime security for
Indonesia, Vietnam and Myanmar, thereby assisting
coastal states along sea lanes and others in enhancing
their capabilities, and strengthening cooperation with
partners that share the same strategic interests as Japan.
In addition, the Basic Plan on Ocean Policy states
that in order to contribute to the creation and development
of order on the ocean, it will ensure international
collaboration and promote international cooperation


by making use of fora such as multilateral and bilateral
ocean conferences to contribute to establishment of
international rules and consensus. In response to this,
the MOD has been working on cooperation for maritime
security within the regional security dialogue such as the
ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM) Plus and
the Inter-Sessional Meeting on Maritime Security (ISMMS). At the 14th Shangri-La Dialogue meeting held in
May 2015, Minister of Defense Nakatani delivered a
speech and proposed “Shangri-La Dialogue Initiative,”
which consists of “dissemination of common rules and
the laws and regulations pertaining to the seas and skies
in the region” and the “security of the seas and skies,” etc.
See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-3 (Promoting Capacity Building
Assistance and Other Practical Multilateral Security Cooperation)

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-2 (Initiatives under the Multilateral
Security Framework and through Dialogue)


The exercise took place in April 2016, and minesweeper tender Uraga and minesweeper Takashima carried out minesweeping training, submarine training, and other training.

The MSDF escort vessel “Fuyuzuki,”the U.S. Navy aircraft carrier “USS Theodore Roosevelt,” and the Indian Navy “Shivalik Class frigate” participated in the exercise, and they will continue to participate in the exercise.


-----

**Efforts to Support International Peace**

**Section 3**

**Cooperation Activities**


The MOD/SDF is proactively undertaking international
peace cooperation activities working in tandem with
diplomatic initiatives, including the use of Offi cial
Development Assistance (ODA) for resolving the fundamental

**1 Frameworks for International Peace Cooperation Activities**


- 1  Framework of International Peace Cooperation
**Activities and the Signifi cance of Stipulating**
**such Activities as One of the Primary Missions**
**of the SDF**


causes of confl icts, terrorism and other problems.

See>> Fig. III-2-3-1 (Record of Activities in the International Community by
the Ministry of Defense / Self-Defense Forces)

Anti-terrorism Special Measures Act, and the former
Replenishment Support Special Measures Act. In 2007,
international peace cooperation activities, which used to
be regarded as supplementary activities[1] were upgraded,
and are now to be one of the primary missions of the SDF,
alongside the defense of Japan and the maintenance of
public order.[2]

See>> Fig. III-2-3-2 (International Peace Cooperation Activities Conducted
by the SDF)

See>> Reference 24 (Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces); Reference
25 (Statutory Provisions about Use of Force and Use of Weapons
by SDF Personnel); Reference 65 (Summary Comparison of Laws
Concerning International Peace Cooperation Activities); Reference 66
(The SDF Record in International Peace Cooperation Activities)


The international peace cooperation activities undertaken
by the MOD/SDF to date are as follows: (1) international
peace cooperation duties such as United Nations
peacekeeping operations (the so-called UN PKO); (2)
international disaster relief operations to respond to largescale disasters overseas; (3) activities based on the former
Special Measures Act on Humanitarian Reconstruction
Assistance in Iraq; and (4) activities based on the former

|9. International disaster relief activities in India (February 2001) Learned lessons concerning collaboration with the Ministry|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|of Foreign Affairs and nongovernmental organizations (NGO) 14 13|||||
|29 5 16 15 10 20 23 27 1|||||
|9 17 25 23 2|27 6||||
||||||
||||||
|11 36 18 34 33 30 26|||||
|12 34 21 8 34|||||
|34|||||
|34 n in Nepal|31|28. United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (February 2010 - February 2013)|||
|25. Anti-piracy activities off the t lh de ie rs coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden||Deployments in conjunction with the activities of the Japan Disaster Relief Team in Haiti Providing support for recovery and reconstruction following a major earthquake|||


Fig. III-2-3-1 Record of Activities in the International Community by the Ministry of Defense / Self-Defense Forces

1. Dispatch of minesweepers 5. United Nations Disengagement 7. Transport of supplies required for a disaster 10. Relief for refugees in Afghanistan 12. United Nations Transitional 15. Transport of supplies required for
to the Persian Gulf Observer Force relief operation in Turkey (October 2001) Administration in East Timor a disaster relief operation in Iran
(April - October 1991)Starting point for international cooperation by the SDF2. United Nations Transitional (September 1992 - September 1993)First peacekeeping operations by the SDF Participation by GSDF, MSDF and ASDF personnel3. United Nations activities in Authority in Cambodia (February 1996 - January 2013)Contributing to the stabilization of the Middle East17-year deployment of units6. International disaster relief (November - December 1998)First international disaster relief activities undertaken by the SDF Carried out long-distance airliftsactivities in Honduras 8. Relief for refugees in Timor-Leste (November 1999 - February 2000)Transport of relief supplies by an ASDF transport unit9. International disaster relief activities in India(February 2001)Learned lessons concerning collaboration with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and nongovernmental organizations (NGO)(September - November 1999)First time the MSDF had carried out duties based on a long sea voyage (around 23 days) Transport of relief supplies at the request of UNHCR11. (November 2001 - November 2007)Efforts to eliminate terrorismStrengthening of collaboration with armed forces from various other countriesCooperation and support activities based on the former Anti-terrorism Special Measures Act (February 2002 - June 2004)Largest peacekeeping operation in which the SDF had participated First participation by female SDF personnel13. Relief for refugees in Iraq(March - April 2003)Transport of supplies for humanitarian relief using a government airplane14. Relief for victims in Iraq(July - August 2003) (December 2003 - January 2004)Airlift of relief supplies in partnership with JICA16. Activities based on the former Iraq (December 2003 - February 2009)Activities of the SDF to assist in the reconstruction of Iraq were highly praised by countries around the world Contributed to the strengthening of the Japan-U.S. AllianceHumanitarian Relief Support Special Measures Act

Mozambique 19 Cooperation in activities at the request
May 1993 - January 1995)First dispatch to a United Nations 7 14 of the World Food Programme (WFP) 17. International disaster relief activities in Thailand
operational headquartersFormed the first unit to consist of GSDF, MSDF and ASDF personnel4. Relief for refugees in Rwanda 5 1316 1 15 10 2920 3722 28 (December 2004 - January 2005)An MSDF destroyer en route home to Japan was swiftly diverted to conduct search and rescue and provide assistance

(September - December 1994)First international humanitarian relief activitiesHighly praised by African and other countries 35 32 25 23 9 17 2 6 27 : Dispatch of minesweepers to the Persian Gulf: United Nations peacekeeping operations: International disaster relief activities: Activities based on the former Anti-terrorism

424 11 3626 18 34 333012 : Activities based on the former Iraq Special Measures Act (Act on Special Measures concerning Implementation of Replenishment Support Activities towards the Anti-Terrorism Maritime Interdiction Operation)

34 21 8 Humanitarian Relief Support Special Measures Act

18. International disaster relief 34 : Anti-piracy activities off the coast of Somalia &
activities in Indonesia in the Gulf of Aden
(January -March 2005)
Large-scale rescue operation of approx. 3
1,000 peopleFirst deployment of GSDF helicoptersEstablishment of the first joint liaison and 34 34. International disaster relief activities in Malaysia
coordination center (March – April 2014)

19. International disaster relief (August 2005)Rapid response by an MSDF submarine rescue ship20. International disaster relief activities in waters off the Kamchatka Peninsula in Russia 22. United Nations Mission in Nepal (March 2007 - January 2011)First duties involving monitoring the management of weapons and soldiers 23. Replenishment support activities based on the former Replenishment Support Special 25. Anti-piracy activities off the (March 2009 - present)Carried out direct escort of private ships as well as warning and surveillance activities (zone defense).coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden 34 31 28. United Nations Stabilization (February 2010 - February 2013)Deployments in conjunction with the activities of the Japan Disaster Relief Team in Haiti Providing support for recovery and reconstruction following a major earthquake29. International disaster relief Mission in Haitiactivities in Pakistan 31. International disaster relief (February - March 2011)Transport of police, fire brigade and coast guard teams, among others32. United Nations Mission in South activities in New Zealand Provided search and rescue activities for a missing Malaysian airplane35. International disaster relief (December 2014)Airlift of personal protective equipment to the UN Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER)activities in West Africa

activities in Pakistan Measures Act 26. International disaster relief (August - October 2010) Sudan 36. International disaster relief
(October - December 2005)Deployment of GSDF helicopters and ASDF transport aircraftCollaboration on the ground with JICA (January 2008 -January 2010)Resumed the activities that had been suspendedSupport for the counterterrorism activities of other countries (October 2009)Provided swift medical supportactivities in Indonesia Establishment of the first joint operations and coordination center on the groundCarried out duties in collaboration with various other countries (November 2011 - present)Contributing to the stability and civilian protection assistance in South Sudan (January 2015)Provided search and rescue activities for a missing AirAsia airplaneactivities in Indonesia

21. Dispatch of Japan Disaster Relief Team to Indonesia 24. United Nations Mission in the Sudan 27. International disaster relief activities in Haiti 30. United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste 33. International disaster relief (November – December 2013)activities in the Philippines 37. International disaster relief activities in Nepal
(June 2006)Provided medical support and carried outepidemic prevention activities (October 2008 - September 2011)Dispatch of staff officers contributing to stabilization of Sudan (January - February 2010)Provided rapid transport and carried out medical care activities following a major earthquake in Haiti (September 2010 –September 2012)Contributing to the maintenance of public order and recovery in Timor-Leste Provided medical care, epidemic prevention, and transportation of affected people in responding to the Philippine typhoon (April - May 2015)Conducted medical service assistance following a major earthquake in Nepal


Activities prescribed in Article 8 of the SDF Act (a miscellaneous provision) or supplementary provisions

Missions defi ned in Article 3 of the SDF Act. The primary mission is to defend Japan. The secondary missions are the preservation of public order, activities in response to situations in areas surrounding Japan


-----

operations. For example, the GSDF promotes initiatives to
enhance the conditions of the engineering units, which are in
high demand in dispatch destinations, as well as procuring
protection carrier vehicles that are used to protect people
from mines and Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs).
It also promotes the development of wheeled armored
personnel carriers (modified). The MSDF is promoting the
portability and deployability of the Marine Air Command
and Control System (MACCS) to facilitate the effective
operation of fixed-wing patrol aircraft overseas. The
ASDF promotes the upgrading of its equipment and
devices including aviation satellite phones, as well as
countermeasure dispensers for transport aircraft, and
airborne collision avoidance systems, in order to maintain
command communication function between aircraft and
ground controllers under a range of environments.
With regard to the education necessary for engaging
in international peace cooperation activities, the GSDF
International Peace Cooperation Activities Training Unit at
Camp Komakado (Shizuoka Prefecture) provides training
for GSDF personnel to be deployed to international
peace cooperation activities, as well as supports their
training. In addition, the Japan Peacekeeping Training and
Research Center (JPC) at the Joint Staff College offers
not only basic education course on international peace
cooperation activities, but also specialized education to
train contingent commanders of UN PKO missions and
staff officers of mission headquarters. These specialized
courses are conducted by using UN standard training
materials and foreign instructors. Furthermore, since
FY2014, the JPC has provided education not just to SDF
personnel but also to personnel from foreign militaries
and other Japanese ministries and agencies. This initiative
represents the approach taken by the MOD/SDF, which
emphasizes the necessity of collaboration and cooperation
with other related ministries and foreign countries, based
on the current situation of more multi-dimensional and
complicated international peace cooperation activities have
become more complicated and multi-dimensional. It also
aims to contribute to more effective international peace
cooperation activities by enhancing collaboration with
those ministries and countries in the field of education.

- 3  Welfare and Mental Health Care of Dispatched
**SDF Units**


International Peace Cooperation Activities
Fig. III-2-3-2
Conducted by the SDF

International Peace Cooperation Activities

Activities based on the “Act Concerning Japan’s Cooperation in
the U.N. Peacekeeping Operations and Other Operations”

International Disaster Relief Activities

Activities based on the “Act Concerning the Dispatch of
International Disaster Relief Teams”

Cooperation and Support Activities, etc. for the Armed Forces
of Foreign Countries

Activities in accordance with the “Act Concerning Cooperation and
Support Activities to Armed Forces of Foreign Countries, in
Situations that the International Community is Collectively
Addressing for International Peace and Security”

Cooperation in Efforts toward the Reconstruction of Iraq

Activities based on the “Act Concerning Special Measures on
Humanitarian and Reconstruction Assistance and Support
Activities for Ensuring Security in Iraq” (Ended in February 2009)

Activities to Respond to International Terrorism

Activities based on the Act Concerning the Special Measures on
the Implementation of Replenishment Support Activities for CounterTerrorism Maritime Interdiction Activities (Ended in January 2010)

Legend : Activities based on time-limited acts
: Activities based on permanent acts


**2**

-   Continuous Initiatives to Promptly and Accurately
**Carry Out International Peace Cooperation Activities**

To be a proactive contributor to world peace, it is important
for the SDF to be fully prepared for any future operations.
For this purpose, the Central Readiness Regiment was
established under the GSDF Central Readiness Force in
March 2008. When a decision to send troops is made,
an advance party will be pulled out from the regiment
deployed swiftly to the planned area of deployment, and
lay the groundwork before the main unit arrives. Also, the
GSDF has a rotational stand-by unit, in which members are
chosen from each area force of the five area forces in Japan
in rotation. The MSDF and ASDF also have a designated
stand-by unit, which are always ready to be deployed.
In September 2015, the United Nations (UN)
launched the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System
(PCRS) with the purpose for the UN Headquarters to be
able to grasp the registered items of each country more
specifically in order to ensure the flexibility and readiness
of international peacekeeping activities. In light of this
change, Japan registered engineering units and command
center staff officers in March 2016.
The SDF is enhancing information-gathering abilities
and protection abilities, which are required for the SDF
units to carry out their missions whilst ensuring the safety of
personnel and unit in international peace keeping activities,
etc. In addition, in order to respond to various environments
and prolonged missions, the SDF is improving its
capabilities for transport, deployment, and information
communication, as well as developing a structure of logistic
and medical support for conducting smooth and continuous


SDF personnel are expected to fulfill their assigned duty
under severe working conditions while being far away
from their home country and their families. Therefore, it
is extremely important to make necessary arrangements
so that dispatched SDF personnel can effectively carry out
their assigned duty while maintaining both their physical


-----

and mental health. For this reason, the MOD/SDF has
implemented various measures to support families to reduce
anxiety for the dispatched SDF personnel and their families.

See>> Part II, Chapter 2, Section 5 (Human Foundation and Organization
that Supports the Defense Force)

The SDF provides mental health checkups several
times from the time before a dispatch to the time after
a dispatch, for all the personnel to be sent. At the same
time, the SDF also provides dispatched personnel with
suffi cient mental care such as offering a mental health
course in which the dispatched personnel acquire

**2 Initiatives to Support U.N. Peacekeeping Operations, etc.**


As a means to promote peace and stability in the confl ict
regions around the world, the United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations (PKO) has expanded its missions in recent years
to include such duties as the Protection of Civilians (POC),
the promotion of political processes, providing assistance
in Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR)
into society of former soldiers, Security Sector Reform
(SSR), the rule of law, elections, human rights, and other
fi elds, in addition to such traditional missions as ceasefi re
monitoring. To date, 16 U.N. peacekeeping operations
and 11 political and peace building missions have been
established (as of the end of March 2016).
International organizations, such as the Offi ce
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), respective governments, and nongovernmental organizations (NGO) conduct relief and
restoration activities for the victims of confl icts and
large-scale disasters from a humanitarian perspective and
from the viewpoint of stabilizing affected countries.
Japan has been promoting international peace
cooperation activities in various regions including
Cambodia, the Golan Heights, Timor-Leste, Nepal, and
South Sudan for more than 20 years, and the results of these
activities have been highly praised by both inside and outside
Japan. From the perspective of “Proactive Contribution to
Peace” based on the principle of international cooperation,
and in light of the appreciation and expectation from the
international community, Japan will continue to actively
engage in international peace cooperation operations in a
multilayered way. In this regard, to maximize the effect
of Japan’s contribution to the international community,
it is necessary to deliberate more deeply about how the
SDF should contribute to the international community.
Therefore, regarding international peace cooperation
operations and other relevant missions, the SDF will
continue proactively taking part in peacekeeping activities
utilizing their accumulated experiences and advanced skills


necessary knowledge on stress reduction and assigning
SDF personnel who have completed specialized
counseling education and training to SDF units in
overseas mission sites. In addition to assigning medical
offi cers to SDF units engaged in overseas missions, the
MOD regularly sends mental healthcare support teams
and provides education on methods of dealing with stress
on the spot, as well as important points to consider in
terms of communication with families or fellow SDF
personnel after returning to Japan.

in fi elds such as engineering, as well as by expanding the
dispatch of SDF personnel to further responsible positions,
such as mission headquarters and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in the United Nations. As such,
the SDF places more emphasis on taking more of a leading
role, and the MOD will be proactively involved in Japan’s
initiatives for international contribution.



- 1  United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
**Sudan (UNMISS)**

**(1) Background to the Decision to Dispatch Personnel to**
**UNMISS**

The United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) was
established following the signing of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) between the Government of
Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/
Army in January 2005.


Fig. III-2-3-3 South Sudan and Its Surrounding Area

South Sudan

Central Equatoria Province

Western Equatoria Province Eastern Equatoria Province

Juba


-----

SDF personnel engaging in road maintenance for UNMISS SDF personnel providing training in South Sudan


Beginning in October 2008, Japan dispatched
two GSDF officers to UNMIS headquarters as staff
officers (logistics and information staff officers), but
UNMIS ended its mission in July 2011 following South
Sudan’s independence. Meanwhile, with the objective
of consolidating peace and security as well as helping
establish necessary conditions for the development
of South Sudan, the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) was established.
The Japanese Government was requested by the United
Nations to cooperate with UNMISS, particularly through
the dispatch of GSDF engineering units. The Cabinet
approved the dispatch of two staff officers (logistics and
information staff officers) to UNMISS in November
2011, and in December it decided to dispatch an SDF
engineering unit, then the on-site Coordination Center,
and an additional staff officer (engineering staff officer).
In addition, the Cabinet also approved the dispatch of one
staff officer (air operations staff officer) in October, 2014.
The peace and stability of South Sudan is essential
for the stability of Africa as a whole, and it is a crucial
issue that should be dealt with by the international
community. The MOD/SDF has accumulated experience
through past peacekeeping operations, and we believe
that it is possible for Japan to contribute to the peace and
stability of South Sudan by providing personnel-based
cooperation in infrastructure development, on which the
United Nations places great expectations.

See>> Part I, Chapter 3, Section 1-2-7 (Situation in Sudan and South Sudan)
See>> Fig. III-2-3-3 (South Sudan and Its Surrounding Area)

**(2) Activities by the SDF**
In January 2012, a then Coordination Center of the SDF
was established for the first time in the SDF’s participation
in U.N. peacekeeping operation, both in the South Sudan


capital city Juba and in Uganda, in order for coordination
for the activities conducted by the dispatched engineering
unit to begin. Since the commencement of engineering
activities within the United Nations facilities in March
2012, the SDF has gradually expanded its activities and
has so far implemented engineering activities outside of
the United Nations facilities; projects in cooperation with
international organizations; and the “All Japan Project,”
which consists of efforts in collaboration with development
assistance projects. In May 2013, an SDF mobilization
order regarding the expansion of areas for operation was
issued, which enabled the SDF to continue its activities in
and around Juba as well as conducting missions also in the
areas in Eastern and Western Equatoria.[3] Since December
2013, due to the worsened security situation in South
Sudan, the dispatched engineering unit conducted site
preparation and maintenance activities for the internally
displaced peoples (IDPs) camp within the United Nations’
facility in Juba. In addition, they also provided assistance
in water supply activities and medical services, making
use of the SDF management capabilities. On December,
2013, at the request of the United Nations and other
organizations, Japan provided 10,000 bullets to the United

|Special Representative of the U|nited Nations Secretary-General|
|---|---|

|Fo Comm|rce ander|
|---|---|

|Chief o|f Staff|
|---|---|

|Fig. III-2-3-4|Organization of UNMISS|
|---|---|
|Special Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General ComFo mrc ae nder Chief of Staff D S DMir u ie i vs pc is spto i ioo or rn n tof RS eR see ic dpD r er eee Cntsp a t o e ru o&ynt r -y t dHGa iS u nt eip m av ne e te a oc r no ri aa f il t l, at h U rie N an R GD e ethp ne er ep e ru Ss at ee ly cn (S Prt ea op tt le a ii tvc r ie y cia - aol l)f Logistics Branch AJ no ai ln yt s iM s i Css ei no tn er En Sg ein ce tie or ning Aviation Section Aviation Operation Logistics Staff Intelligence Staff Engineering Staff Staff Officer Officer (1 officer) Officer (1 officer) Officer (1 officer) (1 officer) (aboE un t g 3i 5n 0e e pr e U rsn oit nnel) Other Units Notes: Blue boxes show the number of Japanese personnel dispatched to UNMISS||


The SDF operation was planned to be conducted in Eastern and Western Equatoria as well in accordance with the needs of the United Nations. However, following the armed conflicts in South Sudan that started


-----

|National Conting (Commander,|ent Commander Engineer Unit)|
|---|---|

|Unit Headquarters|Support Unit for H.Q.|
|---|---|


Fig. III-2-3-5 Overview of the Coordination Center and the Engineer Unit Deployed in South Sudan

: Orders concerning the activities and duties of the engineer unit Minister of Defense
: SDF chain of command (Collaboration among each force)

Chief of Staff, Joint Staff

UNMISS

Central Readiness Force Self Defense Fleet Air Support Command

National Contingent Commander
(Commander, Engineer Unit)

About 350 personnel

Engineer Unit Commander: Colonel

Unit Headquarters Support Unit for H.Q. Engineering Equipment Platoon Engineering Platoon Garrison Liaison Section Military Police

*Excludes commands relating
to judicial police duties


Nations in light of the urgent necessity and humanitarian
nature of the situation.[4]

In May 2014, the United Nations Security Council
adopted Resolution 2155, which created the mandate
of shifting the UNMISS role from support for nation
building to the protection of civilians. Accordingly,
the tasks of the deployed engineering unit also shifted
from infrastructure development to mainly the provision
of civilian protection support for the U.N. troops. The
deployed engineering unit resumed road development
and maintenance outside the U.N. facilities in June 2014
as the situation in Juba had become relatively stable,
while facility-upgrading work was commenced from
February 2015 as collaboration with Japan’s development
cooperation projects.
In August 2015, the Agreement on the Resolution
of the Confl icts between the government and the antigovernment forces was signed. Following this, the United
Nations also reviewed the mandate and activity period
of the UNMISS, and adopted a new United Nations
Security Council Resolution. Responding to the needs of
the UNMISS, the deployed SDF unit commenced road
development in the suburbs of Juba in September 2015
and carried out another development work jointly with the
Bangladesh engineering unit in May 2016. Meanwhile,
the United Nations adopted the United Nations Security
Council Resolution 2252 in December 2015 to extend the
dispatch period of the UNMISS for further about 8 months,
the dispatch period was extended until October 31, 2016.

See>> Fig. III-2-3-4 (Organization of UNMISS)
See>> Fig. III-2-3-5 (Overview of the Coordination Center and the Engineer
Unit Deployed in South Sudan)

**(3) Cooperation between Japan and Australia in UNMISS**
To date, the MOD/SDF has cooperated closely with the
Australian Defense Forces in the fi eld, such as in activities
to provide humanitarian and reconstruction assistance in


Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense Kuroe (left) exchanging opinions regarding
peacekeeping operations with the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, United Nations
Secretariat (second from right)


Iraq and United Nations peacekeeping operations. As both
Japan and Australia are also participating in UNMISS 2012,
two Australian military personnel, who were dispatched
to carry out UNMISS duties, began to undertake external
coordination work and other duties in August 2012.

- 2  Co-Hosting of the United Nations Training of
**Trainers (TOT)**


In October 2015, the Japan Peacekeeping Training and
Research Center (JPC) at the Joint Staff College played
a central part in co-hosting the United Nations Training
of Trainers (TOT), which has the theme of civil-military
coordination in the U.N. peacekeeping operations,
together with the United Nations.

- 3  Dispatch of Ministry of Defense Personnel to
**the U.N. Secretariat**


Currently two SDF personnel (one Division-Director
level and one action offi cer-level) have been dispatched to
the U.N. Department of Peacekeeping Operations (U.N.
DPKO) for a two-year period to serve as the primary


-----

**y**

**United Nations (UN) PKO Training of Trainers (TOT)** **Column**

The United Nations (UN) places emphasis on enhancing the capability
of deployed units from various countries engaging in UN peacekeeping
operations. For this purpose, as it is necessary to train trainers who will
provide training for units to be deployed in respective countries, the United
Nations PKO Training of Trainers is conducted several times annually in
various countries to achieve qualitative progress for personnel from various
countries to be dispatched to peacekeeping operations.
In response to the United Nations’ request that the Government of
Japan be the co-host, the training was decided to be held in Japan in 2015.
It was the fi rst time that this training took place in Japan, and the Japan
Peacekeeping Training and Research Center (JPC) of the Joint Staff College A group photo at the opening ceremony of the training
played the leading role in conducting the training. The theme of the training
was civil-military coordination and 27 people from 14 countries including Japan participated in the training for nearly 2 weeks in October 2015.
The training had great signifi cance in that the Government of Japan contributed to the improvement of capability of PKO personnel in other
countries as well as the Japanese personnel to be participating in PKOs.
The MOD will continue to cooperate in various forms from the perspective of human resources development for the UN and international
community, and will strive to develop human resources for our personnel who could participate in peacekeeping operations and other activities.


|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|Fig. III-2-3-6|Status of Instructors Dispatched to PKO cente|
|Tunisia Morocco Is Ca PKO training Center (Mali) Libya Eg Algeria Mauritania Niger Senegal Bamako BurkiM naa l Fi aso Chad Suda Guinea Benin Cote Ghana Nigeria South Sud D’lvoire Togo Central African Liberia Accra Cameroon Equatorial Guinea Sao Tome and Republic of Congo Principe Gabon Democratic Republic of Kofi Annan International the Congo Peacekeeping Training Centre (Ghana) Angola Zambia South African National Peace Mission Training Centre Zim (South Africa) Botswana Namibia South Africa Note: The dispatch of instructors to South Sudan ref the International Peace Support Training Centr||


Status of Instructors Dispatched to PKO centers

Cyprus Syria

Tunisia Lebanon Iran

Morocco Israel Iraq

Cairo Jordan

PKO training Center (Mali) Libya Cairo Regional Center for

Egypt Conflict Resolution and

Algeria Peacekeeping (Egypt)

Mauritania

Niger

Senegal Bamako Burkina FasoMali Chad Sudan Federal Democratic Republic ofEritrea Yemen

Guinea Benin Ethiopia Peace Support Training Center

Cote Ghana Nigeria South Sudan (FDRE-PSTC) (Ethiopia)

Liberia D’lvoireAccra Togo Cameroon Central African Ethiopia Somalia

Sao Tome and Equatorial Guinea Republic of Congo Uganda Kenya
Principe Gabon

Democratic

Peacekeeping Training CentreKofi Annan International(Ghana) Angola Republic of the Congo Tanzania Support Training CentreInternational Peace (IPSTC) (Kenya) Center for United NationsPeacekeeping (India)

Zambia

South African National Peace Mozambique
Mission Training Centre(South Africa) Botswana Zimbabwe Madagascar

Namibia

Lesotho

South Africa

Note: The dispatch of instructors to South Sudan refers to a lecture delivered in South Sudan by an instructor originally from
the International Peace Support Training Centre in Kenya.

contact to and for the military components within the
offi ce of operations and to conduct force generation
affairs for U.N. peacekeeping operations. In addition,
one administrative offi cial has been dispatched to the
United Nations Department of Field Support (DFS) to
engage in duties such as project management for the
Triangular Partnership.[5]

See>> Reference 67 (Dispatch of Ministry of Defense Personnel to
International Organizations)



- 4  Dispatch of Instructors to PKO Centers

To support peacekeeping operation undertaken by African
and other countries, the MOD/SDF has dispatched SDF
personnel as instructors to the PKO centers to contribute
to the peace and stability by enhancing the capacity of
the centers. Starting with the deployment to the Cairo
Regional Center for Training on Confl ict Resolution and
Peacekeeping in Africa (CCCPA) in November 2008,
a total of 24 SDF personnel (17 deployments and eight


A partnership for supporting the capability enhancement of the personnel from troop contributing countries through the cooperation among the United Nations, troop contributing countries, and third countries


-----

**VOICE**

**My Experience of Participating in the United Nations Project for** **Column**
**Africa Rapid Deployment of Engineering Capabilities**

**GSDF Camp Katsuta (Hitachinaka City, Ibaraki Prefecture)**
**Major (GSDF) Michiaki Okazaki, GSDF Engineer School**

I participated in the project in Kenya as the leader of 11 training instructors. For 10 trainees who were participating from the military forces
of Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda, and Tanzania, we taught the basic operations
of dozers, graders, bucket loaders, and hydraulic excavators through
interpreters, spending approximately 1.5 more time than usual, with the
goal that every participant become capable of operating these types of
equipment safely and surely.
Some trainees required two weeks until they became able to move a
grader straight backward. We encountered trouble such as the overheating of
equipment in the intense heat, and fl ooding in the training place by bursting
water pipes, which suddenly occured during the training activities. However,
as a result of reviewing the education policies and the contents of subjects
in detail as well as implementing rehearsals and study group meetings by
all of the instructors, every trainee passed the profi ciency test for all the The author (center) receiving an award from the United Nations and the Kenya

Defence Forces at the closing ceremony

equipment. This also meant that the goal mentioned earlier was achieved.
Best of all, though, the trainees’ enthusiasm was a source of encouragement for the instructors.
The success of the project not only deepened the tie between the trainees and the instructors, but it also hugely contributed to the trusting
relationship between Japan and Kenyan organizations, strengthened cooperation with the United Nations, and the friendship and goodwill
relationships with the Eastern African countries. We look forward to someday learning about these trainees’ activities in future peacekeeping
operations, and engaging in the same missions jointly with Japan.


countries in total), including two female SDF offi cers,
were dispatched over the period until May 2016. The SDF
personnel provided education based on their experiences
and lessons gained through SDF activities overseas, to
include lectures concerning the importance of building
relationships with local population in international peace
cooperation activities, and the international disaster relief
activities in which the SDF has engaged. From March to
May at 2014, a SDF personnel was dispatched to the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Peace Support Training
Center (FDRE-PSTC) as an international consultant for
the fi rst time besides instructors, to provide advice on
education and to design curriculums for cultivating U.N.
peacekeepers, which were highly appreciated by concerned
local parties and students. Furthermore, in March 2015, two
SDF offi cers were dispatched to Centre for United Nations
Peacekeeping (CUNPK) in India, one as an evaluation
offi cer for evaluating the educational content of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Special Military Female Military
Offi cers Course, and one as an observer for this training.

See>> Fig. III-2-3-6 (Status of Instructors Dispatched to PKO centers)

- 5  Formulation of United Nations Military Unit
**Manuals (UNMUM) for Engineers**


formulation of the United Nations Military Unit Manual
(UNMUM) for Engineers, which is initiated by the
United Nations Headquarters, and Japan served as a chair
country of the Engineering Unit Manual Working Group.
In March 2014, the fi rst Engineer Unit Manual
Working Group was held in Tokyo and its second meeting
was held in Indonesia in June. In October 2015, the
fi nal draft of the manual was distributed to the member
countries. The MOD/SDF will continue to provide
support towards the widespread use of the Manual.

- 6  Support to the Project for Africa Rapid
**Deployment of Engineering Capabilities (ARDEC)**


In recent U.N. PKO missions, serious shortage of
personnel and equipment (heavy equipment), which
plays a major role in the construction of the infrastructure
for its activities, and insuffi cient personnel to operate
such equipment, was revealed, causing a hindrance when
launching a mission and expanding it. For this reason,
Prime Minister Abe expressed Japan’s active support to
the issue at the PKO Summit in September 2014, and it
was embodied by through the ARDEC.
In the ARDEC, the Department of Field Support
(DFS) of the United Nations procures heavy equipment
and carries out training for the facility personnel on the
basis of the fund provided by Japan From September


In order to play more of a leading role in international
peace cooperation activities the MOD/SDF supports the


-----

to October 2015, pilot training was conducted at the
International Peace Support Training Centre (IPSTC)
in Nairobi. Japan dispatched GSDF general personnel
as instructor who provided training on the operation
and maintenance of heavy equipment for 10 personnel
participants from four countries in East Africa. The
MOD will also actively support full-fl edged training to
be implemented going forward.

**3 International Disaster Relief Operations**


In recent years, the role of advanced capabilities in military
affairs has become more diverse, and opportunities for
its use in humanitarian assistance and disaster relief are
growing. To contribute to the advancement of international
cooperation, the SDF has also engaged in international
disaster relief operations proactively from the viewpoint
of humanitarian contributions and improvement of the
global security environment.
To this end, the SDF maintains their readiness to
take any necessary action based on prepared disaster
relief operation plans. Based on the consultation with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, the SDF has been proactively
conducting international disaster relief operations, which
fully utilize their functions and capabilities, while
taking into consideration specifi c relief requests by the
governments of affected countries and disaster situations
in these countries.

See>> Reference 66 (The SDF Record in International Peace Cooperation
Activities)



- 7  United Nations Chiefs of Defence Conference


In March 2015, the United Nations Chiefs of Defence
Conference was held as a follow-up to the summit meeting
on the United Nations Peacekeeping Operations.[6] Over 100
countries participated in this conference. From Japan, the
Chief of Staff of the GSDF attended the conference and
delivered a speech expressing the SDF’s determination about
fulfi lling its responsibility for international peacekeeping
by actively participating in U.N. peacekeeping operations
and providing support for capacity building and Rapid
Deployment of Engineering Capabilities in Africa.

- 2  International Disaster Relief Operations by the
**SDF and SDF’s Posture**


Responding to specifi c relief requests by the governments
of affected countries and the scale of disaster situations
in these countries, the SDF’s capabilities in international
disaster relief operations encompass (1) medical services,
such as fi rst-aid medical treatment and epidemic
prevention; (2) transport of personnel and equipment
by helicopter and other means; and (3) water supply
activities using water-purifying devices. In addition, the
SDF uses transport aircraft and ships to carry disaster
relief personnel and equipment to the affected area.
The Central Readiness Force and regional units of
the GSDF maintain their readiness to ensure that they
can carry out international disaster relief operations in
an independent manner anytime when needed. The Self
Defense Fleet of the MSDF and Air Support Command
of the ASDF also constantly maintain their readiness to
transport personnel and their supplies to disaster affected
areas. Furthermore, in April 2015, the ASDF also

An instructor from the National Defense Medical College (third from right) conducting research
on epidemics in Sierra Leone in cooperation with local offi cers



- 1  Outline of the Japan Disaster Relief Team Law

Since the enactment of the Law Concerning the
Dispatchment of the Japan Disaster Relief Team (Japan
Disaster Relief Team Law) in 1987, Japan has engaged
in international disaster relief activities in response to
requests from the governments of affected countries and
international organizations. In 1992, the Japan Disaster
Relief Team Law was partially amended, enabling the SDF
to participate in international disaster relief activities and
to transport its personnel and equipment for this purpose.

See>> Reference 24 (Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces)


U.S. Vice President Joe Biden called for a high-level meeting concerning the United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, and in response to this, Prime Minister Abe co-hosted the meeting in September 2014. ii


-----

improved their readiness to be able to swiftly respond to
a request for search activities using P-3C patrol aircraft.

- 3  International Disaster Relief Operations for
**the Outbreak of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) in**
**West Africa**


Following the outbreak reported by Guinea in March
2014, Ebola continued to primarily spread in the three
countries of Guinea and its neighboring countries Liberia
and Sierra Leone. The MOD dispatched a liaison officer to
the United States Africa Command (AFRICOM) located
in Germany since October 2014 (the first was a member
of the ASDF, followed by a member of the GSDF), in
order to strengthen the cooperation between Japan and
the United States regarding the response to EVD and
to gather information on the operational status of other
countries. Furthermore, in response to the request of the
United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
(UNMEER) for swift and reliable transport of personal
protective equipment that is vital for safe medical practice,
and based on consultation with the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, the MOD decided to conduct international
disaster relief operations in November, 2014.
The MOD/SDF organized the International Disaster
Relief Airlift Unit for West Africa and initially four
personnel were dispatched in December of the same year
to Accra, the capital city of Ghana, to conduct coordination
and preparation tasks with relevant organizations such as
UNMEER. At the same time, the International Disaster
Relief Airlift Unit for West Africa (one KC-767 aerial
refueling/transport aircraft) was also dispatched to Accra,
and approximately 20,000 sets of personal protective
equipment were delivered to UNMEER.
Furthermore, at the request of the World Health
Organization (WHO), Japan has dispatched one instructor
from the National Defense Medical College (NDMC) to
Sierra Leone in order to support epidemiological survey in
the affected countries from April to the end of May 2015.

- 4  The International Disaster Relief Operations for
**the Missing AirAsia Airplane**


Members of the Medical Assistance Unit conducting medical activities in the field

Center. Two destroyers “Takanami” and “Onami,” as well
as three helicopters, which were on their way to return to
their bases following the completion of counter-piracy
operations off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden,
were dispatched to the waters where the international
disaster relief was being conducted, engaged in search and
rescue activities for approximately one week, and worked
to recover the remains of the deceased passengers.



- 5  International Disaster Relief Activities in Nepal
**(Earthquake)**

A massive M7.8 earthquake struck Nepal in April, 2015.
The MOD allowed an investigation team consisting of
three personnel to accompany the Japan Disaster Relief
Team dispatched by the Government of Japan. In addition
to this, responding to a request from the Government of
Nepal, and based on the consultation with the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Japan, the MOD decided to initiate
international disaster relief operations.
The MOD/SDF deployed personnel to Nepal that were
comprised of the Joint Operations Coordination Center (four
personnel), International Disaster Relief Medical Assistance
Unit (approximately 110 personnel), International Disaster
Relief Air Transport Unit (approximately 30 personnel and
six C-130 transport aircraft, etc.) and other units. At the same
time, considering the urgent needs for medical assistance
in the affected areas, part of the Medical Assistance Unit
(approximately 20 personnel) was swiftly dispatched as the
First Response Unit, followed by the Airlift Unit and main
Medical Assistance Unit. During the operation period of
approximately three weeks, the Medical Assistance Unit
provided medical treatment to approximately 2,900 people
within the capital Kathmandu and its suburbs, while the Joint
Operations Coordination Center conducted coordination
tasks with the Government of Nepal and other relevant
organizations. At the same time, the Airlift Unit transported
a total of nearly 9.5 tons of equipment and goods necessary
for medical activities


In December 2014, AirAsia Flight 8501 flying from
Surabaya to Singapore lost its contact. Following
the request for search and rescue assistance from the
Indonesian government, and based on the consultation
with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the MOD decided
to initiate SDF international disaster relief operations.
The MOD/SDF organized the SDF Maritime surface
Unit for the missing Air Asia airplane, and dispatched three
personnel to conduct preparatory work as a Coordination


-----

**Initiatives for Arms Control, Disarmament and**

**Section 4**

**Non-Proliferation**


Causing anxiety not only to Japan, but also countries
across the globe, North Korea’s launch of missiles,
which was purported to be a satellite, and its nuclear test
demonstrated that the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and missiles, which serve as their means of
delivery, still posed a pressing challenge to peace and
stability of the international community.
Moreover, many countries are working on the
regulation of certain conventional weapons, considering

**1 Initiatives Focused on Treaties Relating to Arms Control, Disarmament, and Nonproliferation**


Japan actively participates in international initiatives for
arms control, disarmament, and nonproliferation in regard
to weapons of mass destruction, in the form of nuclear,
chemical, and biological weapons, as well as missiles as a
means of delivery and associated technologies and materials.
Japan has contributed to the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC) by offering its knowledge in the fi eld
of chemical protection since it was at the negotiating stage
and dispatching the GSDF personnel who are experts on
protection against chemical weapons to the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which
was established to continuously implement verifi cation
measures following the entry of the Convention into force.
Furthermore, small quantities of chemical substance under
regulation of the Convention are synthesized at the GSDF
Chemical School (Saitama City), in order to conduct
protection research. Thus, the school has undergone
inspections nine times in total since its establishment, in
accordance with the Convention regulations.
Moreover, the whole of the Japanese government
is working on projects aimed at disposing of abandoned


the need to maintain a balance between humanitarian
perspectives and defensive requirements.
One of the initiatives to deal with these issues is
the development of an international framework for arms
control, disarmament, and nonproliferation, and Japan is
playing an active role in this effort.

See>> Fig. III-2-4-1 (Framework for Arms Control, Disarmament and
Nonproliferation Relating to Conventional Weapons, Weapons of
Mass Destruction, Missiles and Related Materials, etc.)

chemical weapons in China, in accordance with the CWC,
and the Ministry has seconded nine personnel, including
GSDF personnel, to the Cabinet Offi ce to work on this project.
Since 2000, GSDF personnel with expertise in chemicals and
ammunitions have been dispatched to conduct excavation and
recovery projects on a total of 15 occasions. In addition, the
MOD has been cooperating in endeavors aimed at increasing
the effectiveness of regulations and decisions, by dispatching
offi cials to major meetings such as those of the Biological
Weapons Convention (BWC), as well as international export
control regimes in the form of the Australia Group (AG)
and the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR).
Furthermore, from 2011 to 2012, one GSDF personnel was
dispatched to the headquarters of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) for the fi rst time.

See>> Reference 67 (Dispatch of Ministry of Defense Personnel to
International Organizations)

Japan has signed various conventions on the
regulation of conventional weapons such as the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed

|Fig. III-2-4-1|Framework for Arms Control, Disarmament and Nonproliferation Relating to Conventional Weapons, Weapons of Mass Destruction, Missiles and Related Materials, etc.|
|---|---|

|Category|Weapons of Mass Destruction, etc.|Col3|Col4|Col5|Conventional Weapons|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Nuclear Weapons|Chemical Weapons|Biological Weapons|Delivery Systems (Missiles)||
|Conventions on Arms Control, Disarmament and Nonproliferation, etc.|Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) Comprehensive Nuclear- Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)|Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)|Biological Weapons Convention (BWC)|The Hague Code of Conduct Against Ballistic Missile Proliferation (HCOC)|Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW) Convention on Cluster Munitions (Oslo Convention) Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention (Ottawa Treaty) U.N. Register of Conventional Arms U.N. Report on Military Expenditures Arms Trade Treaty (ATT)|
|Export Control Frameworks Aimed at Nonproliferation|Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG)|Australia Group (AG)||Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR)|Wassenaar Arrangement (WA)|


**Weapons of Mass Destruction, etc.**
**Category** **Delivery Systems** **Conventional Weapons**
**Nuclear Weapons** **Chemical Weapons** **Biological Weapons**
**(Missiles)**

Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons (CCW)

Treaty on the Non- Convention on Cluster Munitions (Oslo

The Hague Code of

Conventions on Arms Proliferation of Nuclear Convention)

Chemical Weapons Biological Weapons Conduct Against Ballistic

Control, Disarmament and Weapons (NPT) Anti-Personnel Mine Ban

Convention (CWC) Convention (BWC) Missile Proliferation

Nonproliferation, etc. Comprehensive Nuclear- Convention (Ottawa Treaty)

(HCOC)

Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) U.N. Register of Conventional Arms

U.N. Report on Military Expenditures
Arms Trade Treaty (ATT)
Export Control Frameworks Nuclear Suppliers Group Missile Technology
Australia Group (AG) Wassenaar Arrangement (WA)
Aimed at Nonproliferation (NSG) Control Regime (MTCR)

New International Initiatives

Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI)

Aimed at Nonproliferation of

United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540

Weapons of Mass Destruction


-----

to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects (CCW),[1] based on humanitarian perspectives and
security needs. Japan has also signed the Convention
on Cluster Munitions (Oslo Convention),[2] which was
adopted outside the framework of the CCW. With the
entry of this Convention into force in August 2010, it
was stipulated that the use of all cluster munitions in the
possession of the SDF was immediately prohibited and
they must be discarded within eight years, which was
completed in February 2015. Furthermore, the MOD has
actively cooperated in the initiatives of the international

**2 International Initiatives Aimed at Nonproliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction**


- 1  Proliferation Security Initiative


community that focuses on the problem of anti-personnel
mines by submitting annual reports that include data on
Japan’s exceptional stocks to the United Nations.[3]

In addition, the MOD/SDF participates in various
systems introduced by the United Nations with the aim
of increasing the transparency of military preparedness
and military expenditure (the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and the United Nations Report on
Military Expenditures), providing the requisite reports.
They dispatched personnel as needed to governmental
expert meetings for reviewing and improving these systems.

well as personnel from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the
National Police Agency, and the Ministry of Finance. Based
on the proliferation cases in the areas surrounding Japan,
and from the perspectives of preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction in peacetime and improving
the response capability of the SDF, the MOD strives to
conduct activities to strengthen nonproliferation frameworks
including PSI, as well as participating in and holding various
relevant exercises and meetings.

See>> Fig. III-2-4-2 (Participation of MOD/SDF in PSI Interdiction Exercise
(Since 2012))


Deeply concerned about the development of weapons of
mass destruction and missiles by countries such as North
Korea and Iran, the United States announced its Proliferation
Security Initiative (PSI)[4] in May 2003, and sought the
participation of other countries therein. Various initiatives are
being undertaken based on PSI; PSI interdiction exercises
aimed at improving the ability to thwart the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and related items and meetings
to consider issues on policies and legislations.
Since the 3rd PSI Meeting in Paris (September 2003),
the MOD/SDF has collaborated with relevant organizations
and countries, dispatching the MOD offi cials and the SDF
personnel to various meetings, as well as engaging in
ongoing participation in these exercises since 2004.
Japan has hosted PSI maritime interdiction exercises
twice, working in partnership with relevant organizations
such as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the National Police
Agency, the Ministry of Finance and the Japan Coast Guard,
and hosted the PSI air interdiction exercise in July 2012 for
the fi rst time. In addition, during the PSI interdiction exercise,
which was hosted by New Zealand in November 2015, Japan
sent participants including personnel from the Joint Staff, as



- 2  United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540
**Regarding the Nonproliferation of Weapons of**
**Mass Destruction**

In April 2004, the United Nations Security Council unanimously
adopted United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540
regarding the nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
which lays the foundations for the international community to
deal with the acquisition, development, use, and proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction by non-state actors. Japan supports
the adoption of this resolution and hopes that all United Nations
member countries will comply with it.


Fig. III-2-4-2 Participation of MOD/SDF in PSI Interdiction Exercise (Since 2012)

**Date** **Exercise** **Location** **Participation of MOD/SDF**

Joint Staff, Air Defense Command, Air Support Command, Northern Army,
July 2012 PSI air interdiction exercise hosted by Japan Japan
Central Readiness Force, Internal Bureau

September 2012 PSI maritime interdiction exercise hosted by the ROK Republic of Korea 1 destroyer, 1 patrol aircraft (P-3C)

February 2013 PSI exercise co-hosted by the U.S. and UAE UAE Dispatch of observer

August 2014 PSI maritime interdiction exercise hosted by the U.S. United States 1 destroyer

November 2015 PSI exercise hosted by New Zealand New Zealand Joint Staff


CCW: Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to be Excessively Injurious or to have Indiscriminate Effects

Major producers and owners of cluster munitions such as the United States, China and Russia have not signed the Oslo Convention.

The MOD nominated retired Self-Defense Offi cials to the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) from 1999 to December 2006, to support antipersonnel mine removal activities in Cambodia; these
retired SDF personnel were dispatched to the Cambodian Mine Action Center (CMAC) as maintenance and transport advisors within JICA’s long-term expert dispatch framework.

An initiative that seeks to strengthen the relevant domestic laws of respective countries to the maximum possible extent, and considers measures that participating countries can jointly take while complying


-----

**Chapter 3** **[Measures on Defense ]**
**Equipment and Technology**


While defense equipment has become more advanced and
complex, the defense industry in Japan has been exposed
to harsh conditions due to a decrease in the number
of units procured caused by Japan’s severe fi nancial
conditions and an increase in imports of foreign-made
equipment. In addition, other countries are aiming to
acquire advanced military capabilities utilizing the latest
technologies. In order to ensure the quality of defense
capabilities suffi ciently and to enhance deterrence as
well as response capabilities amid the situation in which
rapid advancements in technological innovation have a
signifi cant infl uence on the global security environment,
it is crucial that Japan ensure technological superiority
over other countries. Hence, Japan is required to further

**Promotion of Research and Development for Ensuring**
**Section 1**
**Technological Superiority**

**1 Orientation for Research and Development of Equipment and Material**


In recent years, technological innovation has made rapid
progress. Thus, as a nation, strategically working on the
ways to ensure technological superiority has become a
pressing issue from the perspective of ensuring Japan’s
security. The state-of-the-art military technologies in each
country are sensitive technologies that shall not be easily
shared with other countries. From the perspective of
Japan, for the areas, which should strategically maintain
their domestic technology platforms, it is necessary to
promote research and development domestically. In the
case that international joint development etc. is carried
out when acquiring equipment, it leads to bargaining
power that Japan owns cutting-edge technology (key
technology). Therefore, it is necessary to promote research
and development by public and private sectors working
together in unity. For the purpose of ensuring Japan’s
technological superiority, carrying out the invention of
advanced equipment in effective and effi cient manners,
and dealing with various policy issues pertaining to
defense technologies and civilian technologies, the


develop defense equipment and technology policies
while also taking into account these points.

See>> Part I, Chapter 3, Section 6 (Trends Concerning Military Science and
Technology as well as Defense Production and Technological Bases)

Amid such a situation, it is indispensable to work
on strategic research and development for ensuring
the Japan’s technological superiority, strengthening
project management, promoting defense equipment
and technological cooperation, and maintaining and
strengthening defense production and technological bases
in order to maintain an environment in which defense
equipment that meets the SDF’s operational needs will
be procured into the future.

**Promotion of Research and Development for Ensuring**

MOD would formulate a Defense Technology Strategy
(tentative), which shows specifi c directions for various
measures to be strategically worked on, and conduct
research and development activities.
Under these ideas, the MOD develops outlooks
regarding future technology based on the current trends in
technology both in and outside of Japan and Medium-toLong Term Defense Technology Outlook indicating the
directions of medium-to-long-term initiatives in the area
of science and technology set in accordance with these
outlooks. These initiatives are vital for Japan to be able
to continue inventing and producing advanced equipment
required by the Self-Defense Force (SDF) going forward.
Furthermore, related to the Medium-to-Long Term
Defense Technology Outlook, the integration of superior
and advanced civilian technology, which is dual-use
technology,[1] will be promoted by publicizing it. At the
same time, it is expected to promote the development of
key technologies and advanced technology fi elds to be
focused on in the future, which have the potential for


-----

playing a role as a game changer by identifying those and
carrying out intensive resource investment.
Based on changes in future combat modality in light of
joint operations, as well as the trend in technology enabling
smarter, more networked and more unmanned conditions,
the MOD formulates “Research and Development Vision,”
covering items that require development and improvement
of technological bases, and that could potentially become
Japan’s important defense equipment in approximately 20

**2 Initiatives regarding Research and Development**


The MOD engages in the invention of equipment
that corresponds to the needs of the SDF, including
(1) improvement of air defense capability, (2) enhancement
of intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR)
capabilities, (3) unmanned equipment that can be used
fl exibly at times of various contingencies including largescale
disasters, and (4) enhancement of the capacity of existing
equipment. The MOD also makes proposals regarding
highly promising technologies based on the technological
trends, as well as adopting advanced technologies and dualuse technologies for prototyping, and conducts testing and
evaluation of the prototype equipment.
Particularly for improving air defense capability,
with regard to future fi ghters, the MOD conducts
demonstrational research on the high-mobility stealth
fi ghter “Advanced Technology Demonstrator (ATD-X)”


years. The “Research and Development Vision” is intended
to realize effective and effi cient research and development
by presenting a farsighted concept of defense equipment
based on a technical proposal and a roadmap for research
and development designed to achieve the concept. By
offi cially publishing the vision, the MOD expects such
effects as increasing predictability for industries, and
promoting stable and effi cient capital investment as well
as staff assignment.

in order for the development (including the possibility of
international joint development) of fi ghters to be taken
into account as an option before the retirement of F-2
fi ghters. Along with this research, the MOD also carries
out strategic studies such as research on a compact heat
transfer system for increased heat generation of mounted
avionics and thrust vectoring nozzles for ensuring high
mobility and stealth capabilities. This will enable the
fi ghter-related technology to be compiled and advanced
within Japan. The decision on the development will be
made by FY2018 and necessary measures will be taken
accordingly. Furthermore, the MOD carries out a study
on the element technology based on the high-power
laser system, which can be applied to close air defense
of vessels and bases, and a study on the technology,
which induces malfunction or destruction of electronic


**Commentary**

**Maiden Flight of the Advanced Technology Demonstrator** **Column**

On April 22, 2016, the Advanced Technology Demonstrator (X-2) made its
maiden fl ight. The Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Agency had been
working on building its prototype. The fi rst fl ight was conducted by Mitsubishi
Heavy Industries, Ltd., which was in charge of making the prototype. The
X-2 took off from Nagoya Airport, which is adjacent to Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries’ Komaki Minami factory, and fl ew for approximately 26 minutes
until it landed at the JASDF Gifu Air Base. Following this fl ight, on June 13,
the X-2 was delivered to the MOD, and from now on, its test fl ights are going
to be carried out at the Gifu Air Base by the Acquisition, Technology and
Logistics Agency.
The X-2 is an aircraft to be used to verify feasibility and operability Advanced Technology Demonstrator (X-2) during its maiden fl ight
of fi ghter technologies, which combine stealth capabilities, and high
maneuverability. It has already been 16 years since the completion of the development of F-2 fi ghters. This fi rst fl ight will lead to the inheritance
of highly skilled human resources and the know-how necessary for acquiring technologies that have the potential for developing the next
generation fi ghters. Furthermore, in the situation where only a few countries other than the United States have fl own stealth manned aircraft,
we can expect an increase in the international bargaining power by showcasing Japan’s technologies related to fi ghter development to the
international community. It can be said that these are very important initiatives leading to the acquisition of the successor of F-2 fi ghters.
In order to establish the most desirable air defense posture for Japan in the future, we will continue to promote these strategic examinations
for accumulating and advancing the fi ghter-related technologies within the country.


-----

equipment built into incoming missiles to neutralize the
missiles by generating and irradiating high-powered
directed microwaves.
To improve ISR capabilities, the MOD conducts
research aiming to load dual wavelength infrared sensors
with superior detecting and discriminating capabilities
onto “advanced optical satellites,” which are currently
being planned by the Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) and the Japan
Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), and to make
them operate in the space environment. The MOD also

**3 Active Utilization of Civilian Technology**


The Acquisition, Technology & Logistics Agency (ATLA)
and domestic research institutions, such as national
research and development agencies and universities have
been proactively working on research collaborations
and technological information exchanges in order to
ensure that superior advanced civilian technology is
incorporated and effi cient research and development is
conducted. In FY2015 the MOD launched competitive
research funding program called “Innovative Science &
Technology Initiative for Security” to discover creative


promotes research on high mobility powered suits and the
environmental awareness enhancement technology for
remote control vehicles that can be used fl exibly at times
of various contingencies including large-scale disasters.
Furthermore, as advanced research, which has the
potential to ensure technological superiority, the MOD
conducts research regarding the element technology of
the next generation of night vision devices and the one
regarding electromagnetic pulse (EMP) missiles, which
induce the malfunction and destruction of sensor and
electronic equipment.

research activities conducted in universities, research
institutes, companies etc., which are expected to apply
defense equipment in future and to promote promising
research seeds. In the fi rst fi scal year, 9 research projects
were awards from 109 applications. Since actively
utilizing advanced civilian technology is essential for
ensuring Japan’s technological superiority, ATLA will
award new research projects in FY2016.

See>> Fig. III-3-1-1 (FY2015 Selected Resarch Project for the “Innovative
Science & Technology Initiative for Security” (competitive funding))

|Fig. III-3-1-1|FY2015 Selected Research Project for the “Innovative Science & Technology Initiative for Security” (competitive funding)|
|---|---|
|Research Title (Representative institution for the project) Isotropic wide-band optical perfect absorber made of dark metamaterials (RIKEN) This project aims to realize optical perfect absorber using artif icial structure of sub-wavelength. Optimization of hetero-structures for improving power characteristics of high-frequency devices (Fujitsu Limited) This project aims to realize the dramatic improvement of performance of a gallium nitride (GaN) based high-frequency transistor by, for example, introducing indium-based materials, which are capable of optimizing the device structure. Improve the reliability and strength of the bonded portion research for structural weight reduction (Kanagawa Institute of Technology) This project aims to increase the strength and reliability of carbon f iber reinforced plastic and bonded part by increasing the strength of the part between f biers and resin using carbon nanotubes. Conceptual design of hypersonic combined cycle engine and an experimental verif ication of the hypersonic thrust performance (Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA)) This project carries out conceptual designing of hypersonic combined cycle engine, which can operate with the f light speed range from the resting condition to mach 5, and its experimental verif ication. Wireless power transmission development for underwater (Panasonic Corporation) This project aims to realize the method of wireless power transmission a few meters apart in the sea water by transmitting energy to multiple coils using the magnetic f ield resonance method. Research of underwater optical wireless robust communication with photomultiplier tubes (Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC)) Toward the construction of future undersea network, this project will make a prototype of underwater optical wireless communication device in order to establish high-speed and stable optical communication in the sea. Research of repeat pass interferometric MTI2 using unmanned aircraft SAR1 (Tokyo Denki University) This project aims to signif icantly improve the MTI performance by cooperatively control two unmanned aircrafts equipped with SAR performance. Development of ultra-high adsorptive polymer nanof ibers sheet for adsorption of toxic gas (Toyohashi University of Technology) This project will produce polymer nanof ibers, which are capable of chemical adsorption,and evaluate adsorption properties of toxic gas. Development of portable ultra-small biomass gasif ication and power generation system (Tokyo Institute of Technology) This project aims to realize a portable micro-biomass gasif ication power generation system using a wide variety of organic matters as a possible source. 1 SAR: Synthetic Aperture Radar 2 MTI: Moving Target Indication||


-----

**Section 2** **Efforts toward Project Management, etc.**


**1 Project Management throughout Its Life Cycle**



- 1  Acquisition of Defense Equipment through
**Focused Project Management**


establishing the Integrated Project Team (IPT), which is
composed of offi cials of the relevant departments.

- 2  Effective and Effi cient Procurement from
**a Comprehensive Perspective**


Since defense equipment is becoming more advanced
and complex in recent years, there is an increasing
tendency in the procurement cost of defense equipment
throughout its life cycle of the equipment (equipment
design, Research & Development, full rate production
and acquisition, and sustainment). For acquiring the
necessary number of equipment in appropriate timing,
it is extremely important to streamline the procurement
process throughout the life cycle of equipment.
Therefore, pertaining to important defense equipment,
the Department of Project Management was set up within
the Acquisition, Technology & Logistics Agency, which
was launched in October 2015 to realize the most optimal
acquisition in accordance with operational needs by
managing the costs and schedule throughout the life cycle
of equipment. Also, in November 2015, twelve types of
equipment[1] have been selected as eligible for project
management focused equipment.
With regard to project management focused
equipment, the MOD works to realize the acquisition of
strategically optimal defense equipment by designating
a Project Manager (PM) as the person responsible
for performing the project management as well as by

C-2 (one of the selected programs for project management)


Procurement of defense equipment based on a
comprehensive perspective is required to build a Dynamic
Joint Defense Force.
So far, based on the integrative point of view, the
Ministry has been striving to reduce development,
acquisition, and maintenance expenses through (1) making
the equipment function integrated, (2) procuring common
equipment and supplies in bulk, standardizing some
components, and development of product families, etc.[2]

Hereafter, the Ministry will have the viewpoint of
project management from the planning stage of defense
equipment and strive to reduce procurement costs through
connecting information and integrating functions,
standardizing some components, and developing
product families, etc., to promote effective and effi cient
procurement throughout the life cycle of equipment.

- 3  Initiatives for Strengthening Project Management


The MOD has carried out the following initiatives in
order to strengthen project management.
❍ Utilizing knowledge from external audit fi rms to enhance
the fairness of project management duties for the purpose
of developing a system regarding project management.
❍ Working on the improvement of cost estimation
evaluation methods through the creation of a database
of cost information and carrying out statistical analysis
for enhancing the accuracy of life-cycle cost estimation.
❍ Regularly carrying out training on project management
methods used overseas and in the private sector to develop
human resources pertaining to project management.


SM-3 Block IIA, Middle-range SAM (improved version), Global Hawk (unmanned aerial vehicle), AAV7 (amphibious vehicle), New Destroyers, GSDF UH-X, V-22 (tilt-rotor aircraft), enhanced SH-60K, P-1, C-2,
F-35A, next-generation fi ghter aircraft (being considered as a successor of F-2 fi ghter aircraft)

Examples of “procuring common equipment and supplies in bulk,” “standardizing some components,” and “development of product families” are small arms, vehicles, and chemical supplies used by the Ground
Self-Defense Force (GSDF), Maritime Self-Defense Force (MSDF), and Air Self-Defense Force (ASDF), short-range surface-to-air missiles used by the GSDF and ASDF, and anti-ship missiles used by all three


-----

**2 Improving the Contract System and Other Related Matters**



- 1  Reviewing Acquisition Systems procurement possible, leading to the realization of the

For the purpose of promoting acquisition reform, which is systematic improvement of defense capability. At the
a prompt response to swiftly changing surroundings, the same time, for companies, given that the procurement
MOD has been holding meetings of the Comprehensive amount will be assured, the systematic use of personnel
Acquisition Reform Committee since 2007, besides the and equipment, as well as cost reductions due to bulk
Contractual Systems Study Groups has been held since orders, will be made possible. Furthermore, this will
2010 to review acquisition systems. Since FY2016, a prevent subcontractors from withdrawing from the
special research offi cer system[3] has been adopted in order defense industry.
to surely embody the review results. For the FY2015 budget, a long-term contract for

the procurement of 20 fi xed-wing patrol aircraft (P-1)
(expected amount of cost reduction is approximately 41.7

- 2  Long-Term Contracts, etc.

billion yen on a contract basis) was concluded. For the

The production of defense equipment requires a FY2016 budget long-term contracts for the procurement
signifi cant amount of time. Therefore, if a certain set of 17 patrol helicopters (SH-60K) as well as the aircraft
amount is to be acquired by the integrated procurement maintenance of GSDF special transport helicopters
method, in many cases a contract for more than fi ve years (EC-225LP) and MSDF training helicopters (TH-135)
is needed. With regard to defense equipment and services, (expected amount of cost reduction is approximately 14.8
economies of scale[4] tend not to work mainly due to the billion yen on a contract basis)[6] were concluded.
following reasons: (1) the annual procurement quantity is See>> Fig. III-3-2-1 (Image of Long-term Contracts and the Cost Reduction Effect)
small; (2) the MOD is the only customer; (3) companies In addition, by realizing long-term multiple-year
that provide such defense equipment etc., are limited. In contracts through active utilization of the PFI Act,[7] it is
addition, it is diffi cult for companies to systematically anticipated that the planned acquisition and execution
move forward with their businesses with a high degree of of budgets through the standardization of investment
predictability, which is peculiar to the defense industry. amounts of the national expenditure will be realized.
For this reason, the upper limit of acts that incur It is also anticipated that the realization of long-term
national debt prescribed in the Public Finance Act as multiple-year contracts will give rise to such benefi ts as
within fi ve years in principle was changed to within cutting equipment procurement costs by reducing risks
10 years for specifi c equipment through the enactment for those taking orders and by promoting the entry of
of the Long-term Contract Act.[5] Introduction of this new suppliers. In regard to the project of operation and
change regarding long-term contracts will make stable management of private ships, which makes use of the PFI

Act, the MOD concluded the contract for the project in
March 2016.[8]

In addition, regarding procurement of certain
equipment with which little competitiveness can be
expected due to its characteristics, and companies that
work on cost reduction using the MOD’s programs, the
MOD promotes limited tendering contracts while ensuring
transparency and fairness as well as clarifying and
putting the subject into patterns, from the perspective of
the implementation of smooth and effi cient procurement,
Procurement cost reduction for patrol helicopters (SH-60K) is attempted through integrated and the enhancement of the company’s predictability.
procurement based on long-term contracts


This is a system to conduct research, which contributes to the procurement system of defense equipment, by inviting experts such as associate professors from different universities specializing in the areas
of concern in order to review and reconsider an effective procurement system, based not only on the viewpoints of the Ministry of Defense personnel but also on theories that have been proposed in the fi eld
of business administration and economics.

Economies of scale refer to the cost advantage that arises with an increased output of a product. For example, costs per unit can be reduced by a bulk purchase of materials.

“Special Measures Law Concerning the Term of Expenditure Based on the Obligatory Assurance of National Subsidization for Specifi c Defense Procurement”(enacted in April 2015)

This amount of approximately 14.8 billion yen includes the cost reduction effect (stated later) due to PBL contracts pertaining to the aircraft maintenance of EC-225LP and TH-135.

Act on Promotion of Private Finance Initiative


-----

Fig. III-3-2-1 Image of Long-term Contracts and the Cost Reduction Effect

[Traditional procurement (image)]

**FY2016** **FY2017** **FY2018** **FY2019** **FY2020** **FY2021**

**Delivery of**
**five aircraft** **Total of**

**Conclusion of** **Delivery of** **approx. 114.0 billion yen**
**a contract** **six aircraft**

**Conclusion of** **Delivery of**
**a contract** **six aircraft** **Reduction of**

**Conclusion of** **11.4 billion yen**
**a contract** **(Reduction by 10%)**

[Procurement based on a long-term contracts (image)]

**FY2016** **FY2017** **FY2018** **FY2019** **FY2020** **FY2021**

**Total of**
**approx. 102.6 billion yen**

**Conclusion of** **Delivery of** **Delivery of** **Delivery of**

**a contract** **five aircraft** **six aircraft** **six aircraft**



- 3  Decrease Procurement Cost and Improve
**Companies’ Incentives to Reduce Cost**


return any excessive profi t (audit contracts incorporating a
provision requiring the return of excessive profi t).
However, it has also been noted that these contracts
diminish the effectiveness of cost reduction incentives for
the companies due to the particular condition that they might
be required to return excessive profi ts after the completion of
the contract payment at the end of the fi scal year. Therefore,
the MOD conducts a review of a risk sharing-type incentive
contract as a new contract method in which public and
private sectors jointly carry out the management of contract
implementation to minimize the risk of it, and in which a
certain percentage will be given back to the companies if the
cost reduction has been performed.

**3 Initiatives Aimed at Increasing the Effi ciency of Procurement, and Other Related Initiatives**


air missiles (SM-2) and the upgrading of maintenance
equipment for fi ghter aircraft (F-15), etc.
In addition, the Ministry is striving to reduce
development, acquisition, and maintenance expenses
through integrating procurement of common equipment
and supplies, standardizing some components, and
developing product families, etc.


With regard to the procurement of defense equipment,
due to the peculiarity that there are a variety of equipment
without a market price, it is necessary to achieve both
the reduction of procurement cost and improvement of
companies’ incentives to reduce cost simultaneously.
Thus, the MOD has been striving to achieve the reduction
of procurement prices by confi rming the actual costs
incurred and ensuring that no excessive business profi t will
be added after the execution of the contract through cost
audit contracts with a special provision requiring respective
companies to conduct a review of the contract sum and

**3 Initiatives Aimed at Increasing the Effi ciency of Procurement, and Other Related Initiatives**

- 1  Achieving Further Effi ciency in the Acquisition of
**Defense Equipment**


The MOD carries out the following measures in addition
to a review of the contract system when acquiring
defense equipment: a bulk purchase, which seeks greater
effi ciency by budgeting and entering into contracts for
defense equipment, supplies, and components based on
the approach of consolidating the quantities required
for several years into a single specifi c fi scal year; and
integrated procurement, which involves the consolidated
implementation of budgets for equipment used across
multiple different organizations, or for components that
are common to different types of defense equipment. In
the FY2016 budget, approximately 46.5 billion reduction
of expenses on a contract base is expected, by concluding
an integrated contract of the procurement of ship-to


- 2 **Effective and Effi cient Maintenance and Replenishment**

With regard to periodic maintenance checks of defense
equipment, the MOD has been working to achieve
greater effi ciency by extending the interval between the
maintenance checks, after making suffi cient effort to ensure
safety. In addition, the MOD embarks on the introduction of
Performance Based Logistics (PBL)[9] from the perspective


PBL is a contract method that involves payment of compensation according to the level of equipment performance achieved, in terms of availability ratio and stable stock. It has achieved positive outcomes upon


-----

more appropriate” across the whole government, the
MOD continues to carry out the introduction and
expansion of a comprehensive evaluation bidding
system[11] and make bidding procedures more effi cient.
In addition to these, based on refl ection on the past,
Strengthening system investigation, reviewing penalties,
ensuring the effectiveness of supervision and inspection,
and other measures have steadily been carried out in order
to prevent recurrence of incidents such as overcharging
and falsifi ed results of product testing by defense-related
companies. Through these measures, the MOD strives to
surely prevent recurrence of scandals, enhance fairness
and transparency, and make contracts more appropriate.
In addition, the Acquisition, Technology and
Logistics Agency (ATLA) carries out multilayered checks
through both internal and external checking systems for
more strict checks – namely, ATLA conducts internal
inspections etc., by establishing the inspection and audit
department, and through deliberations in the Defense
Procurement Council, which consists of inspectors
and external experts, run by the Inspector General’s
Offi ce of Legal Complaints. Moreover, ATLA has also
improved its education department and strives to enhance
compliance awareness by providing thorough education
pertaining to compliance for ATLA personnel.

See>> Fig. III-3-2-2 (Inspection and Audit Functions regarding the Procurement
of Defense Equipment)


PBL for EC-225LP (special transport helicopter) is planned based on a long-term contract

of improving the equipment availability ratio and longterm cost reductions. In FY2016, approximately 9.9 billion
yen[10] of cost reduction is expected on a contract basis by
concluding PBL contracts on the aircraft maintenance
of GSDF special transport helicopters (EC-225LP)
and MSDF training helicopters (TH-135) as well as the
components of GSDF attack helicopters (AH-64D).



- 3  Efforts to Increase Fairness and Transparency

The MOD implements measures for making contracts
more appropriate and strengthening checking functions
to promote the enhancement of fairness and transparency
in relation to the acquisition of equipment and materials.
As a part of the effort to “make public procurement


Fig. III-3-2-2 Inspection and Audit Functions regarding the Procurement of Defense Equipment

Acquisition, Technology
and Logistics Agency (ATLA)

Other organizations Commissioner, ATLA
and agencies Third-party organization

Assistant Commissioner

Inspector General’s Office
of Legal Compliance (Director,) Audit and Evaluation Division Defense Procurement Council

(Deliberation to be conducted

H Directly reports the results and H 25 staff members (regular staff as of the end by external experts)
improvement plans of defense of FY2015)
inspections to the Minister of Defense. Defense inspection H H Internal inspection: inspection carried out from of collusive bidding. Internal audit: an audit regarding research and the perspectives of compliance and the prevention H university professors, lawyers, and certified public accountants.Seven external experts including

development, tasks such as procurement and H Study and deliberation will be

the Minister’s SecretariatAuditing Division at Human ResourcesaccountingH 13 staff members Internalinspection conducted on rules regarding procurement, project management, single bidder projects, and

H Conducts an audit of ATLA as necessary. Development Center (regular staff as of the end of FY2015) Internalaudit specifications, etc.

Audit Training and education regarding compliance, etc. Study anddeliberation

Internal and external multi-layered checks and
mutual supervision within the organization

implementationReportingstatus Project ManagementDepartment of Audit Firm

Corporations Equipment development (Project Management Group)

Contracts, etc. Department of officer, etc. of rulemaking andoperation statusUnderstanding Equipment PolicyDepartment of H methods and operational status, etc.Evaluation on project management

Procurement Operations Department of Evaluation H Use of the results of evaluation for
(Practical Development and Technology Strategy the improvement of duties and
Procurement Group) Applicationfor various Procurement ManagementDepartment of enhancement of internal audit capabilities.

approvals, etc. (Rulemaking Group)


10 This amount of approximately 9.9 billion yen includes the cost reduction effect related to long-term contracts pertaining to the aircraft maintenance of EC-225LP and TH-135.

11 Unlike the automatic bid system which focuses only on price, this is a system which the successful bidder is determined on the basis of a comprehensive evaluation that includes both the price and other


-----

**Section 3** **Defense Equipment and Technology Cooperation**


Based on the Three Principles on Transfer of Defense
Equipment and Technology, Japan promotes cooperation
in defense equipment and technology with other countries
in order to contribute to promoting the maintenance and
enhancement of defense production and technological
bases, as well as contributing to the promotion of peace

**1 Three Principles on Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology**


- 1  Purpose of Establishment of the Three Principles
**on Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology**


and international cooperation. Japan will continue to realize
effective defense equipment and technological cooperation
through the strengthening of intelligence gathering such as
the needs of its counterparts, cooperation including assistance
for maintenance and repair of equipment, and strengthening
of cooperative posture between the public and private sectors.

- 2  Main Contents of the New Three Principles


**(1) Clarifi cation of Cases Where Transfers are prohibited**
**(the First Principle)**

The cases where transfers are prohibited are clarifi ed as
follows: (1) in the case of violating the obligations based
on agreements signed by Japan and other international
agreements; (2) in the case of violating the obligations based
on the Resolution of the United Nations Security Council;
or (3) in the case of transferring to the countries in confl icts.

See>> Fig. III-3-3-1 (The First Principle “The Cases Where Transfers Are Prohibited”)

**(2) Limitation to Cases Where Transfers May Be**
**Permitted As Well As Strict Examination and**
**Information Disclosure (the Second Principle)**

The cases where transfers may be permitted are limited to
(1) cases that contribute to the active promotion of peace
contribution and international cooperation, or (2) cases
that contribute to the security of Japan. The Government
will conduct strict examination on the appropriateness of
the destination and end user whilst ensuring transparency,
and the extent the overseas transfer of such equipment
and technology will raise concern for Japan’s security. In
addition, it has been decided that important cases would
be deliberated at the National Security Council and along
with this, information concerning the cases that were
deliberated would be disclosed.


Japan has dealt with arms exports in a careful manner, in
accordance with the Three Principles of Arms Exports and
their related policy guidelines. On the other hand, in individual
cases, such as the participation of domestic companies in the
joint development of Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD) by
Japan and the U.S., it has taken separate measures in which
arms exports are dealt with outside the Three Principles.
Amidst this situation, in December 2011, the
Statement by the Chief Cabinet Secretary on Guidelines
for Overseas Transfer of Defense Equipment, etc. put
in place exemptions from the Three Principles of Arms
Exports based on the premise of strict control,[1] with regard
to (1) cases related to peace contribution and international
cooperation, and (2) cases regarding international joint
development and production of defense equipment, etc.
that contributes to Japan’s security.
In April 2014, based on the National Security
Strategy, the Government formulated the Three Principles
on Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology as new
principles replacing the Three Principles on Arms Exports
etc.[2] and its implementation guidelines. These clarifi ed the
concrete standards, procedures and limitation.

See>> Reference 68 (Three Principles on Transfer of Defense Equipment
and Technology)


Fig. III-3-3-1 The First Principle “The Cases Where Transfers Are Prohibited”

**Situation** **Specifi c examples**

(1) Violation of obligations under treaties

Chemical Weapons Convention, Convention on Cluster Munitions, Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention, Arms

concluded and other international

Trade Treaty, etc.

arrangements

(2) Violation of obligations under United Nations
Security Council Resolution 1718 (nuclear issue of North Korea), etc.
Security Council Resolutions

Countries which are the target of measures taken by the United Nations Security Council to maintain or
(3) Transfer to a nation which is party to a confl ict
restore international peace and security in the event of an armed attack


The strict control refers to the duty imposed on recipient countries to gain prior consent from Japan with respect to extra-purpose use and third party transfer, within international arrangements concluded
between the Governments of Japan and recipient countries.

The term “defense equipment” is deemed appropriate for the title of “Three Principles for the Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology,” since possible articles of overseas transfers help peace contribution
and international cooperation as was seen in the example of the provision of bulldozers and other items belonging to the SDF to disaster-stricken countries. Similarly, due to the fact that there is provision of


-----

Fig. III-3-3-2 The Second Principle “Limitation to cases where transfers may be permitted”

**Situation** **Specifi c examples**

(1) Contribution to the proactive Overseas transfers that contribute to active promotion of peace contribution and international cooperation, only if the transfers
advancement of peace have positive meaning from the viewpoint of peace contribution and international cooperation and when:
contribution and international ❍ the recipient is a foreign government, or
cooperation ❍ the recipient is the United Nations (UN) System or organizations conducting the activities based on a UN resolution

Overseas transfers that contribute to Japan’s security, only if the transfers have positive meaning from the viewpoint of Japan’s
security, and that:
❍ are related to international joint development and production with countries cooperating with Japan in security area including
the U.S.,
❍ contribute to enhancing security and defense cooperation with countries cooperating with Japan in security area including
the U.S., and of the following:

-  Overseas transfer of defense equipment and technology included in the provision of supplies and services implemented by
the SDF in accordance with laws

-  provision of military technology as a part of mutual exchange of technology with the U.S.,

(2) Contribution to the security -  Provision of parts or services related to a licensed product of the U.S. or provision of repair services etc. to the U.S. armed
of Japan forces, or

-  defense equipment and technology related to cooperation concerning rescue, transportation, vigilance, surveillance or
minesweeping with countries cooperating with Japan in security area, or
❍ are necessary for supporting activities of the governmental agencies including the Self-Defense Forces (hereinafter referred
to as “the SDF etc.”), which include the activities of foreign governments or private entities etc. related to the activities of the
SDF etc., or for ensuring the safety of Japanese nationals, and that are:

-  temporary export of equipment, return of purchased equipment or provision of technical information related to the
activities of the SDF etc. including replacements of items which need repairing with non-defective items,

-  export of equipment for the protection or self-protection of public offi cials, or

-  export of equipment for the self-protection of Japanese nationals operating in danger areas


consent regarding extra-purpose use and transfer to third
parties. However, in cases where it is judged appropriate
for the active promotion of peace contribution and
international cooperation, cases involving participation
in the international systems for sharing parts, and cases
where parts are delivered to a licenser, appropriate control
may be ensured with the confi rmation of the control
system at the destination.

**2 Deepening Relationships with the United States regarding Defense Equipment and Technology Cooperation**


- 2  Production, Sustainment and Maintenance
**of Common Equipment between Japan and**
**the United States**


See>> Fig. III-3-3-2 (The Second Principle “Limitation to cases where
transfers may be permitted”)

**(3) Ensuring Appropriate Control regarding Extra-Purpose**
**Use or Transfer to Third Parties (the Third Principle)**

Overseas transfer of defense equipment and technology
will be permitted only in cases where appropriate control
is ensured, and the Government will in principle oblige
the Government of the recipient country to gain its prior

**2**

- 1  Joint Research and Development, etc.


Since 1992, Japan has implemented 20 joint research
projects and 1 joint development project with the United
States. At present, 3 joint research projects (joint research
on hybrid electric propulsion, joint research on highspeed multi-hull vessel optimization, and joint research
on the comparison of exposure to jet fuel and noise in
unit operation) and 1 development project (Japan-U.S.
cooperative development of an Advanced Ballistic Missile
Interceptor) are underway. In addition, with regard to the
transfer of software and parts related to the Aegis System
from Japan to the United States, Japan affi rmed in July
2015 that this overseas transfer falls under the case,
which may be permitted, based on deliberations at the
National Security Council.

See>> Part III, Chapter 1, Section 2-3-2 (Missile Defense of the United
States and Japan-U.S. BMD Technical Cooperation)

See>> Reference 33 (Japan–U.S. Joint Research and Development Projects)


**(1) Participation of Japanese Industry in the Production**
**of the F-35A and the Establishment of Regional**
**Maintenance, Repair, Overhaul and Upgrade**
**(MRO&U) Capability**

In December 2011, Japan selected the F-35A as the
next-generation fi ghter aircraft to succeed the F-4 fi ghter
aircraft. At the same time, the government decided to
procure 42 aircraft from FY2012 onwards and to have
Japanese industries participate in its production, aside
from several complete aircraft, which shall be imported.
In light of this decision, the Japanese government has
been working to enable the involvement of Japanese
industries in the manufacturing process in preparation
for the F-35A acquisition from FY2013 onwards. The
Japanese government decided on the range of production
participation by Japanese industries including the
Final Assembly and Check Out (FACO) for airframe,
the manufacture of some engine parts (17 items) and


-----

providing additional capability at least 3-5 years later.[5]
Utilizing the FACO facility for airframe and engine, and
contributing to maintenance in the Asia-Pacifi c region are
signifi cant from the perspectives of securing the operational
support system for F-35A in Japan, maintaining the
foundation of the Japanese defense industry, strengthening
the Japan-U.S. Alliance, and deepening equipment
cooperation in the Asia-Pacifi c region.

**(2) Initiatives towards the Establishment of a Common**
**Maintenance Base of the Japan-U.S. Osprey**

As the Periodic Maintenance Inspection (PMI) of the
U.S. Marine Corps Ospreys (24 aircraft) deployed at
Futenma is scheduled to commence roughly in 2017,
the U.S. Forces carried out public tender to select a
maintenance company and made a decision to select Fuji
Heavy Industries Ltd. as the maintenance company for
this purpose in October 2015.
The MOD intends to establish common maintenance
base for both Japan’s and the United States’ Osprey (V22) aircraft by allowing the maintenance company to
use the hangars at GSDF Camp Kisarazu for aircraft
maintenance of the U.S. Marine Corps Ospreys and
also to implement the future aircraft maintenance of the
GSDF Ospreys at the same camp from the following
perspectives: (1) Smooth introduction of the GSDF
Osprey;[6] (2) Smooth and effective operation of the
Japan-U.S. security arrangement; and (3) Enhanced
effi ciency in maintenance. The establishment of common
maintenance base at GSDF Camp Kisarazu would be
extremely signifi cant in that it will lead to the realization
of the reduction of Okinawa’s burden as well as the
“Strengthening the basis to repair and maintain common
equipment ” stated in the new guideline.


F-35A aircraft, the production of which involves the participation of Japanese industries
(the aircraft shown in this photo was manufactured in the United States)

radar parts (7 items) in FY2013, FACO for engines and
the manufacture of some Electro-Optical Distributed
Aperture System (EODAS)[3] parts (2 items) in FY2014,
and the manufacture of some engine parts (2 items) and
EODAS part (1 item) in FY2015.
In terms of the skills and facilities required for
FACO, it will be important for Japanese companies to
have the following abilities, in order to provide effective
operational support for the F-35A:
❍ The ability to offer a swift response within Japan in
the event that an airframe suffers damage and requires
work that cannot be carried out by the SDF unit itself,
including the repair or replacement of major structural
components, such as main wings and fuselage, without
transporting the airframe overseas; and
❍ The ability to carry out refurbishment work domestically,
in the event that performance improvements to the
F-35A are sought within Japan in future.
In addition, participation of Japanese companies in the
implementation of FACO and parts production will
have significance in that they will be able to come
in contact with the system integration technology
of stealth fighter as well as the cutting edge fighter
technology and know-how.
Due to global operation of F-35, the U.S. government
plans to establish maintenance depot mainly for airframe
and engine in the North America, Europe, and the
Asia-Pacifi c regions. In December 2014, with regard to
regional Maintenance, Repair, Overhaul and Upgrade
(MRO&U) Capability in the Asia-Pacifi c region for F-35,
the U.S. government announced the following decisions:
(1) regional MRO&U Capability for airframe will be
provided to Japan and Australia with both capabilities
required not later than early 2018;[4] (2) With regard to the
regional MRO&U Capability for engine, initial capability
will be provided by Australia by early 2018, with Japan


Engineers from a Japanese maintenance company checking the structure of the U.S. Marine
Corps Ospreys (Photo courtesy of Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd.)


Electro-Optical Distributed Aperture System (EODAS), comprising six cutting edge infrared sensors per aircraft for 360 degree spherical situational awareness, missile detection and tracking.

The regional MRO&U for airframe in Japan is scheduled to be located at Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd. (Komaki-minami factory in Aichi Prefecture).

The regional MRO&U for engine in Japan is scheduled to be located at IHI Corporation (Mizuho factory in Tokyo).

GSDF will introduce 17 tilt-rotor aircraft (Osprey (V-22)) that can complement and strengthen the capabilities of transport helicopters (CH-47J) in terms of cruising speed and range. In June 2015, a contract


-----

**3 Building New Defense Equipment and Technology Cooperation**



- 1  Defense Equipment and Technology Cooperation
**with Major European Countries, etc.**

Defense equipment and technology cooperation with
major European countries, which have competitive
defense industries, will contribute to the strengthening of
security and defense cooperation with these countries as
well as the maintenance and strengthening of the defense
production and technological base in Japan. Therefore,
Japan seeks to establish and deepen relationships with
these countries.



- 2  Defense Equipment and Technology Cooperation,
**etc., with Partner Countries in the Asia-Pacifi c Region**

As partner countries in the Asia-Pacifi c region have
expressed their interest and expectation regarding
defense equipment and technology cooperation with
Japan, the MOD proactively seeks to build relationships
with these countries.


**(1) Australia**
With Australia, the Agreement between the Government
of Japan and the Government of Australia concerning the
Transfer of Defence Equipment and Technology[9] was
signed in July 2014. In addition, Japan commenced the
joint research in the fi eld of marine hydrodynamics in
December 2015.
Meanwhile, at the Japan-Australia Defence
Ministerial Meeting held in October 2014, it was agreed
to seek multifaceted defense equipment and technology
cooperation, including the following: (1) exploration of
potential cooperation opportunities in the F-35 program;
(2) acquisition reform dialogue with the Defence
Material Organisation of Australia; (3) at the request
of the Australian side, exploration of the possibility of
Japanese cooperation in the Australian Future Submarine
Program; (4) defense technology exchanges with the
Defence Science and Technology Organisation of
Australia (marine hydrodynamics fi eld and exchanges
among engineers and scientists); and (5) talks between
defense industries in both countries.
Furthermore, during the Japan-Australia Defense
Ministerial telephone conference in May 2015, the
Government of Australia explained its intention to
examine the possibility of jointly designing and building
Australian future submarines with Japan, and therefore,
requested that Japan participate in the process of
selecting Australian future submarines. In May 2015,
responding to this request, with the participation of
private companies, consultations with the Government
of Australia were commenced. At the same time, the
transfer of technical information for feasibility research
of the joint development and production of submarines
was deliberated at the National Security Council, and
it was affi rmed that this falls under the case in which
the overseas transfer could be permitted. In November
of the same year, Japan submitted the proposal for the


**(1) United Kingdom**
In July 2013, the governments of Japan and the United
Kingdom concluded an intergovernmental framework
agreement regarding joint development and other
initiatives related to defense equipment, etc.[7] In the same
month, the two countries also started joint research on
chemical and biological protection technology, marking
the fi rst time that Japan had engaged in such research
with a country other than the United States. Also, in July
2014, information on seeker technology for joint research
with the United Kingdom was determined by the National
Security Council as a case where overseas transfer may be
permitted. Responding to the said decision, in November
of the same year, a letter of arrangement was formulated
in relation to Japan-U.K. co-operative research project
on the feasibility of a joint new air-to-air missile and
the joint research was commenced. Furthermore, in
January 2016, it was confi rmed that the joint research
on personnel vulnerability evaluation (PVE) in relation
to the research and development of personal equipment
would be launched.

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-4-8 ((1) The United Kingdom)

**(2) France**
Japan and France established a committee on cooperation
in the fi eld of defense equipment and a committee on
export control in January 2014, and signed the Agreement
concerning the transfer of Defense Equipment and
Technology[8] in March 2015.

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-4-8 ((2) France)


Offi cial name: Agreement Between the Government of Japan and the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Concerning the Transfer of Arms and Military Technologies
Necessary to Implement Joint Research, Development and Production of Defence Equipment and Other Related Items

Offi cial name: Agreement between the Government of Japan and the Government of France concerning the Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technologyi


-----

**(3) ASEAN Countries**
Between Japan and ASEAN, opinion exchanges are
taking place regarding defense equipment and technology
cooperation in non-traditional security sectors, such as
humanitarian assistance, disaster relief and maritime
security through the Japan-ASEAN Defense ViceMinisterial Meetings and other occasions. Participating
countries have expressed their expectation for Japan’s
cooperation in effectively dealing with these issues. In
September 2014, as part of the Seminar on Capacity
Building in Maritime Security and Disaster Relief
(hosted by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs), an event to
introduce defense equipment, etc., by Japanese defenserelated companies was held at the MOD. In February
2016, the Agreement concerning the Transfer of
Defense Equipment and Technology was signed with the
Philippines, while during the Japan-Philippines Defense
Ministerial telephone conference in May of the same year
it was confirmed that the two countries would promote
defense equipment and technological cooperation, and
would develop the cooperation regarding the transfer of
MSDF’s TC-90 training aircraft TC-90 to the Philippine
Navy to be more concrete.

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-4-6 (Defense Cooperation and
Exchanges with ASEAN Countries); Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-2-3
((3) Japan–ASEAN Defense Vice-Ministerial Forum)

TC-90 under consultation regarding its transfer to the Philippines


Future Submarine Program. Note that, in tandem with the
request to Japan, the Government of Australia was also
making a request to German and French companies to
participate in the selection procedure.
Afterwards, in April 2016, the Government of
Australia announced that they selected a French company
as their international partner for the Future Submarine
Program. The Government of Australia explained this
decision by stating that this company had demonstrated
the most suitable capabilities to fulfill the overall requests
on capabilities which were specific to Australia.

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-4-1 (Japan-Australia Defense
Cooperation and Exchanges)

**(2) India**
With India, which has been considering the acquisition of
amphibious search and rescue aircraft, the establishment
of the Joint Working Group (JWG) to facilitate bilateral
cooperation for the US-2 aircraft was decided during the
Japan-India Summit Meeting held in May 2013. So far,
three JWG meetings have been held in total in which the
Japanese representatives provided information on the
performance, overview of operations, production and
assembly, and maintenance, etc. of the US-2, including
the offer of an opportunity to experience a US-2 flight
and to visit the factory to the Indian delegation of the
JWG. Furthermore, talks between the two countries are
taking place to prepare the formulation of a roadmap for
industry-to-industry cooperation, including technology
transfer and production within India. Also, in response
to the Japan-India Summit Meeting in September 2014,
the first Japan-India Joint Working Group on Defence
Equipment and Cooperation was held in March 2015 in
order to promote cooperation in defense equipment and
technology. At the Summit Meeting in December 2015,
the Agreement between the Government of Japan and the
Government of India concerning the Transfer of Defence
Equipment and Technology[10] was signed. It was expressed
to explore potential future defense equipment and
technology cooperation such as projects including US-2.

See>> Part III, Chapter 2, Section 1-4-3 (Japan-India Defense Cooperation
and Exchanges)


-----

**4 Adapting Defense Equipment for Civilian Use**


In August 2010, the MOD compiled a set of guidelines
for the development of a concrete system for converting
aircraft to civilian use, while in 2011, it also developed the
application procedure for private companies interested in
civilian use. So far, technical data related to the civilian use
of the US-2 amphibian rescue aircraft and the F7 engine
that are mounted on P-1 fi xed wing patrol aircraft have
been disclosed and released in response to requests from
the implementing companies. The possibility of civilian
use of equipment other than aircraft will be considered
based on the intentions of the defense industry.

**5 Technology Control**


In promoting defense equipment and technology
cooperation internationally, it is necessary to evaluate the
sensitivity and strategic value of defense technology and
dual-use technology, and protect those technologies that
should be protected as strengths of Japan. At the same


P-1 patrol aircraft with which there is an ongoing effort to transfer its engine to private use

time, it is necessary to strengthen the technology control
functions by avoiding the risk of their conversion into
weapons from the perspective of Japan’s security. As
such, cooperation with the Ministry of Economy, Trade
and Industry will be promoted.


**6 Other**


In December 2014, the “Committee on Challenges
surrounding the Transfer of Defense Equipment and
Technology,” consisting of external experts, was launched
to review the system for smoothly and appropriately


advancing cooperation in defense equipment and
technology for the security of Japan, and in September
2015 reports were compiled and submitted from this
Committee to the MOD.


-----

**The Current Status of Defense Production and Technological Bases,**
**Section 4**
**and the Strategy on Defense Production and Technological Bases**


**1 The Current Status of Japan’s Defense Production and Technological Bases**


The term “defense production and technological bases”
refers to the human, physical and technological bases
for development, production, operation, sustainment and
maintenance, remodeling, and refurbishment of defense
equipment required for the MOD/SDF activities. As
Japan has no national arsenal (state-owned munitions
factory), most of those base is covered by companies (the
defense industry) that manufacture defense equipment
and associated items. Therefore, a broad range of
companies,[1] which own specialized and advanced skills
and facilities are involved in the defense production
and technological bases. In addition, volume effi ciency
of defense production is unlikely to be expected due to
its market being limited to the demand from the MOD.
The degree of defense demand dependence (the ratio of
defense-related sales that accounts for the entire company
sales) is approximately 5% on average, indicating that the
defense business does not comprise the main business of
many companies.
On the other hand, increasing per unit cost and
maintenance/sustainment costs due to the advances in
recent defense equipment and an increase in imports of
foreign-made equipment, such as U.S.-made aircraft,
have caused a decrease in the number of units procured.

**2 Defense Production and Technological Bases Strategy**


- 1  Context of Formulation of Strategy on Defense
**Production and Technological Bases, etc.**


In addition, despite the trend in increasing research and
development costs, the ratio of research and development
expenditure to defense-related expenditure has leveled
off. Furthermore, Japan’s defense production and
technological bases also face challenges in retaining
and passing on skills and techniques, and there has been
an emerging issue that some companies, which cannot
handle the reduced procurement units, have pulled out
of the defense business. There has also been exposure to
changes in the international security environment such
as the realignment of the Western defense industries
and advances in international joint development and
production projects. Amidst these situations, there are
new changes emerging in the framework, such as the
transfer of defense equipment and technology based on
the Three Principles on Transfer of Defense Equipment
and Technology, which was approved by the Cabinet in
April 2014.

See>> Fig. III-3-4-1 (Current Status of the Unit Price and the Acquisition
Quantity of Defense Equipment); Fig. III-3-4-2 (Trends in the Maintenance
and Upgrade Expenditures for Equipment, etc.); Fig. III-3-4-3
(Current Status of Research & Development Budget); Part I,
Chapter 3, Section 6-2 (Trends Concerning Defense Production
and Technological Bases); Part III, Chapter 3, Section 3-1 (Three
Principles on Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology)

- 2  Composition of the Strategy


**(1) Context of Formulation of Strategy on Defense**
**Production and Technological Bases**

“The Strategy on Defense Production and Technological
Bases” has made the following three points clear: (1) the
context of the formulation of the strategy on defense
production and technological bases and the historical
positioning of this strategy; (2) characteristics of defense
production and technological bases; (3) changes in the
security environment surrounding defense production
and technological bases.


In light of the current situation, for the purpose
of maintaining and strengthening Japan’s defense
production and technological bases, which are important
and essential elements supporting Japan’s defense
capability, the “Strategy on Defense Production and
Technological Bases” was adopted in June 2014. The
Strategy responded to the National Security Strategy
and the National Defense Program Guidelines (NDPG),
replacing “kokusankahoshin (guideline for domestic
development/production).”[2]

See>> Reference 5 (National Security Strategy (Outline)); Reference 6
(NATIONAL DEFENSE PROGRAM GUIDELINES for FY2014 and beyond)


For example, it is said that there are approximately 1,100 fi ghter aircraft-related companies, approximately 1,300 tank-related companies, and approximately 8,300 destroyer–related companies.


-----

|110 16|Self-propelled guns|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||Armored vehicles Tanks||
|47|||
|54 6 41.6|||
|7.6 35.6 32 35 30 7.4 6 6 24 47 21.2 16 6|||
|17 12 8 18 12.8 11.2 14 13 10|||

|5|Minesweepers|
|---|---|
||Submarines Destroyers|
|2 3.8 1.4 3 3||
|2.6 1 2.4 1 1 0.8 0.6 2||
|1 1 1 1 1 0.8||
|2 1.4 1 1 1 1 0.8||

|99|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||Rotary-wing aircraft Fixed-wing aircraft||
|47|Fighter aircraft Tilt-Rotor Aircraft||
|56 42.6 29 36|||
|31 31 3 22 19.4 1188 22|||
|18 1166 21 14.8 8 9 9 5.8 10.8 0.8 6 2 45 6 5|||

|Fig. III-3-4-2|Trends in the Maintenance and Upgrade Expenditures for Equipment, etc.|
|---|---|
|(100 million yen) 11,000 Maintenance and upgrade expenditures for equipment etc. (100 million yen) 9,000 8,671 8,237 8,211 8,285 7,923 7,755 7,803 7,786 7,562 7,575 7,479 7,180 6,972 7,000 6,794 6,790 6,837 6,829 6,600 6,642 6,610 6,372 6,477 6,184 5,737 5,339 5,000 4,769 4,908 4,400 0 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 (FY) Note: “Maintenance and upgrade expenditure” refers to the budget for repair costs for equipment, consumable goods costs, and service costs (repair costs exclude those repair costs for the extension of vessel life and modernization of aircraft).||


Fig. III-3-4-1 Current Status of the Unit Price and the Acquisition Quantity of Defense Equipment

Status of Procurement: Unit Price

Type-74 Tank: Approximately 0.39 billion yen Oyashio type: Approximately 52.0 billion yen E-2C: Approximately 9.94 billion yen
(contracted in FY1989) (contracted in FY1993) (contracted in FY1990)
**(2.5 times increase)** **(1.24 times increase)** **(2.34 times increase)**
Type-10 Tank: Approximately 1 billion yen Soryu type: Approximately 64.3 billion yen E-2D: Approximately 23.31 billion yen
(contracted in FY2014) (contracted in FY2015) (contracted in FY2015)

Status of Procurement: Quantity

Trend in the annual average procurement Trend in the annual average procurement Trend in the annual average procurement
quantity of the main vehicles quantity of the main vessels quantity of the main aircraft
(Data shown for the period prior to (Data shown for the period prior to (Data shown for the period prior to
FY2012 is the annual average for each period) FY2012 is the annual average for each period) FY2012 is the annual average for each period)

Number of vehicles Number of vessels Number of aircraft

120 6 100 **99**

**110**

Self-propelled guns Minesweepers Rotary-wing aircraft

100 **16** Armored vehicles 5 **5** Submarines 80 Fixed-wing aircraft

Tanks Destroyers **47** Fighter aircraft

80 4 **2** **3.8** Tilt-Rotor Aircraft

**47** 60 **56**

60 **54** 3 **1.4** **2.6** **3** **3** **42.6**

**6** **1** **2.4** **1** **1** 40 **29** **36**

40 **41.67.6** **35.6** **32** **35** 2 **1** **0.8** **0.6** **2** **31** **22** **31** **3**

20 **47** **30** **21.2** **7.417** **126** **166** **246** 1 **2** **1** **0.8** **1** **1** **1** 20 **18** **19.4** **16** **18** **22**

0 **18** **12.8** **11.2** **14** **13** **108** 0 **1.4** **0.8** **1** **1** **1** **1** 0 **21** **9** **14.85.8** **10.80.8** **68** **2** **459** **65**

FY1983– FY1993– FY2003– FY2008– FY2013 FY2014 FY2015 FY1983– FY1993– FY2003– FY2008– FY2013 FY2014 FY2015 FY1983– FY1993– FY2003– FY2008– FY2013 FY2014 FY2015
FY1992 FY2002 FY2007 FY2012 FY1992 FY2002 FY2007 FY2012 FY1992 FY2002 FY2007 FY2012


-----

Fig. III-3-4-3 Current Status of Research & Development Budget

**Defense R&D Budget of Major Countries (FY2015)** **Percentage of R&D Budget out of Defense Budget of Major**
**Countries (FY2015)**

(100 million yen) (%)

-  FY2014 -  FY2014

80,000 15

**74,106**

**11.72**

60,000

10

4,000 **7.29***

**2,848***

**2,570*** 5 **4.14*4.14***

2,000 **3.50**

**1,317** **1,107** **1,5171,517** **2.44** **2.28** **2.65**

**130**

0 0

USA UK France ROK Sweden Germany Japan USA UK France ROK Sweden Germany Japan

Source: “OECD:Main Science and Technology Indicators”
“SIPRI Military Expenditure Databese ©SIPRI 2016”


**VOICE**

**Defense Industry that Supports Defense Capability Build-Up** **Column**

**Business Development Offi ce Manager Fujikura Parachute Co., Ltd**
**Mr. Shinya Yasuda**

Our company, Fujikura Parachute Co., Ltd, is a manufacturer, which has been making parachutes and various other kinds of life-saving
equipment. Since its foundation in 1939, the company has produced and sold over 400,000 parachutes, and we are proud of our contribution
to the JGSDF achieving the record of 600,000 parachute drops without any accidents, and we strive to gain our customers’ trust, placing
maximum priority on human life. Two years ago, we decided to exhibit at the EUROSATORY 2014 for the fi rst time. Following the delivery of
the Airborne Parachute Type 13 developed by our company to the JGSDF and the formulation of the Three Principles on Transfer of Defense
Equipment and Technology, we wondered whether the technology of our company would be accepted by the world. Thankfully, we received
highly positive evaluations from many customers from all over the world, which gave us the courage to work towards entering new markets.
However, it is a huge step that we enter into global market because we have done business only in Japan, so we have no time to lose for
everything including overseas marketing research and global human resources development. In addition, the overseas sales of our products,
which are classifi ed as defense equipment, will not move forward without intergovernmental adjustment. While it is not easy to land on new
ground, we are determined to drop down on overseas countries as a fi rst batch, like the JGSDF fi rst airborne brigade, in anticipation of the
future defense industry and in order to contribute to the security of Japan.

Airborne Parachute Type 13 The author (left) giving an explanation at Defense & Security 2015 in Thailand


-----

**(2) Goals and Significance of Maintaining and Strengthening**
**Defense Production and Technological Bases**

The MOD intends to (1) ensure sovereignty of security,
(2) potentially contribute to deterrence enhancement,
and maintain and improve bargaining power, and
(3) contribute to the sophistication of the domestic
industry in Japan driven by cutting-edge technology.

**(3) Basic Stance for Promoting Measures**
The MOD intends to promote necessary measures based
on the following basic viewpoints: (1) establishing
long-term partnership between the private and public
sector; (2) strengthening international competitiveness;
(3) ensuring consistency with effective and efficient
acquisition of defense equipment.


based on the Three Principles on Transfer of Defense
Equipment and Technology.

**(5) Measures for Maintaining and Strengthening Defense**
**Production and Technological Bases**

Considering Japan’s severe financial condition, the MOD
will promote the following measures: (1) improvement
of the contract system; (2) efforts regarding research and
development; (3) defense equipment and technology
cooperation; (4) initiatives regarding defense industrial
organizations including the building of a robust production
and technology platform through understanding actual
conditions of supply chain; (5) strengthening of the
MOD’s structure; and (6) collaborative measures with
other relevant ministries.

See>> Fig. III-3-4-4 (Measures for Maintaining and Strengthening Defense
Production and Technological Bases)


**(4) Methods of Defense Equipment Procurement**
With regard to the defense equipment procurement,
currently multiple methods, such as domestic
development, international joint development and
production, licensed domestic production, utilization of
commercially produced goods, and imports, are adopted.
These methods directly affect defense production and
technological base. According to the characteristics of
defense equipment, it is necessary to select the acquisition
method appropriately, including international joint
development and production, I which became more agile
and flexible implementation of which became achievable


**(6) Courses of Actions for Each Defense Equipment Sectors**
In deciding the MOD’s principle regarding defense
production and technological bases of the main defense
equipment sectors (such as land equipment, supplies,
etc., ships, aircraft, explosives, guided weapons,
communications electronics and command control
systems, unmanned equipment, space systems and
cyber), the MOD will take the following flow: Based
on the matters indicated in NDPG to be emphasized
considering strengthening the architecture of the SDF,

|Measures for Maintaining and Strengthening Defense Production and Technological Bases|Col2|
|---|---|
|Improve contract system|❍ Utilize negotiated contracts ❍ Introduce longer-term contracts (multi-year procurements) ❍ Establish flexible systems for taking orders such as joint ventures ❍ Decrease procurement cost and improve companies’ incentives to reduce cost ❍ Enhance project management throughout equipment’s life-cycle|
|Measures regarding Research and Development (R&D)|❍ Formulate a R&D vision ❍ Develop ability to survey technological information including civilian advanced technology ❍ Strengthen cooperation with universities and research institutes ❍ Cooperation with and utilizing R&D programs including those that cover dual-use technology ❍ Fund advanced research with promising output for defense ❍ Strengthen cooperation with overseas organizations|
|Defense equipment and technology cooperation|❍ Deepen defense equipment and technology cooperation with the United States ❍ Establish new defense equipment and technology cooperation ❍ Contributing to international logistics systems ❍ Improving bases for defense equipment and technology cooperation ❍ Promote application of defense equipment to civilian use ❍ Technology control and information security|
|Measures regarding defense industry organization|❍ Promote understanding of significance of defense business and industry ❍ Maintain resilient supply chains ❍ Defense industrial organizations and applications of contract systems|
|Strengthen MOD’s structure|❍ Implementation of efforts such as unification of departments associated with equipment acquisition, as a part of MOD reform ❍ Implementation of strengthening inspection and audit functions as well as the training of human resources in project management and procurement|
|Measures through cooperation with relevant ministries|❍ Consideration of support measures through the use of policies of other ministries|

|Fig. III-3-4-4|Measures for Maintaining and Strengthening Defense Production and Technological Bases|
|---|---|
|Measures for Maintaining and Strengthening Defense Production and Technological Bases ❍ Utilize negotiated contracts ❍ Introduce longer-term contracts (multi-year procurements) Improve contract system ❍ Establish flexible systems for taking orders such as joint ventures ❍ Decrease procurement cost and improve companies’ incentives to reduce cost ❍ Enhance project management throughout equipment’s life-cycle ❍ Formulate a R&D vision ❍ Develop ability to survey technological information including civilian advanced technology Measures regarding ❍ Strengthen cooperation with universities and research institutes Research and ❍ Cooperation with and utilizing R&D programs including those that cover dual-use technology Development (R&D) ❍ Fund advanced research with promising output for defense ❍ Strengthen cooperation with overseas organizations ❍ Deepen defense equipment and technology cooperation with the United States ❍ Establish new defense equipment and technology cooperation Defense equipment and ❍ Contributing to international logistics systems technology cooperation ❍ Improving bases for defense equipment and technology cooperation ❍ Promote application of defense equipment to civilian use ❍ Technology control and information security Measures regarding ❍ Promote understanding of significance of defense business and industry defense industry ❍ Maintain resilient supply chains organization ❍ Defense industrial organizations and applications of contract systems ❍ Implementation of efforts such as unification of departments associated with equipment acquisition, as a part of MOD reform Strengthen MOD’s ❍ Implementation of strengthening inspection and audit functions as well as the training of human resources in project management and structure procurement Measures through cooperation with relevant ❍ Consideration of support measures through the use of policies of other ministries ministries||


-----

the MOD intends point out the future directions of the
maintenance and strengthening of defense production
and technological bases and the acquisition plan for each
defense equipment sectors. By deciding the principle,


efforts will be contributed to increasing predictability
for companies.

See>> Fig. III-3-4-5 (Direction in the Various Defense Equipment Sectors
(Outline))

|Ground equipment|❍ With regard to tanks and artillery, making use of its world-class level of strength in this area, the MOD will maintain its production and technological bases to the appropriate level. In addition, production and technological bases for mobile combat vehicles etc., will be built. ❍ Through further promotion of standardization (categorization), effective and efficient acquisition as well as the maintenance and strengthening of production and technology bases of wheeled vehicles will be implemented. ❍ Regarding amphibious capabilities, aspects of Japan’s technological weakness will be reinforced as necessary, while defense equipment and technology cooperation that make use of our strengths will be promoted.|
|---|---|
|Supplies, etc.|❍ Based on factors such as compatibility with the physical characteristics of the Japanese people, the relevant foundations will be maintained, thereby making it possible to continue the procurement of supplies from domestic companies. ❍ As for fields where Japan can excel, such as chemical protection equipment, adapting equipment for civilian use, and defense equipment and technology cooperation will be considered.|
|Ships|❍ With regard to vessels, in order to enable the MOD to respond to the latest technology such as stealth capabilities, production and technological bases will be maintained and strengthened through the entry of multiple prime enterprises. ❍ Consideration will be given to the bulk order of multiple escort ships with a standardized design. In doing so, a review of the format of contracts will also be considered, taking into account the effects of lowering prices. ❍ Since the National Defense Program Guidelines state that the number of submarines will be increased to 22, the existing bases will be maintained and strengthened through continuous research and development for enhancing capabilities.|
|Aircraft|❍ For the acquisition of F-35A aircraft, the MOD will make efforts to promote the industrial participation of Japanese companies in production and to prepare for the start of Regional MRO&U for F-35 aircraft in the Asia-Pacific region. As for future fighter aircraft, necessary measures including empirical research will be taken so as to maintain the option of the development of future fighter aircraft including the possibility of international joint development of an aircraft to replace the F-2 when it is time to retire it. ❍ With regard to transport aircraft and amphibian rescue aircraft, multifaceted use of the results of development such as the possibility of adaptation for civilian use, and defense equipment and technology cooperation will be promoted. For rotary-wing aircraft, keeping both the civilian and defense demand in mind, international joint development and production will be considered as an option based on the technologies cultivated through licensed domestic production and domestic development.|
|Explosives|❍ A certain scale of procurement from domestic companies will continue to be made possible and bases, which ensure the necessary scale of explosives in various situations, will be maintained.|
|Guided weapons|❍ In order to improve air defense performance, technological considerations regarding future SAMs will be pursued to further strengthen the relevant technological bases. A vision for research and development for the implementation of technological examinations of future guided weapons will be established including propulsion devices such as fixed rocket motors and other technologies required to improve the performance of various types of guided weapons such as the extension of their launch range. ❍ Regarding international joint development as one option, efficient acquisition methods will be selected based also on the enhancement of interoperability with allied and friendly nations. ❍ Along with the continuous promotion of SM-3 Block IIA Cooperative Development (SCD) between Japan and the United States, necessary measures for the transition to the production and deployment phases will be taken, considering the sustainment and enhancement of production and technological phases.|
|Communications electronics and command control systems|❍ Research and development on cutting-edge technology for the bases required for defense will be implemented with priority, involving the improvement of the detection performance of fixed warning and control radar systems as well as the simultaneous, parallel use of multiple sonar systems. At the same time, the technological bases will be maintained and strengthened by pursuing the applicability of cutting-edge civilian technology. ❍ Because systems capable of responding to battles based around network data are necessary for future command control systems, civilian technological bases, which are progressing at a significant pace, will be adopted to ensure a system replacement at the appropriate timing reflecting the latest technological standards. ❍ Defense equipment and technology cooperation, as well as civilian use of wireless software technology, radar technology, which uses high-output semiconductors, and other technologies will be promoted.|
|Unmanned equipment|❍ In light of the trend towards defense technology such as future battle conditions, smarter technologies and networking, a vision for research and development will be established and proactive research will be implemented for the enhancement of technological bases in order to present a direction of unmanned equipment whilst taking the perspective of integrated operation into account. ❍ Defense equipment and technological cooperation such as research collaboration with research institutions and joint research and development with other countries will be advanced in order to raise the level of Japan’s technological bases.|
|Cyber and space systems|❍ While cooperating with the MOD’s initiatives to increase its capability to respond to cyber attacks and policies relating to the use of space development, from the perspective of the defense of Japan, the future outlook of defense production and technological bases, which will be required in the future, will be discussed.|

|Fig. III-3-4-5|Direction in the Various Defense Equipment Sectors (Outline)|
|---|---|
|❍ With regard to tanks and artillery, making use of its world-class level of strength in this area, the MOD will maintain its production and technological bases to the appropriate level. In addition, production and technological bases for mobile combat vehicles etc., will be built. Ground ❍ Through further promotion of standardization (categorization), effective and efficient acquisition as well as the maintenance and strengthening of equipment production and technology bases of wheeled vehicles will be implemented. ❍ Regarding amphibious capabilities, aspects of Japan’s technological weakness will be reinforced as necessary, while defense equipment and technology cooperation that make use of our strengths will be promoted. ❍ Based on factors such as compatibility with the physical characteristics of the Japanese people, the relevant foundations will be maintained, thereby making it possible to continue the procurement of supplies from domestic companies. Supplies, etc. ❍ As for fields where Japan can excel, such as chemical protection equipment, adapting equipment for civilian use, and defense equipment and technology cooperation will be considered. ❍ With regard to vessels, in order to enable the MOD to respond to the latest technology such as stealth capabilities, production and technological bases will be maintained and strengthened through the entry of multiple prime enterprises. ❍ Consideration will be given to the bulk order of multiple escort ships with a standardized design. In doing so, a review of the format of contracts Ships will also be considered, taking into account the effects of lowering prices. ❍ Since the National Defense Program Guidelines state that the number of submarines will be increased to 22, the existing bases will be maintained and strengthened through continuous research and development for enhancing capabilities. ❍ For the acquisition of F-35A aircraft, the MOD will make efforts to promote the industrial participation of Japanese companies in production and to prepare for the start of Regional MRO&U for F-35 aircraft in the Asia-Pacific region. As for future fighter aircraft, necessary measures including empirical research will be taken so as to maintain the option of the development of future fighter aircraft including the possibility of international joint development of an aircraft to replace the F-2 when it is time to retire it. Aircraft ❍ With regard to transport aircraft and amphibian rescue aircraft, multifaceted use of the results of development such as the possibility of adaptation for civilian use, and defense equipment and technology cooperation will be promoted. For rotary-wing aircraft, keeping both the civilian and defense demand in mind, international joint development and production will be considered as an option based on the technologies cultivated through licensed domestic production and domestic development. ❍ A certain scale of procurement from domestic companies will continue to be made possible and bases, which ensure the necessary scale of Explosives explosives in various situations, will be maintained. ❍ In order to improve air defense performance, technological considerations regarding future SAMs will be pursued to further strengthen the relevant technological bases. A vision for research and development for the implementation of technological examinations of future guided weapons will be established including propulsion devices such as fixed rocket motors and other technologies required to improve the performance of various types of guided weapons such as the extension of their launch range. Guided weapons ❍ Regarding international joint development as one option, efficient acquisition methods will be selected based also on the enhancement of interoperability with allied and friendly nations. ❍ Along with the continuous promotion of SM-3 Block IIA Cooperative Development (SCD) between Japan and the United States, necessary measures for the transition to the production and deployment phases will be taken, considering the sustainment and enhancement of production and technological phases. ❍ Research and development on cutting-edge technology for the bases required for defense will be implemented with priority, involving the improvement of the detection performance of fixed warning and control radar systems as well as the simultaneous, parallel use of multiple sonar systems. At the same time, the technological bases will be maintained and strengthened by pursuing the applicability of cutting-edge civilian Communications technology. electronics and ❍ Because systems capable of responding to battles based around network data are necessary for future command control systems, civilian command control technological bases, which are progressing at a significant pace, will be adopted to ensure a system replacement at the appropriate timing systems reflecting the latest technological standards. ❍ Defense equipment and technology cooperation, as well as civilian use of wireless software technology, radar technology, which uses high-output semiconductors, and other technologies will be promoted. ❍ In light of the trend towards defense technology such as future battle conditions, smarter technologies and networking, a vision for research and development will be established and proactive research will be implemented for the enhancement of technological bases in order to present a Unmanned direction of unmanned equipment whilst taking the perspective of integrated operation into account. equipment ❍ Defense equipment and technological cooperation such as research collaboration with research institutions and joint research and development with other countries will be advanced in order to raise the level of Japan’s technological bases. ❍ While cooperating with the MOD’s initiatives to increase its capability to respond to cyber attacks and policies relating to the use of space Cyber and space development, from the perspective of the defense of Japan, the future outlook of defense production and technological bases, which will be systems required in the future, will be discussed.||


-----

**Chapter 4** **[Interaction with Local Communities ]**
**and Japanese Citizens**


**Section 1** **Collaboration with Local Communities**


**1 Activities in Civic Life and Contributions to Society**


The Ministry of Defense (MOD)/the Self-Defense Forces
(SDF) conducts activities to support the lives of citizens
in a range of fi elds, in response to requests from municipal
governments and relevant organizations. Such activities
contribute to further deepening the trust in the SDF, and
provide SDF personnel with pride and confi dence.
The Ground Self-Defense Force (GSDF) handles
the disposal of unexploded ordnance found throughout
Japan. In FY2015, there were approx. 1,392 such cases
(approx. 43 tons). In particular, cases handled in Okinawa
Prefecture accounted for approx. 47% of the total cases.
The Maritime Self-Defense Force (MSDF) clears and
disposes of underwater mines and other dangerous
explosives, and approx. 1,832 explosives (approx.
3.5 tons) were handled in FY2015.
The SDF camps and bases allow the local residents
access to their facilities to the extent that it does not
interfere with unit activities, thus striving to foster
friendly interaction with local communities. The SDF
also provides transportation and other assistance at a
variety of athletic events. In addition, it supports regional

GSDF personnel carrying out the disposal of unexploded ordinance


medical treatment efforts by providing general medical
care at some SDF hospitals as well as conducting urgent
transport for emergency patients from isolated islands.
Furthermore, based on national policy,[1] the MOD/SDF
ensures opportunities for local small and medium sized
enterprises to receive orders, while taking effi ciency into
account, by such measures as the promotion of separated/
divided ordering[2] and the securing of competition

MSDF aircraft conducting a remote island emergency transportation mission


ASDF Blue Impulse fl ying over JR Hakodate Station at the Hokkaido Shinkansen Launch Event


“The Contract Basic Policy of the Government regarding Small and Medium Enterprises in FY2015” (Cabinet decision on August 28, 2015)


-----

**y**

**The SDF as an Organization Existing with Local Communities** **Column**

The role of the SDF in local communities is not limited to disaster relief dispatch.
The GSDF holds fi ve armies nationwide, namely Northern, North Eastern, Eastern, Middle, and Western Armies, and each of these armies
conducts cooperation activities that suit the characteristics of each region.
Among these cooperation activities, unexploded ordinance disposal is common across the armies, and they deal with approximately 1,400
cases on average every year. Due to the history of the Battle of Okinawa, the number of disposal cases in the Kyushu and Okinawa regions
(GSDF Western Army) still account for 50% of the total disposal cases even after 70 years since the end of the battle. Transporting emergency
patients also counts for over 200 cases annually (GSDF alone), and the overwhelming majority (70-80%) of these cases occur in the remote
islands of Nagasaki, Kagoshima and Okinawa. Also, recently removing snow from houses where an elderly person is living alone is becoming
an issue in snowy cold places. In the ongoing depopulation areas in particular, there are not many young people who can carry out such a work.
For this reason, there have been increasing cases in Hokkaido (GSDF Northern Army) that the SDF that stations in the vicinity provides support
for removing snow as volunteers.
In addition to providing the assistance for various traditional events held in each region, in the Tohoku region (GSDF North Eastern Army), people
have larger expectations on the SDF’s contribution to memorial events and town development connected to the Great East Japan Earthquake.
Meanwhile, support for national events taking place in each region is also an important role of the SDF. Following the support for the
National Sports Festival in Wakayama in 2015, the GSDF Army (GSDF Middle Army) provided support to transport state guests along with
other support during the G7 2016 Ise-Shima Summit held in May 2016. The SDF intends to contribute to a successful Olympic Games by
providing security assistance under the Ground Central Command to be newly formed and the GSDF Eastern Army during the Tokyo Olympic
Games in 2020.

Volunteering to remove snow in Akabira City, Hokkaido (GSDF 10th Infantry Support for the rowing competition at the National Sports Festival in Wakayama
Regiment (Takikawa City, Hokkaido)) (The Third Tank Battalion (Takashima City, Shiga Prefecture))


amongst companies within the same qualifi cation and
grade divisions.[3]

**2 Cooperation from Local Governments and Other Relevant Organizations for the SDF**


Amid the harsh recruitment and employment situation,
the cooperation from local governments and relevant
organizations is vital to secure highly qualifi ed personnel
and to support the reemployment of uniformed SDF
personnel who retire at a relatively young age under the
SDF’s early retirement system.
Furthermore, SDF camps and bases maintain
close relations with local communities, and therefore,


See>> Reference 69 (Activities in Civic Life); Reference 70 (Activities
Contributing to Society)

various forms of support and cooperation from the local
community are indispensable for the SDF to conduct
its diverse activities, including training exercises and
disaster dispatch. Moreover, units dispatched overseas
for international peace cooperation missions and other
duties receive support and assistance from the relevant
organizations for the procedures involved.[4]


Out of the bidding participation eligibility categorized into grade A-D, this refers to competition between grade C or D only, which comprise mostly of small and medium enterprises.

In addition to this kind of support, many letters of encouragement are sent from the public to the SDF personnel, which raise the morale of SDF personnel and reinforce their awareness of serving the people


-----

**3 Activities for Securing Understanding and Cooperation of Municipal Governments and Local Residents**


Regional Defense Bureaus make efforts to build
cooperative relationships with local communities, through
collaboration with SDF units and Provincial Cooperation
Offi ces. Specifi cally, Regional Defense Bureaus hold
seminars on defense issues for local residents and provide
explanations about the Annual White Paper, “Defense
of Japan,” to local governments in order to gain wide
understanding. They also host Japan-U.S. friendship
programs for citizens who live near U.S. Forces facilities
and areas in Japan, U.S. Forces personnel, and their
families to interact with each other through sports and
music regarding defense policies and the realignment of
the U.S. Forces in Japan. Furthermore, Regional Defense
Bureaus provide necessary explanations and conduct
coordination for relevant local governments when
implementing the realignments of the U.S. Forces and the
reorganization of SDF units, deployment of equipment,
and training, as well as conducting the necessary liaison
and coordination in the event of disasters, accidents, or any
other emergency situations, such as major earthquakes.
It should be noted that in recent years, cases of
interference against SDF and U.S. Forces aircraft via kite
fl ying and laser irradiation have frequently occurred in
the areas surrounding air stations in Atsugi and Futenma.
These are extremely dangerous and malicious acts that
may disrupt a pilot’s ability to control aircraft and result
in a catastrophe such as a crash. From the viewpoint of
preventing unforeseen accidents in advance, as well as
ensuring the safety of the area and the safe operation of
aircraft, the MOD disseminates information regarding the

**4 Measures to Promote Harmony between Defense Facilities and Surrounding Areas**


- 1  Scale and Features of Defense Facilities


A defense issues seminar held in Sapporo, Hokkaido


An image of being exposed to laser irradiation in a cockpit

risks involved in those acts to local residents by putting up
posters and requests their cooperation in reporting to the
police while closely cooperating with relevant ministries
and agencies as well as relevant local governments.


noise and other issues, impacting the living environment
of local residential communities.

See>> Fig. III-4-1-1 (Status of SDF Facilities (Land Plots)); Fig. III-4-1-2
(Status of Facilities and Areas of U.S. Forces in Japan (Exclusively
Used Facilities))

- 2  Initiatives to Promote Harmony between Defense
**Facilities and Surrounding Areas**


The uses of defense facilities[5] are diverse, and they often
require large volumes of land. In addition, as of January
1, 2016, approx. 25% of the land area of the facilities and
areas (for exclusive use) of the U.S. Forces in Japan is
jointly used by the SDF in accordance with the Japan-U.S.
Status of Forces Agreement, with the purpose to enhance
the diversity and effi ciency of Japan-U.S. bilateral training
and exercises. Meanwhile, problems related to restricted
establishment and operations of defense facilities have
emerged due to the urbanization of areas around many of
the defense facilities. Also, another problem is that frequent
aircraft operations such as takeoffs and landings cause


Defense facilities, as the foundation that supports the
defense capabilities of Japan and the Japan-U.S. Security
Arrangements, are indispensable for our country’s
security. Therefore, it is necessary to maintain conditions
for constant and stable utilization by ensuring harmony


-----

|Col1|Total area: Approx. 1,087km2|
|---|---|

|Col1|Total area: Approx. 304km2|
|---|---|

|Other regions 10% Approx. 111km2 Kanto region 5% Approx. 57km2 Kyushu region 12% Approx. 135km2 Tohoku region 14% Approx. 147km2 Chubu region 16% Approx. 178km2|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Hokkaido region 42% Approx. 459km2|||||||||
|accounting for approx. 0.3% Total area: Approx. 1,087km2 of Japan’s land area|||||||||
|Maneuver Areas 75% Approx. 812km2|||||||||
|Airfields 7% Approx. 81km2 Barracks 5% Approx. 54km2 Others 13% Approx. 140km2|||||||||

|Other regions 7% Approx. 22km2 Tohoku region 8% Approx. 24km2 Kanto region 11% Approx. 32km2|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Okinawa Prefecture 74% Approx. 226km2|||||
|Total area: accounting for 0.08% of Approx. 304km2 Japan’s land area|||||
|Maneuver Areas 54% Approx. 164km2|||||
|Airfields 20% Approx. 60km2 Warehouses 13% Approx. 40km2 Others 13% Approx. 40km2|||||

|Purpose|Measures|Description of Measures|
|---|---|---|
|Preventing Noise Problems|Subsidies to finance sound insulation work|❍ Educational facilities such as elementary schools, junior high schools, and kindergartens; medical facilities such as hospitals and clinics; and welfare facilities such as nursery centers, day-service centers for the elderly, and special nursing homes for the elderly ❍ Housing|
||Compensation for relocations|❍ Compensation for relocating buildings ❍ Land procurement ❍ Improvement of public facilities such as roads, water-supply systems, and sewage facilities in the area where housing, etc., is to be relocated|
||Improving green belts|❍ Planting trees, installing grass fields|
|Preventing Nuisances Besides Noise|Subsidies to finance trouble prevention work|❍ Canals, reservoirs, roads, river improvement, television broadcast community reception facilities|
|Reducing Troubles Related to Living and Business|Subsidies for building facilities meant to stabilize people’s lives|❍ Roads, radio broadcast facilities, nursing homes, fire departments, parks, waste disposal facilities, welfare centers for the elderly, public facilities for learning, etc. ❍ Agricultural facilities, fishing facilities|
|Reducing Impact on Surrounding Areas|Provision of specified defense facilities environs improvement adjustment grants|❍ Improving public facilities such as traffic facilities, recreation centers, and welfare facilities ❍ Medical expenses, operating costs of community buses, assessment fees for earthquake resistance for school buildings, etc.*|

|Fig. III-4-1-3|Measures for Harmony Between Defense Facilities and Surrounding Areas|
|---|---|
|Purpose Measures Description of Measures ❍ Educational facilities such as elementary schools, junior high schools, and kindergartens; medical Subsidies to finance sound facilities such as hospitals and clinics; and welfare facilities such as nursery centers, day-service insulation work centers for the elderly, and special nursing homes for the elderly ❍ Housing Preventing Noise Problems ❍ Compensation for relocating buildings Compensation for ❍ Land procurement relocations ❍ Improvement of public facilities such as roads, water-supply systems, and sewage facilities in the area where housing, etc., is to be relocated Improving green belts ❍ Planting trees, installing grass fields Preventing Nuisances Subsidies to finance trouble ❍ Canals, reservoirs, roads, river improvement, television broadcast community reception facilities Besides Noise prevention work Subsidies for building ❍ Roads, radio broadcast facilities, nursing homes, fire departments, parks, waste disposal facilities, Reducing Troubles Related facilities meant to stabilize welfare centers for the elderly, public facilities for learning, etc. to Living and Business people’s lives ❍ Agricultural facilities, fishing facilities Provision of specified ❍ Improving public facilities such as traffic facilities, recreation centers, and welfare facilities Reducing Impact on defense facilities environs ❍ Medical expenses, operating costs of community buses, assessment fees for earthquake resistance Surrounding Areas improvement adjustment for school buildings, etc.* grants * Newly added due to the partial revision of the Act on Improvement of Living Environment of Areas Around Defense Facilities (effective as of April 27, 2011)||


Fig. III-4-1-1 Status of SDF Facilities (Land Plots)

(as of January 1, 2016)

Other regions 10% Approx. 111km[2]
Kanto region 5% Approx. 57km[2]
Kyushu region 12% Approx. 135km[2]
Tohoku region 14% Approx. 147km[2]

Chubu region
16% Approx. 178km[2]

Distribution Hokkaido region
by region 42% Approx. 459km[2]

accounting for approx. 0.3%
Total area: Approx. 1,087km[2]
of Japan’s land area

Distribution
by use Maneuver Areas 75% Approx. 812km[2]

Airfields 7% Approx. 81km[2]

Barracks 5% Approx. 54km[2]

Others 13% Approx. 140km[2]

0 20 40 60 80 100

(%)

Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.


Status of Facilities and Areas of U.S. Forces in
Fig. III-4-1-2
Japan (Exclusively Used Facilities)

(as of January 1, 2016)

Other regions 7% Approx. 22km[2]

Tohoku region 8% Approx. 24km[2]

Kanto region 11% Approx. 32km[2]

Distribution Okinawa Prefecture 74%
by region Approx. 226km[2]

Total area: accounting for 0.08% of
Approx. 304km[2] Japan’s land area

Distribution Maneuver Areas 54%
by use Approx. 164km[2]

Airfields 20% Approx. 60km[2]

Warehouses 13% Approx. 40km[2]

Others 13% Approx. 40km[2]

0 20 40 60 80 100

(%)

Notes: Numbers may not add up to 100 due to rounding.


between the defense facilities and the surrounding areas
as well as obtaining the understanding and cooperation of
the local residents. For that purpose, the MOD has taken
measures to promote harmony between defense facilities
and surrounding areas since 1974, based on the Act on
Improvement of Living Environment of Areas Around
Defense Facilities (Living Environment Improvement Act).

See>> Fig. III-4-1-3 (Measures for Harmony Between Defense Facilities and
Surrounding Areas); Reference 71 (Outline of Measures to Improve
the Living Environment in the Areas Surrounding Defense Facilities)

**(1) Measures of the Act on Improvement of Living**
**Environment of Areas Around Defense Facilities**

Based on the Act on Improvement of Living Environment
of Areas Around Defense Facilities the MOD has


implemented various measures to prevent, alleviate,
and mitigate impediments such as aircraft noise in the
surrounding areas caused by the SDF or U.S. Forces
activities, or by establishing and operating defense
facilities including airfields. Furthermore, taking into
consideration the requests of the relevant municipal
governments, the MOD partially revised the Living
Environment Improvement Act in 2011, and conducted
a review to make it possible for the specified defense
facilities environs improvement adjustment grants to be
applied to so-called soft projects, such as aid for medical
expenses. In addition, the MOD added defense facilities
to be eligible for these grants. Focused work is also
underway to provide residential sound insulation and


-----

efforts are being made to ensure its further progress.
Regarding the specifi ed defense facilities environs
improvement adjustment grants, the MOD has
implemented initiatives such as the ‘PDCA Cycle’ process
since April 2014, aiming to increase the effectiveness of
these grants.

See>> Reference 72 (Partial Amendment of the Law Concerning Adjustment,
etc. of the Living Environment in the Environs of Defense Facilities)

**(2) Considerations for Future Harmonization of Defense**
**Facilities and Surrounding Areas**

In response to the requests by related municipal
governments, the MOD continues to consider practical
ways to achieve more effective and effi cient measures to
harmonize defense facilities and surrounding areas, in
light of the severe fi scal situation.

See>> Fig. III-4-1-4 (FY2016 Costs for Countermeasures in Areas near
Bases (Based on Expenditures))

|Project|Mainland|Okinawa|
|---|---|---|
|Projects for preventing disturbances|105|15|
|Sound insulation projects|396|87|
|Measures related to relocations|37|1|
|Subsidies for stabilizing people’s livelihoods|231|22|
|Road improvement projects|62|3|
|Environs Improvement Adjustment Grants|180|32|
|Other projects|19|2|


FY2016 Costs for Countermeasures in Areas near
Fig. III-4-1-4
Bases (Based on Expenditures)

(100 million yen)

**Project** **Mainland** **Okinawa**

Projects for preventing disturbances 105 15

Sound insulation projects 396 87

Measures related to relocations 37 1
Subsidies for stabilizing people’s
231 22
livelihoods

Road improvement projects 62 3
Environs Improvement Adjustment
180 32
Grants

Other projects 19 2


**Commentary**

**Initiatives Taken by Local Authorities in the Vicinity of Defense Facilities** **Column**

To ensure the stability of the lives and the enhancement of the welfare of local residents, local authorities in the vicinity of defense facilities
conduct various developments and improvements of the living environment utilizing the national subsidy provided by the MOD to deal with
obstacles generated due to the presence of defense facilities.
For example, to prevent and reduce the noise generated by the takeoff and landing of aircraft at the airfi eld of the SDF and the U.S. Forces
in Japan, noise insulation work is conducted in schools and hospitals that require a quiet environment (a project using the subsidy scheme by
the MOD).
Particularly, local authorities in municipalities situated in the vicinity of defense facilities that are signifi cantly affected in terms of their living
environment and community development, various projects are carried out to ease the impact on the surrounding areas using the Provision of
Specifi ed Defense Facility Environs Improvement Adjustment Grant.

Example of noise Sound Example of project
insulation work absorption (Operation of a community bus)

Sound Ventilation and
insulation temperature holding

(Photo provided by Shibecha–cho, Hokkaido) (Photo provided by Shintomi-cho, Miyazaki Prefecture)

Noise insulation work involves the installation of soundproof sashes (sound In Shintomi-cho, Miyazaki Prefecture, where the Nyutabaru Airfield is
insulation), installation of air-conditioning equipment to keep the sealed located, the above grant is used for the purchase and operation of a
indoor environment comfortable (ventilation and temperature holding), and vehicle for the stable operation of community buses, which are necessary
the installation of sound absorption materials on the room walls and ceilings for the daily lives of the town residents in the area with no presence of
(sound absorption). public transport.

As these examples demonstrate, cooperation with relevant local authorities is essential for facilitating harmony between defense facilities
and their surrounding communities.


-----

**Public Relations Activities, Information Disclosure, and**
**Section 2**
**Related Activities**


**1 Various Public Relations Activities**


As the activities of the MOD/SDF cannot be carried out
without the understanding and support of the Japanese
people, it is important to be proactive in undertaking
easily comprehensible public relations activities and to
gain the trust and cooperation of the public.
According to a “Public Opinion Survey on the SelfDefense Forces and Security Issues” conducted by the
Cabinet Offi ce (in January 2015), the public expectations
and evaluations towards the SDF have been increasing
as the scope of MOD/SDF activities has expanded both
domestically and internationally. In light of this result,
the MOD/SDF will continue to conduct a variety of PR
activities, thereby striving to ensure better understanding
of the current status of the MOD/SDF.

See>> Reference 74 (“Public Opinion Survey on the Self Defense Forces and
Defense Issues” (excerpt) (Public Relations Offi ce of Cabinet Offi ce))

- 1  Website, Brochures, and Other Forms of PR


Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense Kumada exchanging opinions with local residents at
a Roundtable Talk (Akita City, Akita Prefecture)


The MOD/SDF conducts PR activities using the Internet such
as offi cial websites, video distribution, and social media.
The MOD has also been making great efforts to
provide accurate information in a more extensive and
timely fashion, by creating brochures, PR videos, and
manga editions of the defense white paper, as well as
providing assistance in editing the PR magazine MAMOR
and cooperation on media coverage.
Furthermore, based on the increasing interest in the
MOD/SDF initiatives by the international community,
the MOD has been striving to gain the understanding
of people in other countries by publishing the monthly
English magazine, “Japan Defense Focus.” It is proactively
transmitting information to the international community
through efforts such as providing international media
with opportunities to cover stories, enhancement of the
English section of the MOD website, publishing English
versions of the defense white paper and brochures, as
well as producing PR videos.

- 2  Events and PR Facilities


PR magazine MAMOR, which is produced with cooperation
from the MOD/SDF in its editing process

at camps and bases throughout the country, events
including equipment exhibitions and unit tours are held on
occasions such as the anniversary of a unit’s foundation.
In some instances, they also hold parades throughout
the cities, with cooperation from the local communities.
Furthermore, as part of the commemoration of the
SDF anniversary, the SDF Marching Festival is held at
Nippon Budokan arena every year. The festival attracted
approximately 40,000 visitors in total in 2015.
Concerning annual reviews by the SDF, a troop
review, a fl eet review, and an air review are hosted in
rotation by the GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF respectively. In
2015 a fleet review was held by the MSDF at Sagami


The MOD/SDF conducts activities to widely inform
nationals of the current circumstances of the SDF. These
activities include the GSDF Fuji Fire Power Exercise,
cruises to experience MSDF vessels, and demonstration
flights and boarding experiences on aircraft In addition


-----

**y**

**The SDF Marching Festival, an Event That Keeps on Evolving** **Column**

The SDF Marching Festival is held annually in autumn, and its 52nd event will take place this year. It aims to deepen the public understanding
of the SDF by introducing a wide range of SDF activities such as drill performance, by the GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF bands.
While the fi rst SDF Marching Festival took place at the Tokyo Metropolitan Gymnasium in 1963, the Nippon Budokan arena has been the
venue since 1973. Various international military bands have been invited as guest bands, and participated in the event since 1980, when the
U.S. Army Band was invited for the 1st time. Japan International guest bands are how are the integral part of the SDF Marching Festival adding
a glamorous atmosphere to the event.
At the FY2015 SDF Marching Festival, the bands of the four services of the U.S. Forces in Japan (the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine
Corps) participated in event to commemorate the milestone of the 70th year of the post-war period, and the Republic of Korea Navy Band joined
to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Normalization of Diplomatic Relations between Japan and the Republic of Korea. It brought together
Japan, the United States, and the Republic of Korea, and sent out the message “Moving forward hand-in-hand together.”
The SDF Marching Festival is expanding its role globally, as an opportunity of event defense exchanges with foreign armed forces. As it
has been said, music is a global language. The SDF will continue to further develop itself so that it can make a signifi cant contribution to the
stability of Japan and the world, through this wonderful power of music.

A scene from the FY2015 SDF Marching Festival


Bay. Six vessels from fi ve countries and various aircraft
including the U.S. Marine Corps Osprey participated in the
fl eet review to promote the maintenance and promotion of
international friendship and defense exchanges. The fl eet
review attracted approximately 34,000 visitors, including
visitors who attended the review and the rehearsal. In
2016, a troop review is planned to take place.
The MOD/SDF also actively opens PR facilities to


the public. For instance, the number of visitors on the
facility tour at the PR facilities in the MOD at Ichigaya
district (Ichigayadai Tour) reached 380,000 as of the end
of March 2016. Each SDF service also has a large-scale
PR facility in addition to PR facilities and archives at the
SDF camps and bases open to the public. Furthermore,
the MOD/SDF provides cooperation for shooting fi lms
and TV programs.


-----

**y**

**Introduction of Historical Naval Buildings (Etajima)** **Column**

Since the relocation of the naval academy from Tokyo Tsukiji in 1888, Etajima has been widely known as the location of one of the world top
three naval academies. The allied forces used this location for a decade after the end of the war, but it was returned to Japan in 1956. In the
same year a service school, which was in Yokosuka at that time, was relocated, and this school celebrated its 60th anniversary in January 2016.
Today, Etajima accommodates the Maritime Offi cer Candidates School and the 1st Service School, while the facilities of the naval academy are
still used for our education.
The Student Hall of the Naval Academy, which was completed in 1893, is commonly known as the “Red Brick Building” and is used for
offi cer candidate education as a government building of the Maritime Offi cer Candidate School. The Ceremonial Hall, which was completed in
1917, is a stone building with a total building area of 1655m[2] and the capacity of 2,000 people, and is used for entrance and commencement
ceremonies. As this building has excellent acoustics, no microphone is required.
The Greek-temple style Naval History Museum, completed in 1936, was built with the purpose to commemorate the heritage of our
predecessors and foster our spiritual foundation. Many navy-related historical materials are still displayed and it is used as a site of education
for MSDF personnel.
In this way, Etajima has been handed down as a place of education for the MSDF personnel, whilst maintaining the appearance of a period
of Naval Academy.

The “Red Brick Building” and Ceremonial Hall Naval History Museum



- 3  Trial Enlistment Programs

The MOD/SDF offers SDF Life Experience Tours[1] and
Enlistment Experience Programs.[2] These programs are
intended to promote participants’ understanding of the
SDF by offering the opportunity to experience the daily
life and training of the SDF, as well as to have direct
contact with SDF personnel. In FY2015, approximately
140 persons participated in SDF Life Experience Tours.
From the private sector, the SDF received approximately
1,300 requests for Enlistment Experience Programs, and
approximately 28,000 employees experienced SDF life.


A scene from the summer tour with university students and others held
at the GSDF Camp Zentsuji

Information on the Summer Tour/Spring Tour for College Students, Ms. Parsley Tour (trial tour for women in their 20s); and One-Day Visit to SDF for Women etc. is available on the MOD/SDF website.


-----

A scene from the spring tour with university students and others held
in the MSDF Yokosuka Disrtict


A scene from the one-day visit to SDF for women held at the ASDF Ashiya Air Base

**2 Initiatives for Information Disclosure**


- 2  Appropriate Operation of the Whistleblower
**Protection System**



- 1  Appropriate Operation of the Information Disclosure
**System and Personal Data Protection System**

In accordance with the Act on Access to Information Held
by Administrative Organs in 2001, the MOD discloses
its administrative documents properly. In the light of
respecting individual rights in line with the Act on the
Protection of Personal Information Held by Administrative
Organs, the MOD takes measures to ensure the security
of the personal information under its jurisdiction, and
discloses such information upon due request.

See>> Reference 73 (Record of Information Disclosure by the Ministry of
Defense (FY2015))


The MOD set up a system to handle public interest-related
information disclosures by its offi cials, employees and
outside workers, establishing an internal contact desk for
dealing with information disclosure that is in the public
interest and whistleblower protection.

- 3  Engagement in Policy Evaluation


The MOD has been conducting the evaluation of various
policies based on its policy evaluation system. In FY2015,
the MOD conducted policy evaluations of Research and
development (R&D) programs and the special measures
concerning taxation as well as the major policies and
programs of the National Defense Program Guidelines
(NDPG) and the Mid Term Defense Program (MTDP).


-----

|Year|Olympics Title|Gold medal|Col4|Silver medal|Col6|Bronze medal|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Event|Name|Event|Name|Event|Name|
|1964|Tokyo|Weightlifting|Yoshinobu Miyake|||Marathon|Kokichi Tsuburaya|
|1968|Mexico|Weightlifting|Yoshinobu Miyake|||||
|||Wrestling|Masaaki Kaneko|||||
|||Wrestling|Shigeo Nakata|||||
|1972|Munich|||Wrestling|Koichiro Hirayama|||
|1976|Montreal|||||Wrestling|Koichiro Hirayama|
|1984|Los Angeles|Shooting (pistol)|Takeo Kamachi|Wrestling|Takashi Irie|||
|||Wrestling|Atsuji Miyahara|Wrestling|Masaki Eto|||
|1988|Seoul|||Wrestling|Atsuji Miyahara|||
|1992|Barcelona|||||Shooting (rifl e)|Ryohei Koba|
|1996|Atlanta|||||||
|2000|Sydney|||||||
|2004|Athens|||||Wrestling|Kenji Inoue|
|2008|Beijing|||||||
|2012|London|Wrestling|Tatsuhiro Yonemitsu|||Wrestling|Shinichi Yumoto|
|||Wrestling|Hitomi Obara|||Boxing|Satoshi Shimizu|
|Overall medals||8 medals||4 medals||6 medals||


**y**

**SDF Personnel Performing Brilliantly on the Stage of the Olympics** **Column**

**[Nurturing SDF personnel athletes and the enhancement of their competitiveness]**
The SDF is promoting the acquisition of promising players such as high school students who have world-class competitiveness. At the same
time, in addition to the nine events* which the SDF has placed its focus on training and fostering players, it is implementing programs to foster
and train players of women’s rugby and canoeing, with the purpose to foster the SDF athletes and enhance their competitiveness towards the
Rio 2016 Olympic and the Tokyo 2020 Olympic games.

-  Wrestling, boxing, judo, shooting, weightlifting, archery, athletics, swimming, and modern pentathlon

**[List of prospective SDF personnel who will participate in the Rio 2016 Olympic Games]**
(1) Modern Pentathlon: Sergeant (GSDF) Tomoya Miguchi
(2) Shooting (rifl e): Major (GSDF) Toshikazu Yamashita
(3) Athletics: Second Lieutenant (ASDF) Takayuki Tanii
(4) Shooting (pistol): Second Lieutenant (ASDF) Eita Mori
(5) Boxing: First Lieutenant (GSDF) Daisuke Narimatsu
(6) Swimming: Sergeant First Class (GSDF) Naito Ehara
(7) Athletics: Second Lieutenant (GSDF) Hirooki Arai
(8) Modern Pentathlon: Sergeant (GSDF) Shohei Iwamoto
(9) Weightlifting: Second Lieutenant (GSDF) Hiroaki Takao

Sergeant (GSDF) Major (GSDF) Second Lieutenant (ASDF) Second Lieutenant (ASDF) First Lieutenant (GSDF)
Tomoya Miguchi Toshikazu Yamashita Takayuki Tanii Eita Mori Daisuke Narimatsu

Sergeant First Class (GSDF) Second Lieutenant (GSDF) Sergeant (GSDF) Second Lieutenant (GSDF)
Naito Ehara Hirooki Arai Shohei Iwamoto Hiroaki Takao

**[Number of medals received in the past Olympic Games]**

Gold medal Silver medal Bronze medal
Year Olympics Title
Event Name Event Name Event Name
1964 Tokyo Weightlifting Yoshinobu Miyake Marathon Kokichi Tsuburaya

Weightlifting Yoshinobu Miyake
1968 Mexico Wrestling Masaaki Kaneko
Wrestling Shigeo Nakata
1972 Munich Wrestling Koichiro Hirayama
1976 Montreal Wrestling Koichiro Hirayama

Shooting (pistol) Takeo Kamachi Wrestling Takashi Irie
1984 Los Angeles
Wrestling Atsuji Miyahara Wrestling Masaki Eto
1988 Seoul Wrestling Atsuji Miyahara
1992 Barcelona Shooting (rifl e) Ryohei Koba
1996 Atlanta
2000 Sydney
2004 Athens Wrestling Kenji Inoue
2008 Beijing

Wrestling Tatsuhiro Yonemitsu Wrestling Shinichi Yumoto
2012 London
Wrestling Hitomi Obara Boxing Satoshi Shimizu
Overall medals 8 medals 4 medals 6 medals


-----

Reference


**Part I** **Security Environment Surrounding Japan**

Reference 1 Number of Nuclear Warheads Arsenals by Country and
Their Major Means of Delivery................................................ 385

Reference 2 Outline of Military Power of Major Countries and Regions
(Approximate Numbers)......................................................... 385

Reference 3 Outline of Regular and Reserve Forces of Major Countries
and Regions (Approximate Numbers)..................................... 385

Reference 4 Transition of Military Power in the Area Surrounding Japan.... 386

**Part II Japan’s Security and Defense Policy and the Japan-U.S. Alliance**

Reference 5 National Security Strategy (Outline)........................................ 386

Reference 6 NATIONAL DEFENSE PROGRAM GUIDELINES for FY2014
and beyond............................................................................ 390

Reference 7 Medium Term Defense Program (FY2014-FY2018)................. 398

Reference 8 The Number of Tanks and Major Artillery Owned.................... 404

Reference 9 Number of Major Aircraft and Performance Specifications...... 404

Reference 10 Number of Major Ships Commissioned into Service................ 405

Reference 11 Guided Missile Specifications................................................. 405

Reference 12 Pattern of Defense-Related Expenditures
(Original Budget Basis)........................................................... 406

Reference 13 Changes in Major Area of Expenditures on General Account
Budget (Original Budget Basis)............................................... 407

Reference 14 Changes in Composition of Defense-Related Expenditures
(Original Budget Basis)........................................................... 407

Reference 15 Trend of Defense Expenditures of Major Countries.................. 408

Reference 16 Authorized and Actual Strength of Uniformed SDF Personnel.. 408

Reference 17 Status of Application and Recruitment of Uniformed SDF
Personnel (FY2015)................................................................ 409

Reference 18 Breakdown of Ministry of Defense Personnel......................... 409

Reference 19 Major Exercises Conducted in FY2015................................... 410

Reference 20 Results of Firing Training and Related Training
by Dispatch of Each of the Self-Defense Forces
to the United States (FY2015)................................................. 410

Reference 21 Main Measures for Re-employment Support.......................... 411

Reference 22 Employment situation of retired uniformed SDF Personnel
in disaster prevention-related bureaus in local government.... 411

Reference 23 Development of Seamless Security Legislation to
Ensure Japan’s Survival and Protect its People....................... 412

Reference 24 Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces........................... 414

Reference 25 Statutory Provisions about Use of Force and Use
of Weapons by SDF Personnel................................................ 416

Reference 26 Record of Joint Exercises for Civil Protection Implemented
by the National and Local Governments (FY2015)................... 418

Reference 27 Joint Statement of the Security Consultative Committee
(April 27, 2015)...................................................................... 418

Reference 28 The Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation
(April 27, 2015)...................................................................... 420

Reference 29 United States–Japan Roadmap for
Realignment Implementation.................................................. 425

Reference 30 Joint Statement of the Security Consultative Committee
(April 27, 2012)...................................................................... 427

Reference 31 Japan-U.S. (Minister-Level) Consultations (Since 2013).......... 428

Reference 32 Record of Japan-U.S. Bilateral Exercises in FY2015............... 430

Reference 33 Japan-U.S. Joint Research and Development Projects............ 432

Reference 34 Outline of Cost Sharing of the Stationing of the USFJ.............. 432

Reference 35 Outline of 23 Issues............................................................... 433

Reference 36 The SACO Final Report........................................................... 434

Reference 37 State of Progress of the SACO Final Report............................. 436

Reference 38 Background of the Futenma Replacement Facility.................. 438

Reference 39 Estimated Timelines for the Return of Facilities and
Areas South of Kadena........................................................... 439

Reference 40 Agreement between the Government of Japan and
the Government of the United States of America Concerning
the Implementation of the Relocation of III Marine
Expeditionary Force Personnel and Their Dependents
from Okinawa to Guam.......................................................... 439


Reference 41 Protocol amending the Agreement between the Government
of Japan and the Government of the United States of America
Concerning the Implementation of the Relocation of III Marine
Expeditionary Force Personnel and Their Dependents from
Okinawa to Guam.................................................................. 441

Reference 42 Chronology of Osprey Deployment by the U.S. Forces............. 442

**Part III Initiatives to Protect the Lives and Property of the People**
**as well as Securing the Territorial Land, Water and Airspace**

Reference 43 Direction of the MOD Reform (Outline).................................... 442

Reference 44 History of Efforts for BMD Development in Japan................... 443

Reference 45 Flow of Responce to Ballistic Missiles.................................... 443

Reference 46 Record of Disaster Relief Dispatches (Past Five Years)............ 444

Reference 47 Implementation and participation record of major drills
related to disaster dispatch (FY2015)..................................... 444

Reference 48 Record of Major Multinational Security Dialogues
(Asia-Pacific Region, Last Five Years)...................................... 444

Reference 49 Exchange Student Acceptance Record (Number of Newly
Accepted Students in FY2015)............................................... 445

Reference 50 Multilateral Security Dialogues Hosted by the Ministry
of Defense............................................................................. 445

Reference 51 Other Multilateral Security Dialogues...................................... 446

Reference 52 Status of Capacity Building Assistance................................... 448

Reference 53 Status of Invitation Program................................................... 449

Reference 54 Participation in Multilateral Training (Last Three Years)........... 449

Reference 55 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with Australia
(Past Three Years).................................................................. 451

Reference 56 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with the ROK
(Past Three Years).................................................................. 452

Reference 57 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with India
(Past Three Years).................................................................. 453

Reference 58 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with China
(Past Three Years).................................................................. 454

Reference 59 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with Russia
(Past Three Years).................................................................. 454

Reference 60 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with ASEAN
Countries (Past Three Years)................................................... 454

Reference 61 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with Other
Asia-Pacific Countries (Past Three Years)................................ 457

Reference 62 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with European
Countries (Past Three Years)................................................... 457

Reference 63 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with Other
Countries (Past Three Years)................................................... 459

Reference 64 Outline of a Bill Concerning Punishment of and Response
to Acts of Piracy..................................................................... 459

Reference 65 Summary Comparison of Laws Concerning International
Peace Cooperation Activities.................................................. 460

Reference 66 The SDF Record in International Peace Cooperation Activities.... 460

Reference 67 Dispatch of Ministry of Defense Personnel to
International Organizations..................................................... 463

Reference 68 Three Principles on Transfer of Defense Equipment
and Technology...................................................................... 463

Reference 69 Activities in Civic Life............................................................. 464

Reference 70 Activities Contributing to Society............................................ 465

Reference 71 Outline of Measures to Improve the Living Environment
in the Areas Surrounding Defense Facilities............................ 465

Reference 72 Partial Amendment of the Law Concerning Adjustment,
etc. of the Living Environment in the Environs of
Defense Facilities................................................................... 466

Reference 73 Record of Information Disclosure by the Ministry of
Defense (FY2015).................................................................. 466

Reference 74 “Public Opinion Survey on the Self Defense Forces
and Defense Issues” (excerpt)
(Public Relations Office of Cabinet Office)............................... 467


-----

**Reference 1 Number of Nuclear Warheads Arsenals by Country and Their Major Means of Delivery**

|Col1|Col2|United States|Russia|United Kingdom|France|China|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Missiles|ICBM (Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles)|450 Minuteman III:  450|332 SS-18:  54 SS-19: 30 SS-25: 108 SS-27:  78 RS-24:  62|―|―|52 DF-5 (CSS-4):  20 DF-31 (CSS-10): 32|
||IRBM MRBM|―|―|―|―|160 DF-4 (CSS-3):  10 DF-21 (CSS-5):  134|
|||||||DF-26 16|
||SLBM (Submarine Launched Ballistic missiles)|336 Trident D-5:  336|192 SS-N-18:  48 SS-N-23:  96 SS-N-32:  48|48 Trident D-5: 48|64 M-45: 32 M-51:  32|48 JL-2 (CSS-NX-14):  48|
|Submarines equipped with nuclear ballistic missiles||14|13|4|4|4|
|Aircraft||78 B-2:  20 B-52:  58|76 Tu-95 (Bear): 60 Tu-160 (Blackjack): 16|―|63 Mirage2000N:  23 Rafale:  40|50 H-6K: 50|
|Number of warheads||Approx. 4,760|Approx. 4,380 (including approx. 2,000 tactical nuclear warheads)|215|300|Approx. 260|



Notes:
1. Data is based on “The Military Balance 2016,” the SIPRI database, etc.
2. In April 2016, the United States released the following figures based on the new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty between the United States and Russia as of March 1, 2016 —the
number of deployed strategic nuclear warheads for the United States was 1,481 and the delivery vehicles involved 741 missiles/aircraft; the number of deployed strategic nuclear
warheads for Russia was 1,735 and the delivery vehicles involved 521 missiles/aircraft. However, according to the SIPRI database, as of January 2015, the number of deployed U.S.
nuclear warheads was approx. 2,080 (including 180 tactical nuclear warheads).
3. In November 2015, the U.K.’s Strategic Defence and Security Review (SDSR) stipulated that the number of deployed nuclear warheads is to be no more than 120, while the number of
nuclear warheads possessed is to be no more than 180.
4. According to the SIPRI database, India possesses 100-120 nuclear warheads, Pakistan 110-130, Israel a maximum of 80, and North Korea 10.


**Reference 3** **Outline of Regular and Reserve Forces of Major**
**Countries and Regions (Approximate Numbers)**

|Country or Region|Military Service System|Regular (10,000 persons)|Col4|Reserves (10,000 persons)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|United States|Volunteer|138||84|
|Russia|Conscription / Volunteer|80||200|
|United Kingdom|Volunteer|15||8|
|France|Volunteer|21||3|
|Germany|Volunteer|18||3|
|Italy|Volunteer|17||2|
|India|Volunteer|135||116|
|China|Conscription|233||51|
|North Korea|Conscription|119||60|
|Republic of Korea|Conscription|63||450|
|Egypt|Conscription|44||48|
|Israel|Conscription|18||47|
|Japan|Volunteer|Ground|14|3.1 (0.5)|
|||Maritime|4.2|0.05|
|||Air|4.3|0.05|



Notes:
1. Data from “The Military Balance 2016” and other sources.
2. Figures for Japan show the actual strength of its Ground, Maritime, and Air Self-Defense
Forces as of the end of FY2015. The figure in parentheses shows the number of SDF
Ready Reserve Personnel and is not included in the total figure.
3. Russia uses a personnel augmentation system which adds a contract employment
system (a type of volunteer system) to the preexisting conscription system.
4. In Germany, as a result of the enactment of the Military Law Amendment Act in April
2011, the conscription system was suspended effective July 1, 2011, and the volunteer
system was newly introduced as a replacement of the former.
5. China has announced that the PLA would be reduced by 300,000 troops by the end
of 2017.


**Reference 2 Outline of Military Power of Major Countries and**
**Regions (Approximate Numbers)**

|Ground Forces|Col2|Naval Forces|Col4|Col5|Air Forces|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Country or Region|Ground Forces (10,000 persons)|Country or Region|Tonnage (10,000 tons)|Number of Vessels|Country or Region|Number of Combat Aircraft|
|China|160|United States|625.0|944|United States|3,638|
|India|115|Russia|204.9|1012|China|2,715|
|North Korea|102|China|150.2|879|Russia|1,344|
|Pakistan|55|United Kingdom|61.2|136|India|984|
|United States|51|India|48,0|243|Republic of Korea|619|
|Republic of Korea|50|France|40.3|292|Egypt|601|
|Vietnam|41|Indonesia|26.7|171|North Korea|563|
|Turkey|40|Italy|22.5|184|Taiwan|508|
|Myanmar|38|Turkey|22.1|206|Israel|482|
|Iran|35|Republic of Korea|21.1|236|Pakistan|456|
|Egypt|31|Taiwan|21.0|393|France|417|
|Indonesia|30|Germany|20.6|127|Turkey|407|
|Thailand|25|Australia|19.4|98|Iran|336|
|Russia|24|Spain|18.9|172|Saudi Arabia|336|
|Colombia|24|Brazil|17.3|110|United Kingdom|295|
|Japan|14|Japan|46.7|137|Japan|410|



Notes:
1. Data on ground forces and air forces is taken from “The Military Balance 2016” and
other sources, and data on naval forces is taken from Jane’s Fighting Ships 2015–2016
and other sources.
2. Figures for Japan show the actual strength of its Self-Defense Forces as of the end
of FY2015, and combat aircraft (Air Forces) include ASDF combat aircraft (excluding
transports) and MSDF combat aircraft (only those with fixed wings).
3. Arrangement is in order of the scale of armed strength.


-----

**Reference 4 Transition of Military Power in the Area Surrounding Japan**

Ground Forces Maritime Forces Air Forces

(10,000 persons) (10,000 tons) (Number of Combat Aircraft)

250 250 8,000


200

150


200

150


6,000

4,000


100

50


100

50


2,000


1996
2006
2016


1996
2006
2016


1996
2006
2016


Far East Russia China North Korea Japan Far East Russia China North Korea Japan Far East Russia China North Korea Japan


**Reference 5** **National Security Strategy (Outline)**

(Approved by the National Security Council
and the Cabinet on December 17, 2013)
**I. Purpose**
❍ As Japan’s security environment becomes ever more severe, Japan
needs to identify its national interests from a long-term perspective,
determine the course it should pursue in the international community,
and adopt a whole-government approach for national security
policies and measures in order to continue developing a prosperous
and peaceful society.
❍ In a world where globalization continues, Japan should play an even more
proactive role as a major global player in the international community.
❍ The Strategy, as fundamental policies pertaining to national security,
presents guidelines for policies in areas related to national security.
❍ With the National Security Council (NSC) serving as the control
tower, as well as with strong political leadership, the Government of
Japan will implement national security policies in a more strategic
and structured manner through a whole-government approach.
❍ When implementing policies in other areas, the Government of
Japan will give due consideration to national security so that Japan
can utilize its strengths, such as its diplomatic ability and defense
capability, in a smooth and fully-functional way as a whole, based on
the Strategy.
❍ The Strategy will guide Japan’s national security policy over the
next decade. Through the implementation of concrete policies, the
NSC will regularly carry out systematic evaluation and upgrade the
Strategy in a timely and appropriate manner.
**II. Fundamental Principle of National Securityy**
1. Principles Japan Upholds
❍ Japan is a country with rich culture and tradition, and upholds
universal values, such as freedom, democracy, respect for
fundamental human rights and the rule of law. Japan has a wealth
of highly educated human capital and high cultural standards, and
is an economic power with strong economic capacity and high
technological capabilities. Japan has achieved its development
benefiting from an open international economic system. In addition,
Japan as a maritime state has pursued “Open and Stable Seas.”
❍ Japan has consistently followed the path of a peace-loving nation
since the end of World War II, and has adhered to a basic policy of
maintaining an exclusively national defense-oriented policy, not
becoming a military power that poses a threat to other countries,
and observing the Three Non-Nuclear Principles.
❍ Japan has maintained its security, and contributed to peace and
stability in the Asia-Pacific region, by enhancing its alliance with
the United States (U.S.), as well as by deepening cooperative
relationships with other countries. Japan has also contributed
to the realization of stability and prosperity in the international
community through initiatives for supporting the economic
growth of developing countries and for addressing global issues
based on the principle of human security, as well as through trade
and investment relations with other countries.
❍ Complying with the United Nations (U.N.) Charter, Japan has been
cooperating with the U.N. and other international organizations,
and has actively contributed to their activities. Japan has also
continuously participated in international peace cooperation
activities. In addition, as the only country to have ever suffered


atomic bombings in war, Japan has consistently engaged in
disarmament and non-proliferation efforts, playing a leading role in
international initiatives to realize “a world free of nuclear weapons.”
❍ Japan will continue to adhere to the course that it has taken to date
as a peace-loving nation, and as a major player in world politics
and economy, contribute even more proactively in securing peace,
stability, and prosperity of the international community, while
achieving its own security as well as peace and stability in the
Asia-Pacific region, as a “Proactive Contributor to Peace” based on
the principle of international cooperation. This is the fundamental
principle of national security that Japan should stand to hold.
2. Japan’s National Interests and National Security Objectives
National Interests
❍ To maintain its sovereignty and independence; to defend its
territorial integrity; to ensure the safety of life, person, and
properties of its nationals, and to ensure its survival while
maintaining its own peace and security and preserving its rich
culture and tradition.
❍ To achieve the prosperity of Japan and its nationals through
economic development, thereby consolidating its peace and
security (to this end, it is essential that Japan strengthens the free
trade regime and realizes an international environment that offers
stability, transparency and predictability).
❍ To maintain and protect international order based on rules
and universal values, such as freedom, democracy, respect for
fundamental human rights, and the rule of law.
National Security Objectives
❍ To strengthen the deterrence necessary for maintaining Japan’s
peace and security and for ensuring its survival, thus deterring
threats from directly reaching Japan; at the same time, if by any
chance a threat should reach Japan, to defeat such threat and to
minimize the damage.
❍ To improve the security environment of the Asia-Pacific region,
and prevent the emergence of and reduce direct threats to Japan,
through strengthening the Japan-U.S. Alliance, enhancing the
trust and cooperative relationships between Japan and its partners
within and outside the Asia-Pacific region, and promoting practical
security cooperation.
❍ To improve the global security environment and build a peaceful,
stable, and prosperous international community by strengthening
the international order based on universal values and rules, and
by playing a leading role in the settlement of disputes, through
consistent diplomatic efforts and further personnel contributions.
**III. Security Environment Surrounding Japan and National Security**
**Challenges**
1. Global Security Environment and Challenges
(1) Shift in the Balance of Power and Rapid Progress of Technological
Innovation
❍ The balance of power between nations is changing due to
the rise of emerging countries (e.g., China and India). In
particular, China is increasing its presence in the international
community. The United States, which has the world’s largest
power as a whole, has manifested its policy to shift its
emphasis of national security and economic policy towards the
Asia-Pacific region.
❍ The rapid advancement of globalization and technological
innovation has increased the relative influence of non-state


-----

actors, and the threat of terrorism and crimes committed by
non-state actors is expanding.
(2) Threat of the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction and
Other Related Materials
❍ The issue of the transfer, proliferation, and performance
improvement of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and
their means of delivery, such as ballistic missiles, the issue
of nuclear and missile development by North Korea, and the
nuclear issue of Iran remain major threats to Japan and the
international community.
(3) Threat of International Terrorism
❍ International terrorism has spread and become diverse in its
forms due to the advancement of globalization.
❍ Terrorist attacks against Japanese nationals and interests have
actually taken place overseas. Japan and its people face the
threat of international terrorism both at home and abroad.
(4) Risks to Global Commons
❍ In recent years, risks that can impede the utilization of and free
access to global commons, such as the sea, outer space, and
cyberspace, have been spreading and become more serious.
❍ In the seas, in recent years, there have been an increasing
number of cases of unilateral actions in an attempt to change
the status quo by coercion with respect to natural resources and
the security of respective states.
❍ Due to these cases as well as piracy and other issues, there
is a growing risk of the stability of sea lanes and freedom of
navigation coming under threat.
❍ There exist risks that could impede the continuous and stable
use of outer space, including an increasing amount of space
debris caused by satellite collisions amongst others.
❍ Risks of cyber-attacks with the intent to disrupt critical
infrastructure and obstruct military systems are becoming
more serious.
(5) Challenges to Human Security
❍ Global issues that cannot be dealt with by a single country—
namely, poverty, widening inequality, global health challenges
including infectious diseases, climate change and other
environmental issues, food security, and humanitarian crises
caused by civil wars and natural disasters—are emerging as
critical and urgent issues of human security, threatening the
very survival and dignity of individuals.
❍ These challenges could have repercussions on peace and
stability of the international community.
(6) The Global Economy and Its Risks
❍ The risk of the expansion of an economic crisis from one
country to the entire global economy is growing.
❍ Signs of protectionism and reluctance towards the creation of
new trade rules are becoming apparent.
❍ The rise of resource nationalism in resource rich countries as
well as an intensified competition for the acquisition of energy
and mineral resources by emerging countries are observed.
2. Security Environment and Challenges in the Asia-Pacific Region
(1) Characteristics of the Strategic Environment of the Asia-Pacific
Region
❍ The region has various political regimes and a host of countries
with large-scale military forces including nuclear-weapon
states. Yet a regional cooperation framework in the security
realm has not been sufficiently institutionalized.
(2) North Korea’s Military Buildup and Provocative Actions
❍ North Korea has enhanced the capability of WMDs including
nuclear weapons and that of ballistic missiles. At the same
time, North Korea has repeatedly taken provocative military
actions including the use of provocative rhetoric against
Japan and other countries, thereby increasing the tension in
the region. The threat to the security of Japan and of other
countries is being substantially aggravated.
❍ As Kim Jong-un proceeds to consolidate his regime, the domestic
situation in North Korea needs to be closely monitored.
❍ North Korea’s abduction is a grave issue affecting Japan’s
sovereignty as well as the lives and safety of Japanese
nationals. It is an urgent issue for the Government of Japan to
resolve under its responsibility.
(3) China’s Rapid Rise and Intensified Activities in Various Areas
❍ There is an expectation for China to share and comply with
international norms, and play a more active and cooperative
role for regional and global issues.
❍ China has been rapidly advancing its military capabilities in a
wide range of areas without sufficient transparency.


❍ China has taken actions that can be regarded as attempts
to change the status quo by coercion based on their own
assertions, which are incompatible with the existing order
of international law, in the maritime and aerial domains,
including the East China Sea and the South China Sea (e.g.,
intrusion into Japan’s territorial waters and airspace around
the Senkaku Islands, establishment of its own “Air Defense
Identification Zone”).
❍ The cross-strait relationship has deepened economically.
Meanwhile, the military balance has been changing. Thus, the
relationship contains both orientations towards stability and
potential instability.
**IV. Japan’s Strategic Approaches to National Security**
1. Strengthening and Expanding Japan’s Capabilities and Roles

-  To ensure national security, Japan needs to first and foremost
strengthen its own capabilities and the foundation for exercising
those capabilities. Japan must also steadily fulfill the role it should
play and adapt its capabilities to respond to future developments.

-  Enhancing Japan’s resilience in national security, through
reinforcing its diplomatic power and defense force, as well as
bolstering its economic strengths and technological capabilities,
contributes to peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region and the
international community at large.

-  In order to overcome national security challenges and achieve
national security objectives, as well as to proactively contribute
to peace in cooperation with the international community, Japan
needs to expand and deepen cooperative relationships with other
countries, with the Japan-U.S. Alliance as the cornerstone. At
the same time, Japan needs to make effective use of its diverse
resources and promote comprehensive policies.
(1) Strengthening Diplomacy for Creating a Stable International
Environment
❍ The key of national security is to create a stable and
predictable international environment, and prevent the
emergence of threats.
❍ It is necessary for Japan to realize an international order and
security environment that are desirable for Japan, by playing
an even more proactive role in achieving peace and stability
of the international community as a “Proactive Contributor to
Peace” based on the principle of international cooperation.
❍ It is necessary to enhance diplomatic creativity and negotiating
power to deepen the understanding of and garner support for
Japan’s position in the international community.
❍ By highlighting Japan’s attractiveness, Japan needs to
strengthen its soft power that would benefit the international
community. Japan also needs to strengthen its capacity to
promptly and accurately identify the needs of Japanese
nationals and firms to support their overseas activities.
❍ Japan will make even more proactive contributions to
international organizations such as the U.N., including through
increasing the number of Japanese staff in such institutions.
(2) Building a Comprehensive Defense Architecture to Firmly
Defend Japan
❍ Amid the severe security environment, Japan will efficiently
develop a highly effective joint defense force, adapting to
the change in strategic environment with consideration of its
national power, and strive to ensure operations with flexibility
and readiness based on joint operations.
❍ Japan will advance coordination within the government
and with local governments and the private sector. In doing
so, even in peacetime, Japan will maintain and improve a
comprehensive architecture for responding seamlessly to an
array of situations, ranging from armed attacks to large-scale
natural disasters.
❍ In developing the structure of the Japan Self-Defense Forces
(SDF), which plays a central role in these efforts, Japan will
enhance its defense structure for deterrence and response to
various situations, prioritizing important functions from a joint
and comprehensive perspective.
❍ With regard to the threat of nuclear weapons, the extended
deterrence of the U.S. with nuclear deterrence at its core is
indispensable. In order to maintain and enhance the credibility
of the extended deterrence, Japan will work closely with the
U.S., and take appropriate measures through its own efforts,
including ballistic missile defense (BMD) and protection of
the people.
(3) Strengthening Efforts for the Protection of Japan’s Territorial


-----

Integrity
❍ Japan will enhance the capabilities of the law enforcement
agencies responsible for territorial patrol activities and
reinforce its maritime surveillance capabilities.
❍ Japan will strengthen coordination among relevant ministries
and agencies to be able to respond seamlessly to a variety of
unexpected situations.
❍ Japan will proactively engage in the protection, management,
and development of remote islands near national borders, and
from a national security viewpoint, review issues related to
the use of land in areas such as remote islands near national
borders and areas surrounding defense facilities.
(4) Ensuring Maritime Security
❍ As a maritime state, Japan will play a leading role, in maintaining
and developing “Open and Stable Seas,” which are upheld by
maritime order based upon such fundamental principles as the
rule of law, ensuring the freedom and safety of navigation and
overflight, and peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance
with relevant international law, rather than by force.
❍ Japan will strengthen its maritime domain awareness
capabilities in a comprehensive manner that involves the use
of outer space, while paying attention to the establishment of
international networks.
❍ Japan will provide assistance to those coastal states alongside
the sea lanes of communication and other states in enhancing
their maritime law enforcement capabilities, and strengthen
cooperation with partners on the sea lanes who share strategic
interests with Japan.
(5) Strengthening Cyber Security
❍ Japan as a whole will make concerted efforts to defend
cyberspace and strengthen the response capability against
cyber-attacks, so as to protect cyberspace from malicious
activities; to ensure the free and safe use of cyberspace; and
to guard Japan’s critical infrastructure against cyber-attacks,
including those in which state involvement is suspected.
❍ Japan will constantly strengthen public-private partnership, and
will comprehensively consider and take necessary measures
with regard to expanding the pool of human resources in the
security field, etc.
❍ Japan will take measures at technical and operational levels
to enhance international cooperation, and will promote cyber
defense cooperation.
(6) Strengthening Measures against International Terrorism
❍ Japan will first and foremost strengthen its domestic measures
against international terrorism such as ensuring the security
of nuclear facilities in Japan. In order to ensure the safety of
Japanese nationals living abroad, Japan will strengthen such
measures as collecting and analyzing intelligence on the
situation of international terrorism.
(7) Enhancing Intelligence Capabilities
❍ Japan will fundamentally strengthen its information-collecting
capabilities from a diverse range of sources, including human
intelligence and open source intelligence.
❍ Japan will enhance its intelligence analysis, consolidation,
and sharing capabilities including by developing experts, and
will promote all-source analysis that makes use of the array
of information-collecting means at the Government’s disposal.
Materials and intelligence will be provided to the NSC in a
timely manner, and they will be appropriately utilized in policy
formulation.
(8) Defense Equipment and Technology Cooperation
❍ From the perspective of “Proactive Contribution to Peace”
based on the principle of international cooperation, Japan
is required to contribute more proactively to peace and
international cooperation including through utilizing defense
equipment, and to participate in joint development and
production of defense equipment and other related items.
❍ While giving due consideration to the roles that the Three
Principles on Arms Exports and their related policy
guidelines have played so far, the Government of Japan will
set out clear principles on the overseas transfer of arms and
military technology, which fit the new security environment.
In this context, considerations will be made with regard to
defining cases where transfers are prohibited; limiting cases
where transfers could be allowed with strict examination;
and ensuring appropriate control over transfers in terms of
unauthorized use and third party transfer.
(9) Ensuring the Stable Use of Outer Space and Promoting Its Use


for Security Purposes
❍ Japan will engage itself in enhancing the functions of
information-gathering satellites and in making effective
use of satellites. Japan will also enhance a system for space
situational awareness.
❍ Japan will promote the development and utilization of outer
space in a manner that contributes to national security in
the medium- to long-term, including the development of
technologies.
(10) Strengthening Technological Capabilities
❍ Japan should encourage the further promotion of technologies,
including dual use technologies, thereby strengthening Japan’s
technological capabilities.
❍ Japan will constantly grasp science and technology trends, and
make effective use of technology in the area of security by
combining the efforts of industries, academia, and the Government.
❍ Japan will proactively utilize its internationally outstanding
technologies in diplomacy.
2. Strengthening the Japan-U.S. Alliance

-  Japan and the U.S. have persistently strengthened and expanded
their cooperation on a wide range of areas for peace, stability, and
prosperity of not only the two countries themselves, but also the
Asia-Pacific region and the broader international community.

-  The U.S., based on its Defense Strategic Guidance emphasizing a
rebalancing towards the Asia-Pacific region, aspires to enhance its
presence in the region and strengthen cooperation with its allies,
including Japan and its partners.

-  In order to ensure the security of Japan and to maintain and
enhance peace, stability, and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region
and the international community, Japan must further elevate the
effectiveness of the Japan-U.S. security arrangements and realize
a stronger Japan-U.S. Alliance.
(1) Further Strengthening of Japan-U.S. Security and Defense
Cooperation in a Wide Range of Areas
❍ Japan will work with the U.S. to revise the Guidelines for
Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation, through discussions on
a variety of issues such as the concrete manner of defense
cooperation and basic concepts of bilateral roles, missions, and
capabilities, while ensuring consistency with various policies
in line with the Strategy.
❍ Japan will strive to enhance the deterrence and response
capability of the Japan-U.S. Alliance through working
closely with the U.S. on operational cooperation and policy
coordination on issues such as response to contingencies
and the medium- to long-term strategy, and strengthening
its security cooperation with the U.S. in such broad areas as
BMD, maritime affairs, outer space, cyberspace and largescale disaster response operations.
(2) Ensuring a Stable Presence of the U.S. Forces
❍ While taking measures such as Host Nation Support and
increasing deterrence, Japan will steadily implement the
realignment of the U.S. Forces in Japan in accordance with the
existing bilateral agreements, in order to reduce the impact on
people in host communities including Okinawa.
3. Strengthening Diplomacy and Security Cooperation with Japan’s
Partners for Peace and Stability in the International Community

To improve the security environment surrounding Japan, Japan will
engage itself in building trust and cooperative relations with partners
both within and outside the region through the following approaches.
❍ Japan will strengthen cooperative relations with countries in
the Asia-Pacific region with which it shares universal values
and strategic interests.
— ROK: Japan will strengthen the foundation for security
cooperation. Japan, the U.S., and the ROK will work
together closely in addressing North Korean nuclear and
missile issues.
— Australia: Japan will further strengthen the strategic
partnership by steadily sharing strategic recognition and
advancing security cooperation.
— ASEAN countries: Japan will further deepen and develop
cooperative relations with the ASEAN countries in all sectors
based on the traditional partnership lasting more than 40
years. Japan will also provide further assistance to ASEAN
efforts towards maintaining and strengthening its unity.
— India: Japan will strengthen bilateral relations in a broad
range of areas, including maritime security, based on the
bilateral Strategic and Global Partnership.
❍ Japan will strive to construct a Mutually Beneficial Relationship


-----

Based on Common Strategic Interests with China from a
broad, as well as a medium- to long-term perspective. Japan
will encourage China to play a responsible and constructive
role for the sake of regional peace, stability and prosperity,
and Japan will respond firmly but in a calm manner to China’s
recent attempts to change the status quo by coercion.
❍ Japan will endeavor to achieve a comprehensive resolution of
outstanding issues of concern, such as the abduction, nuclear
and missile issues, in accordance with the Japan-North Korea
Pyongyang Declaration, Joint Statement of the Six-Party
Talks, and relevant Security Council resolutions.
❍ Japan will advance cooperation with Russia in all areas,
including security and energy, thereby enhancing bilateral
relations as a whole.
❍ In promoting these efforts, Japan will actively utilize and
engage in multilateral and trilateral cooperation frameworks.
❍ Japan will cooperate with other partners of the Asia-Pacific
region towards ensuring the stability of the region.
❍ European countries are partners for Japan which together take
a leading role in ensuring the peace, stability and prosperity
of the international community. Japan will further strengthen
its relations with Europe, including cooperation with the EU,
NATO, and OSCE.
❍ Japan will endeavor to further develop relations with emerging
countries, not merely on a bilateral basis, but in cooperative
efforts in tackling global challenges.
❍ Japan will engage in constructing multilayered cooperative
relations with the Gulf States, encompassing political and
security cooperation beyond natural resources and energy. In
addition, Japan will play a proactive role in the resolution of
major issues affecting the stability of the Middle East.
❍ Japan will continue to contribute to the development and the
consolidation of peace in Africa through various avenues,
especially the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD) process.
4. Proactive Contribution to International Efforts for Peace and Stability
of the International Community

As a “Proactive Contributor to Peace” based on the principle of
international cooperation, Japan will play an active role for the peace
and stability of the international community.
(1) Strengthening Diplomacy at the United Nations
❍ Japan will further engage in active efforts by the U.N. for the
maintenance and restoration of international peace and security.
❍ Japan will continue to strive to achieve the U.N. Security
Council reform, including through an expansion of both
permanent and non-permanent categories, with Japan
becoming a permanent member of the Council.
(2) Strengthening the Rule of Law
❍ In order to establish the rule of law in the international
community, Japan will participate proactively in international
rule-making from the planning stage, so that Japan’s principles
and positions are duly reflected.
❍ Japan will actively engage in realizing the rule of law relating
to the sea, outer space and cyberspace, as well as in assistance
for the development of legal systems.
(3) Leading International Efforts on Disarmament and NonProliferation
❍ Japan will carry out vigorous efforts in pursuit of “a world free
of nuclear weapons.”
❍ Japan will lead international efforts on disarmament and nonproliferation, including those towards the resolution of North
Korea’s nuclear and missile development issues and Iran’s
nuclear issues, in a manner consistent with the maintenance of the
credibility of extended deterrence under the Japan-U.S. alliance.
(4) Promoting International Peace Cooperation
❍ Japan will further step up its cooperation with U.N. PKO and
other international peace cooperation activities.
❍ Japan will promote coordination between PKO and ODA
projects, and make further strategic use of ODA and capacity
building assistance.
❍ Japan will proactively train peacebuilding experts and PKO
personnel in various countries in close consultation with
countries or organizations concerned.
(5) Promoting International Cooperation against International Terrorism
❍ Japan will promote consultations and exchanges of views
with other countries on the situation on international terrorism
and international counter-terrorism cooperation, as well as
reinforcement of the international legal framework.


❍ Japan will actively extend assistance to developing countries, etc.
5. Strengthening Cooperation Based on Universal Values to Resolve
Global Issues

Japan will endeavor to share universal values and reinforce an open
international economic system, which form the basis of peace,
stability and prosperity of the international community. At the
same time, Japan will advance the following measures towards the
resolution of development issues and global issues that could hinder
peace and stability of the international community.
(1) Sharing Universal Values
❍ Through a partnership with countries with which Japan
shares universal values, such as freedom, democracy, human
rights, and the rule of law, Japan will conduct diplomacy that
contributes to addressing global issues.
❍ Japan will actively utilize its ODA and other schemes in
supporting democratization, the development of legal systems,
and human rights.
❍ Japan will engage proactively in diplomatic issues on women.
(2) Responding to Global Development and Global Issues and
Realizing Human Security
❍ It is necessary for Japan to strengthen its efforts to address
development issues as part of “Proactive Contribution to
Peace” based on the principle of international cooperation.
❍ Japan will strengthen efforts towards the achievement of the
MDGs, and play a leading role in the formulation of the next
international development goals.
❍ Japan will engage in further efforts in mainstreaming the
concept of human security in the international community.
(3) Cooperating with Human Resource Development Efforts in
Developing Countries
❍ Japan will invite a broad range of personnel from developing
countries, including students and administrative officials, and
provide them education and training. Japan will further promote
human resource development in order to ensure that these
personnel can contribute to development in their home countries.
(4) Maintaining and Strengthening the Free Trade System
❍ Japan will promote economic partnership efforts, including
through the TPP, the Japan-EU EPA, a Japan-China-ROK FTA,
and the RCEP. Through these efforts, Japan will strengthen the
vigor and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region.
(5) Responding to Energy and Environmental Issues
❍ Japan will actively utilize diplomatic tools for efforts to achieve
the stable supply of energy and other natural resources.
❍ In the area of climate change, Japan will implement a proactive
strategy for countering global warming.
(6) Enhancing People-to-people Exchanges
❍ Japan will expand two-way youth exchanges.
❍ Japan will promote people-to-people exchanges through sport
and culture.
6. Strengthening the Domestic Foundation that Supports National
Security and Promoting Domestic and Global Understanding

-  In order to fully ensure national security, it is vital to reinforce the
domestic foundation for diplomatic power, defense force, and other
capabilities to be effectively demonstrated.

-  It is important to seek a deeper understanding of Japan’s security
policies both at home and abroad to ensure national security.
(1) Maintaining and Enhancing Defense Production and
Technological Bases
❍ Japan will endeavor to engage in effective and efficient
acquisition of defense equipment, and will maintain and
enhance its defense production and technological bases,
including through strengthening international competitiveness.
(2) Boosting Communication Capabilities
❍ It is imperative that Japan proactively and effectively
communicate its national security policy to the world and its
people, deepen the understanding among the people of Japan,
and build cooperative relations with other countries.
❍ With the Prime Minister’s Office serving as the control tower,
Japan will enhance its public relations in an integrated and
strategic manner through a government-wide approach. Fully
utilizing various information technologies and diverse media,
Japan will also strengthen its information dissemination in
foreign languages.
❍ Japan will cooperate with educational institutions, key figures,
and think tanks, and in doing so, promote Japanese language
education overseas and train personnel who are capable of
contributing to strategic public relations efforts and other
areas.


-----

those related to precision guided munitions, unmanned vehicles,
stealth capability and nanotechnology.
2. In the Asia-Pacific region, including areas surrounding Japan,
countries are enhancing and strengthening their cooperative
relationships to resolve security challenges. Specific and practical
cooperation and collaboration have progressed to settle challenges
particularly in non-traditional security fields. In the meantime, grayzone situations over territory, sovereignty and maritime economic
interests tend to linger, raising concerns that they may develop into
more serious situations.
North Korea is military-focused and deploys a massive military
force. It is also proceeding with the development, deployment
and proliferation of WMDs including nuclear weapons and
ballistic missiles which may be used to deliver such weapons,
and it maintains a large-scale special operations force. Through
these activities, North Korea is maintaining and strengthening its
asymmetrical military capabilities.
North Korea has also repeatedly heightened tension in the
region by conducting military provocations in the Korean Peninsula
and by escalating its provocative rhetoric and behavior against Japan
and other countries. Such North Korean military trend constitutes a
serious destabilizing factor to the security not only of Japan but of
the entire region and the international community. Therefore, Japan
needs to pay utmost attention to such activities.
In particular, North Korea’s ballistic missile development has
presumably entered a new stage, as technological improvements
have been made to extend the range and increase the accuracy of
its missiles through a series of missile launches. Also, North Korea
has conducted nuclear tests in defiance of calls for restraint from
the international community, so the possibility cannot be ruled out
that it has successfully miniaturized nuclear weapons for warheads
and equipped them on ballistic missiles. North Korea’s nuclear
and missile development, coupled with its provocative rhetoric
and behavior, such as suggesting a missile attack on Japan, pose a
serious and imminent threat to Japan’s security.
As for China, while it is greatly expected to play an active role
in a more cooperative manner in the region and the world, it has
been continuously increasing its defense expenditures and has been
rapidly reinforcing its military in a wide range of areas. As part of
such effort, China is believed to be making efforts to strengthen
its asymmetrical military capabilities to prevent military activity by
other countries in the region by denying access and deployment of
foreign militaries to its surrounding areas. However, China has not
clearly stated the purposes and goals of the military buildup and
therefore, transparency concerning its military and security is not
fully achieved.
In addition, China is rapidly expanding and intensifying its
activities in the maritime and aerial domains in the region including
in the East China Sea and the South China Sea. In particular,
China has taken assertive actions with regard to issues of conflicts
of interest in the maritime domain, as exemplified by its attempts
to change the status quo by coercion. As for the seas and airspace
around Japan, China has intruded into Japanese territorial waters
frequently and violated Japan’s airspace, and has engaged in
dangerous activities that could cause unexpected situations, such
as its announcement of establishing an “Air Defense Identification
Zone” based on its own assertion thereby infringing the freedom of
overflight above the high seas.
China is also expanding and intensifying its activities in the
maritime and aerial domains farther offshore than before. For
example, Chinese military vessels and aircraft routinely enter the
Pacific Ocean, and are expanding their operational areas which
include areas north of Japan.
As Japan has great concern about these Chinese activities, it
will need to pay utmost attention to them, as these activities also
raise concerns over regional and global security.
As for Russia, it is observed that the country is proceeding to
reform and modernize its military forces mainly by strengthening
their readiness and introducing new equipment. The activities of
Russian armed forces have been active.
The U.S. has clearly manifested its strategic decision to put
greater emphasis on the Asia-Pacific region (the rebalance to the
Asia-Pacific region) and is maintaining and strengthening its
engagement and presence in the region despite fiscal and various
other constraints in order to maintain the stability and growth of
the region while enhancing its relationships with its allies and
expanding cooperation with partner countries. In addition, the U.S.
has made its stance clear to prevent coercive actions that aim at


❍ By precisely and effectively communicating information on
Japan’s position based on objective facts, Japan will be able
to gain accurate understanding in the form of international
opinion.
(3) Reinforcing the Social Base
❍ It is essential that each and every Japanese national hopes to
contribute to peace and stability in the region and the world,
and to the improvement of the welfare of humanity, as well as
that they perceive national security as a familiar and immediate
issue for them, and have deep understanding of its importance
and complexity.
❍ Japan will foster respect for other countries and their people as
well as love for the country and region.
❍ Japan will advance measures that raise awareness with regard
to security on such issues as territory and sovereignty, and that
increase understanding of the activities of the SDF and the
U.S. Forces in Japan.
(4) Enhancing the Intellectual Base
❍ Japan will seek to enhance education on security-related
subjects at institutions of higher education.
❍ Exchanges will be deepened between the Government and
institutions of higher education, think tanks, etc.
❍ Japan will promote the fostering of private-sector experts and
government officials.

**Reference 6** **NATIONAL DEFENSE PROGRAM GUIDELINES for**
**FY2014 and beyond**

(Approved by the National Security Council
and the Cabinet on December 17, 2013)
Stipulations regarding the National Defense Program Guidelines for
FY2014 and Beyond are included in the reference.
Accordingly, the National Defense Program Guidelines for FY2011
and Beyond (approved by the Cabinet on December 17, 2010) are
discontinued as of the end of FY2013.
(Additional reference)
National Defense Program Guidelines for FY2014 and beyond
**I. NDPG’s Objective**
In light of the current security environment surrounding Japan,
the Government of Japan sets out the “National Defense Program
Guidelines for FY2014 and beyond” as new guidelines for Japan’s
national defense, based on “Defense Capability Build-up in FY2013”
(approved by the Security Council and the Cabinet on January 25, 2013)
and the “National Security Strategy” (approved by the National Security
Council and the Cabinet on December 17, 2013).
**II. Security Environment Surrounding Japan**
1. As interdependence among countries expands and deepens, there
is a growing risk that unrest in the global security environment or
a security problem in a single country or region could immediately
develop into a security challenge or destabilizing factor for the
entire international community. The multi-polarization of the world
continues as a result of shifts in the balance of power due to the
further development of countries such as China and India and the
relative change of influence of the United States (U.S.). At the same
time, the U.S. is expected to continue to play the role in maintaining
world peace and stability as it retains the largest national power.
There are ongoing regional conflicts involving various countries
as well as an increase in the number of so-called “gray-zone”
situations, that is, neither pure peacetime nor contingencies over
territory, sovereignty and maritime economic interests.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
and ballistic missiles continues to be a deep concern despite nonproliferation efforts by the international community. The presence
of countries with weak governance and failed states feeds the
expansion and spread of international terrorism. These problems
continue to pose imminent security challenges.
In the maritime domain, piracy acts have taken place in various
parts of the world, and there have been cases where coastal states
unilaterally asserted their rights and took action based on their own
assertion concerning international maritime law, thereby unduly
infringing the freedom of the high seas.
Securing the stable use of outer space and cyberspace as
global commons is becoming a significant security challenge for
the international community including Japan against the backdrop
of rapid technology innovation. In addition, military strategies and
military balance in the future are anticipated to be significantly
affected by the progress and proliferation of technologies such as


-----

changing the status quo in the region in cooperation with allies and
partners.
3. Japan is surrounded by the sea, and has a long coastline, numerous
remote islands and a vast Exclusive Economic Zone. Japan is a
maritime state and dependent largely on international trade for its
supply of food and natural resources. Therefore, securing the safety
of maritime and air traffic, through strengthening an “Open and
Stable Seas” order based upon such fundamental principles as the
rule of law and the freedom of navigation, constitutes the basis of
peace and prosperity.
Japan also faces security vulnerabilities resulting from
concentration of industry, population and information infrastructure
in urban areas and from the presence of a large number of key
facilities, such as nuclear power plants, in coastal areas. In the event
of another massive earthquake like the Great East Japan Earthquake,
Japan may suffer enormous damage and the impact may spread not
only nationwide but also to other countries. The possibility of future
huge earthquakes such as a Nankai Trough earthquake or a Tokyo
inland earthquake makes it increasingly necessary to take every
possible measure to prepare for large-scale disasters.
4. In light of the above, while the probability of a large-scale military
conflict between major countries, which was a concern during the
Cold War era, presumably remains low, various security challenges
and destabilizing factors are emerging and becoming more tangible
and acute. As a result, the security environment surrounding Japan
has become increasingly severe, since the formulation of “National
Defense Program Guidelines, FY2011 and beyond” (approved by
the Security Council and the Cabinet on December 17, 2010). As
the security challenges and destabilizing factors are diverse and
wide-ranging, it is difficult for a single country to deal with them on
its own. Under these circumstances, it is increasingly necessary not
only that the military sector cooperate with the non-military sector
but also that countries which share interests in responding to shared
security challenges cooperate and actively respond to maintain
regional and global stability.
**III. Japan’s Basic Defense Policy**
1. Basic Policy
In light of the National Security Strategy, Japan will strengthen its
diplomatic and defense capabilities along the policy of “Proactive
Contribution to Peace” based on the principle of international
cooperation, thereby expanding the role it can play. At the same
time, Japan will contribute even more proactively in securing
peace, stability and prosperity of the international community
while achieving its own security as well as peace and stability in
the Asia-Pacific region by expanding and deepening cooperative
relationships with other countries, with the Japan-U.S. Alliance as
its cornerstone.
Under this basic principle, Japan will build a comprehensive
defense architecture and strengthen its posture for preventing and
responding to various situations. In addition, Japan will strengthen
the Japan-U.S. Alliance and actively promote bilateral and
multilateral security cooperation with other countries while closely
coordinating defense and diplomatic policies. Japan will also seek
to establish an infrastructure necessary for its defense forces to fully
exercise their capabilities.
When implementing these measures, under the Constitution,
Japan will efficiently build a highly effective and joint defense
force in line with the basic principles of maintaining an exclusively
defense-oriented policy, not becoming a military power that poses a
threat to other countries, while adhering to the principle of civilian
control of the military and observing the Three Non-Nuclear
Principles.
With regard to the threat of nuclear weapons, the extended
deterrence provided by the U.S. with nuclear deterrence at its core,
is indispensable. In order to maintain and enhance the credibility of
the extended deterrence, Japan will closely cooperate with the U.S.
In addition, Japan will take appropriate responses through its own
efforts, including ballistic missile defense (BMD) and protection
of the people. At the same time, Japan will play a constructive
and active role in international nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation efforts so as to achieve the long-term goal of creating a
world free of nuclear weapons.
2. Japan’s Own Efforts
Recognizing that a country’s security depends first and foremost on
its independent efforts, Japan will make full-scale efforts on its own
initiative to prevent various situations and will seamlessly respond
to them as the situation evolves with the National Security Council


as the control tower, while maintaining cooperation with its ally,
partners and other countries concerned.
(1) Building a comprehensive defense architecture
Given the increasingly severe security environment, Japan will
efficiently develop a highly effective joint defense force and
make efforts to employ it with a high level of flexibility and
readiness based on joint operations. Japan will also ensure close
regular interagency cooperation in normal times. In the event
of various situations, the Government, under strong political
leadership, will appropriately and promptly make decisions.
Japan will seamlessly respond to situations as they unfold, in a
whole-of-the-government approach, to ensure the protection of
the lives and property of its people and the sovereignty of Japan’s
territorial land, waters and airspace, in coordination with local
governments, private sectors, and others.
Japan will also continue to develop various systems to
respond to a variety of disasters and protect its people and will
enhance the capability to quickly evacuate Japanese nationals
from foreign countries in an emergency situation and ensure their
safety.
In order to take such approaches appropriately, Japan will
increase the effectiveness of its situation and disaster response
posture by systemizing various related plans and formulating
and reviewing them as well as expanding the use of simulations,
comprehensive training and exercises.
(2) Japan’s defense forces – building a Dynamic Joint Defense Force
Japan’s defense forces are the ultimate guarantee of national
security, and represent Japan’s will and ability to deter threats
from directly reaching Japan and defeat them if threats should
reach Japan.
In the times of an ever-changing security environment
surrounding Japan, defense forces need to be constantly reviewed
to adapt to the environment. To this aim, Japan needs to allocate
limited resources in a focused and flexible way to prioritize the
functions and capabilities from a comprehensive perspective,
identified through joint operation-based capability assessments of
the Self-Defense Force’s (SDF’s) total functions and capabilities
against various situations.
Amid the increasingly severe security environment
surrounding Japan, the SDF, in addition to its regular activities,
needs to respond to various situations, including “gray zone”
situations which require SDF commitment. The frequency of
such situations and the duration of responses are both increasing.
Therefore, Japan will regularly conduct persistent intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance (hereinafter “ISR”) activities.
Moreover, the SDF will conduct strategic training and exercises
in accordance with the development of the situation and swiftly
build a response posture including advance deployment of units
in response to the security environment and rapid deployment of
adequate units. Thus Japan will demonstrate its will and highly
developed capability to prevent further escalation. In dealing with
situations, depending on their development, minimizing damage
by effective response through achieving maritime supremacy and
air superiority is essential in safeguarding the lives and property
of the Japanese people, and the sovereignty of Japan’s territorial
land, waters and airspace.
Therefore, Japan will enhance its deterrence and response
capability by improving the mission-capable rate of equipment
and its employment to conduct tailored activities swiftly and
sustainably based on joint operations, as well as by developing
defense capabilities adequate both in quantity and quality that
underpin various activities to realize a more robust defense force.
At the same time, from the perspective of “Proactive
Contribution to Peace” based on the principle of international
cooperation, Japan will strengthen its bilateral and multilateral
cooperative relationships in order to ensure the stability of the
Asia-Pacific region, which is closely related to its own security.
Japan will also engage in international peacekeeping and other
similar activities (peacekeeping operations by the United Nations,
non-traditional security initiatives including Humanitarian
Assistance/Disaster Relief (HA/DR), and other internationally
collaborative activities to improve the international security
environment) and other efforts more proactively than before as
efforts to address the global security challenges, in light of the
diversified roles and increased opportunities of the defense force.
From these viewpoints, given the changes in the security
environment, the defense force based on this NDPG should
prioritize particularly important functions and capabilities


-----

through optimal resource allocation as a whole. The defense
force also must be an effective one which enables conducting a
diverse range of activities to be seamless as well as dynamic and
adapting to situations as they demand. To that end, Japan will
build a Dynamic Joint Defense Force, which emphasizes both
soft and hard aspects of readiness, sustainability, resiliency and
connectivity, reinforced by advanced technology and capability
for C3I, with a consideration to establish a wide range of
infrastructure to support the SDF’s operation.
3. Strengthening of the Japan-U.S. Alliance
The Japan-U.S. Security Arrangements based on the Japan-U.S.
Security Treaty, together with Japan’s own efforts, constitute the
cornerstone for Japan’s national security. The Japan-U.S. Alliance
centered on bilateral security arrangements functions as public
goods that contribute to the stability and prosperity not only of
Japan but also of the Asia-Pacific region and the world at large.
Under its policy of strategic rebalancing towards the AsiaPacific region, the U.S. is maintaining and strengthening its
engagement and presence in the region while enhancing its
partnerships and cooperation with its allies, including Japan, and
partner countries. As the security environment surrounding Japan
becomes increasingly severer, it has become more important than
ever for Japan’s security to strengthen the Japan-U.S. Alliance and
make it more balanced and effective.
(1) Strengthening deterrence and response capabilities of the JapanU.S. Alliance

In order to ensure Japan’s national security by maintaining and
strengthening the commitment of the U.S. towards Japan and
the Asia-Pacific region, Japan will revise the Guidelines for
Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation, further enhance Japan-U.S.
defense cooperation and reinforce the deterrence provided by
the Japan-U.S. Alliance and the alliance’s contingency response
capabilities, while strengthening Japan’s own capabilities as a
premise for these efforts.
At the same time, in response to the increasingly severe
security environment, while increasing the presence of Japan and
the U.S. in the western Pacific region, Japan will build seamless
cooperation with the U.S. ranging from situations on a day-to-day
basis to various situations, including cooperation in responding to
“gray-zone” situations.
To that end, Japan will continue to expand joint training
and exercises, joint ISR activities and the joint/shared use of
facilities and areas with the U.S. It will also tighten the JapanU.S. operational cooperation and policy coordination including
contingency response and medium-to long-term strategies, such
as BMD, bilateral planning, and Extended Deterrence Dialogue.
(2) Strengthening and expanding cooperation in a broad range of
fields

The Japan-U.S. Alliance will contribute to the peace and stability
of the world, including the Asia-Pacific region, by strengthening
cooperation not only in the fields of anti-piracy efforts, capacity
building assistance, HA/DR, peacekeeping and counter terrorism
but also in maritime affairs, outer space and cyberspace.
As for disaster response, Japan will further strengthen its
cooperation between the SDF and the U.S. forces within and
outside Japan in light of the fact that the U.S. forces, including its
USFJ facilities and areas, greatly contributed to the safety of the
Japanese people during the Great East Japan Earthquake.
In addition, Japan will constantly strengthen and expand the
Japan-U.S. cooperative relationship over a broad range of fields,
including efforts for intelligence cooperation and information
security, and cooperation in the field of defense equipment and
technology, to build a firmer and effective alliance.
(3) Steady implementation of measures relating to the stationing of
U.S. Forces in Japan

Japan will provide stable support for the smooth and effective
stationing of U.S. forces in Japan through various measures,
including Host Nation Support (HNS). At the same time, efforts
will be made to steadily implement the realignment of U.S. forces
in Japan and mitigate the impact on local communities while
maintaining the deterrence provided by U.S. forces. In particular,
Japan will seek to mitigate the impact on Okinawa, located in
a critically important location in terms of national security and
where the stationing of U.S. forces significantly contributes
to the deterrence of the Japan-U.S. Alliance, by realignment,
consolidation and reduction of USFJ facilities and areas including
through the relocation of Marine Corps Air Station Futenma as
well as the dispersion of the impact and other measures, in light


of the heavy concentration of such facilities and areas there.
4. Active Promotion of Security Cooperation
(1) Cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region
In the Asia-Pacific region, specific cooperative measures have
been taken mainly in non-traditional security fields, including
disaster relief. Multilateral frameworks such as the ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF), the ASEAN Defense Ministers’
Meeting-Plus (ADMM Plus) and the East Asia Summit (EAS)
have been developed and the regional integration initiative led by
ASEAN has been making progress. However, security challenges
are becoming more serious than ever in North East Asia. Japan
will promote a variety of further cooperative initiatives in a multilayered manner to ease the atmosphere of confrontation and the
sense of curiosity toward one another in the region.
Japan will promote close cooperation with the Republic of
Korea (ROK), which is in a position to support the U.S. presence
in North East Asia together with Japan, and will make efforts
to establish a foundation for further cooperation with the ROK,
for example by concluding an agreement on security information
protection and an acquisition and cross-servicing agreement.
Japan will further deepen its relationship with Australia, with
which Japan shares security interests and security cooperation
has been advancing, and strengthen cooperation in fields such
as international peacekeeping activities. Japan will also actively
conduct joint training and other activities so as to improve
interoperability with Australia.
Moreover, efforts will be made to promote the partnerships
among U.S. allies in the Asia-Pacific region by strengthening
cooperative relationships under trilateral frameworks among
Japan, the U.S. and ROK and among Japan, the U.S. and
Australia.
As Chinese activities have a significant impact on regional
security, Japan will promote security dialogue and exchanges
with China in order to enhance mutual understanding and will
develop confidence-building measures to prevent unexpected
situations. Japan will maintain a calm and firm stance in dealing
with the rapid expansion and intensification of Chinese activities
on the sea and in the air surrounding Japan.
Japan will promote security dialogues with Russia, including
the Foreign and Defense Ministerial Consultations (“2+2”), highlevel exchanges, and unit-to-unit exchanges in order to deepen
understanding about the intention of Russian military activities
and develop mutual trust with Russia. In addition, Japan will
enhance bilateral training and exercises with Russia to promote
regional stability.
Japan will also further strengthen its relationships with
partner countries in the region, including Southeast Asian
countries, and will actively promote joint training and exercises
and capacity building assistance. In addition, Japan will
strengthen its cooperation with these countries in the field of
disaster management in light of the increasing frequency and
growing scale of disasters in the region. Japan will strengthen
its relationship with India in a broad range of fields, including
maritime security, through joint training and exercises as well as
joint implementation of international peacekeeping activities.
As capacity building assistance is effective in stabilizing
the security environment and strengthening bilateral defense
cooperation, Japan will promote it in full coordination with
diplomatic policy initiatives, including the Official Development
Assistance, and aligning it with joint training and exercises and
international peacekeeping activities. Japan will also strengthen
cooperation with relevant countries which actively provide such
support, thereby expanding the range of countries receiving
support as well as its scope.
Under ongoing multilateral security cooperation and
dialogue in the Asia-Pacific region, Japan in cooperation with
the United States and Australia will proactively contribute to
building cooperative relationships in the region. Moreover,
Japan will actively participate in multilateral joint training and
exercises and play a major role in enhancing confidence-building
measures among countries in the region, attaching importance to
multilateral frameworks such as the ARF and the ADMM Plus.
(2) Cooperation with the international community
It is very difficult for a single country to respond to global
security challenges on its own. Moreover, as the roles of military
forces have diversified, there are increasing opportunities for
such forces to play an important role not only in preventing
and responding to conflicts and maintaining peace but also in


-----

supporting post-conflict reconstruction, building peace and
promoting confidence-building and friendly relationships.
Therefore, Japan will promote various initiatives to improve
the global security environment on a regular basis in cooperation
with the international community.
Japan will continue and strengthen various initiatives
concerning arms control, disarmament, nonproliferation and
capacity building assistance in order to respond to global security
challenges, including regional conflicts, expansion and spread
of international terrorism, failed states, proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and problems related to the sea, outer space
and cyberspace, while regularly cooperating with its ally and
relevant countries with which it shares security interests and with
international organizations and other relevant bodies.
In this respect, Japan will further strengthen its cooperation
with the European Union (EU), North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE) and with the United Kingdom, France and other
European countries and will work with them in responding to
these challenges. Japan will also promote cooperation and
exchanges with regard to equipment and technology with these
countries and organizations.
In order to stabilize the security environment in the AsiaPacific region and improve the global security environment based
on the policy of “Proactive Contribution to Peace” based on the
principle of international cooperation, Japan will actively promote
various international peace cooperation activities, including
international peace cooperation assignments and emergency
relief activities, in a multi-layered manner. To this end, Japan
will ensure close cooperation between the defense and foreign
affairs authorities, with comprehensive consideration given to
the significance of the dispatch of SDF units, the situation of
countries accepting SDF units and Japan’s political and economic
relationships with recipient countries.
With regard to international peace cooperation activities
and other similar activities in particular, Japan will continue
to actively conduct activities utilizing the SDF’s capabilities
and will increase the number of SDF personnel it dispatches to
assume positions of responsibility at organizations such as the
local mission headquarters and the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. In addition, Japan will conduct a study
on various challenges it has to overcome to enable the dispatch
of SDF personnel in a broad range of fields, and take necessary
measures. Japan will also contribute to the training of domestic
and foreign personnel engaging in peacebuilding by making use
of the SDF’s experience and knowledge.
**IV. Future Defense Forces**
1. The Role of the Defense Force
Japan’s future defense forces will be developed as described in III.
2 (2) above, and will be capable of effectively fulfilling the expected
roles in the following fields, and will maintain the necessary posture.
(1) Effective deterrence of and response to various situations
In order to respond to various situations in a timely and
appropriate manner, and certainly protect the lives and property
of its people and the sovereignty of its land, sea and airspace,
Japan will achieve intelligence superiority through persistent ISR
activities in an extensive surrounding area to constantly gain an
understanding of military developments in other countries and to
detect any signs of development at an early stage.
Through such activities, Japan will clearly express its resolve
not to tolerate the change of the status quo by force, thereby
preventing various situations from occurring.
At the same time, Japan will swiftly and seamlessly respond
to situations including gray zone situations, and will establish the
necessary posture to continuously address a protracted situation.
Moreover, Japan will implement an effective response
tailored to each situation, even in cases when multiple events
occur in a consecutive or concurrent manner.
When implementing the initiatives above, the following
points are emphasized in particular:
a. Ensuring security of the sea and airspace surrounding Japan
In addition to persistent ISR in an extensive area around Japan,
Japan will immediately take appropriate measures to deal with
any incursions into its territorial airspace. Japan will respond
effectively and promptly to gray-zone situations or any other
acts that may violate its sovereignty. Furthermore, should the
acts in question become protracted or escalate, Japan will


respond seamlessly as the situation evolves, taking all possible
measures for the defense and security of the sea and airspace
surrounding Japan.
b. Response to an attack on remote islands
In responding to an attack on remote islands, Japan will
intercept and defeat any invasion, by securing maritime
supremacy and air superiority, with the necessary SDF units
swiftly deployed to interdict, in addition to the units deployed
in advance in accordance with the security environment.
Moreover, should any remote islands be invaded, Japan will
recapture them. In doing so, any ballistic missile or cruise
missile attacks will be dealt with appropriately.
c. Response to ballistic missile attacks
Japan will promptly detect any signs of a ballistic missile
launch and facilitate a swift, sustained response by establishing
a multi-layered defense posture. Should any damage result,
Japan will take steps to minimize it. Moreover, in the event of
an attack by guerrillas or special operations forces concurrent
with a ballistic missile attack, Japan will protect key facilities
including nuclear power plants and search and destroy the
infiltrating units.
d. Responses in outer space and cyberspace
In regard with outer space and cyberspace, Japan will build
up persistent ISR capabilities to prevent any acts that could
impede efficient action by the SDF. Furthermore, should any
situation arise, Japan will identify the event without delay and
swiftly repair any damage, while taking necessary steps to
contain it. Moreover, in light of society’s growing dependence
on outer space and cyberspace, Japan will make effective use
of the SDF’s capabilities when endeavoring to strengthen
collaboration with relevant organizations and clarify the
division of roles, thereby contributing to comprehensive,
government-wide initiatives.
e. Responses to major disasters
Should a major disaster occur, Japan will swiftly transport
and deploy the requisite units and take all possible measures
as part of its initial response, and maintain its presence in the
longer term, when required. Moreover, as well as providing a
meticulous response to the needs of disaster-stricken citizens
and local government bodies, Japan will engage in appropriate
partnerships and cooperation with local governments and
the private sector, in order to save lives, carry out emergency
repairs, and provide livelihood support.
(2) Stabilization of the Asia-Pacific and improvement of global
security environments

Through persistent ISR in the area surrounding Japan and the
timely and appropriate implementation of training, exercises,
and various other activities, Japan will ensure the stability of
the security environment in the Asia-Pacific region as a whole
including the vicinity of Japan.
Moreover, working in partnership with its ally and partners,
Japan will promote multi-tiered initiatives, including bilateral and
multilateral defense cooperation and exchange, joint training and
exercises, and capacity building assistance, effectively fulfilling
its key role in initiatives focused on the stabilization of the
security environment, including the building and strengthening of
intra-regional cooperative frameworks in the Asia-Pacific region.
As the roles played by military capacity diversify, in order
to respond appropriately to global security issues including
regional conflicts, the expansion and spread of international
terrorism, failed states, and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, Japan will strengthen various initiatives focused
on arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation, as well
as actively promote international peace cooperation activities,
anti-piracy initiatives and capacity building assistance, thereby
working on improvement of the global security environment.
Japan will attach importance to the following in particular,
when engaging in the aforementioned initiatives.
a. Holding training and exercises
As well as the timely and appropriate implementation of
SDF training and exercises, Japan will promote bilateral
and multilateral joint training and exercises in the AsiaPacific region, proactively and visibly demonstrating our
nation’s resolve and advanced capabilities focused on
regional stabilization. In addition, it will build and strengthen
cooperative relationships with relevant countries.
b. Promoting defense cooperation and exchange
Enhancing mutual understanding and relationships of trust


-----

with other countries and international organizations is the
cornerstone of efforts to stabilize the security environment.
Japan will take further steps to promote multi-layered defense
cooperation and exchange, such as building and strengthening
cooperative relationships focused on wide-ranging security
issues of common interest including HADR and ensuring the
stable use of the seas, outer space and cyberspace.
c. Promoting capacity building assistance
Utilizing the capabilities of the SDF, Japan will continuously
engage in capacity building assistance such as human resource
development and technical support on a regular basis in order
to enhance the ability of developing countries themselves,
thereby improving the security environment with particular
focus on active creation of stability in the Asia-Pacific region.
d. Ensuring maritime security
As it is particularly vital for Japan as a maritime state to
maintain an “Open and Stable Seas” order which serves as
the cornerstone of peace and prosperity, Japan will take all
possible measures to secure the safety of maritime traffic.
Japan will also conduct anti-piracy activities in cooperation
with countries concerned, and will promote various efforts
including capacity building assistance of coastal states in this
field and enhancement of joint training and exercises by taking
various opportunities in waters other than those surrounding
our country.
e. Implementing international peace cooperation activities
Working in partnership with non-governmental organizations
and other relevant organizations, Japan will actively engage
in international peace cooperation assignments and emergency
relief activities to meet diverse needs, from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, placing greater emphasis on playing more of
a leading role. In doing so, as well as enhancing its readiness
posture to facilitate rapid overseas dispatch according to the
situation, Japan will strengthen its sustainable preparedness
for a protracted overseas deployment.
f. Cooperating with efforts to promote arms control, disarmament,
and nonproliferation

Japan will be actively involved in arms control and disarmament
activities undertaken by the United Nations and other bodies.
In doing so, Japan will make active, effective use of the
SDF’s knowledge, including through personnel contribution.
Moreover, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
missiles that can serve as their means of delivery, as well as the
proliferation of arms and goods and technology which could
be diverted to military use pose severe threats to the peace
and stability not only of Japan but also of the international
community as a whole. Thus, Japan will cooperate with
relevant countries and international organizations and other
relevant bodies in promoting nonproliferation initiatives.
2. Priorities in strengthening architecture of the Self Defense Forces
(1) Basic approach
The SDF will maintain an appropriate structure to effectively
fulfill the abovementioned roles of defense forces. As such, Japan
has conducted capability assessments based on joint operations
in relation to various potential contingencies to identify the
functions and capabilities that should be prioritized in order to
pursue more effective build-up of the defense force.
Based on the results of the capability assessments, in
the defense capability buildup, the SDF will prioritize the
development of capacities to ensure maritime supremacy and
air superiority, which is the prerequisite for effective deterrence
and response in various situations, including defense posture
buildup in the southwestern region. Furthermore, the SDF will
emphasize the establishment of rapid deployment capabilities
with a consideration to establishing a wide-ranging logistical
support foundation.
At the same time, in terms of preparation for a Cold-War
era style invasion such as the landing of large-scale ground
forces, the SDF will possess the minimum necessary level of
expertise and skills required to respond to unforeseen changes in
the situation in the future and to maintain and inherit them, and
thereby further promote efforts to achieve even greater efficiency
and rationalization.
(2) Functions and capabilities to be emphasized
From the perspective of efficiently developing an effective
defense force, the SDF will selectively strengthen the following
functions and capabilities in particular, paying attention to
enhance joint functions with interoperability with the U.S. forces.


a. ISR capabilities
In order to ensure effective deterrence and response to various
situations, while utilizing unmanned equipment, Japan will
implement extensive persistent ISR on objectives such as
aircraft and vessels in the seas and airspace surrounding it,
and the SDF will adopt a flexible approach to boosting its ISR
posture according to the developments of situations.
b. Intelligence capabilities
Japan will strengthen its system for intelligence collection,
processing information, and analyzing and sharing the
collected information, so that the SDF can promptly detect
and swiftly respond to signs of various situations and take
necessary measures based on medium-to long-term military
trends mainly in its vicinity.
In doing so, the SDF will seek to augment its various
information collection capabilities, including HUMINT,
OSINT, SIGINT, and IMINT, as well as persistent ISR
capabilities using unmanned aerial vehicles. Also, the
SDF will engage in integrated efforts to strengthen its
geospatial intelligence capabilities to combine various types
of intelligence on images and maps to exploit them in a
sophisticated manner, while establishing a framework for
the integrated and systematic nurturing of highly capable
personnel in information gathering analysis.
c. Transport capability
In order to secure swift and large-scale transport and
deployment capability, and to swiftly deploy and move
necessary units, the SDF will strengthen integrated transport
capacity including maritime and airborne transport capacity,
with collaboration with the civilian transport sector. In doing
so, the SDF will avoid redundancy in functions by clarifying
roles and assignments among various means of transport,
considering their respective characteristics.
d. Command and control, and information and communications
capabilities

In order to establish a command and control system that can
manage units nationwide in a mobile, joint integrated manner,
the SDF will take steps to deploy the Ground Self-Defense
Force (GSDF), Maritime Self-Defense Force (MSDF) and
Air Self-Defense Force (ASDF) personnel in the main
headquarters of each service, making effective use of the
knowledge and experience held by each respective service.
Furthermore, the SDF will facilitate swift, resilient nationwide
operation of the GSDF’s units such as basic operational units
(divisions and brigades) through the establishment of a new
central headquarters to control all of the regional armies, as
well as greater efficiency and streamlining of the command
and control function in each regional army headquarters, and
other measures.
Moreover, the SDF will strive to enhance and strengthen
its information and communications capabilities that are
prerequisites for supporting nationwide operation, starting
with the communications infrastructure on remote islands and
data link functions among the three services.
e. Response to an attack on remote islands
In order to ensure maritime supremacy and air superiority
which is a prerequisite for effective response to an attack on
remote islands, the SDF will strengthen its ability to deal with
attacks by aircraft, naval vessels, and missiles, etc.
Moreover, while strengthening the integrated capabilities
to seek to interdict any attack on Japan’s remote islands at sea,
the SDF will newly develop sufficient amphibious operations
capability, which enables the SDF to land, recapture and secure
without delay in the case of an invasion of any remote islands.
Furthermore, the SDF will enhance its logistical support
capabilities, so that SDF units can swiftly and continuously
respond in the event of a situation in the southwestern region.
In addition, the SDF will also examine the desirable air
defense posture in remote islands in the Pacific.
f. Response to ballistic missile attacks
To counter North Korea’s improved ballistic missile capability,
Japan will pursue comprehensive improvement of its response
capability against the threat of ballistic missiles.
With regard to the BMD system, Japan will enhance
readiness, simultaneous engagement capability and sustainable
response capability to strengthen the capability to protect the
entire territory.
Based on appropriate role and mission sharing between


-----

Japan and the U.S., in order to strengthen the deterrent of
the Japan-U.S. Alliance as a whole through enhancement of
Japan’s own deterrent and response capability, Japan will
study a potential form of response capability to address the
means of ballistic missile launches and related facilities, and
take means as necessary.
g. Responses in outer space and cyberspace
While strengthening information collection capability using
satellites equipped with a variety of sensors, and reinforcing
command, control and telecommunications capabilities, the
SDF will secure effective, stable use of outer space so that
satellites can continuously exercise their capabilities even
in contingencies by enhancing the survivability of satellites
through such initiatives as space situational awareness. In
implementing such initiatives, the SDF will form organic
partnerships with research and development institutions in
Japan, as well as with the U.S.
As for cyberspace, Japan will enhance integrated persistent
surveillance and response capabilities and expertise and latest
equipment will be continuously developed and secured in
order to prevent actions that hinder efficient SDF activities.
h. Responses to major disasters, etc.
In the event of a large-scale natural disaster such as a Nankai
Trough earthquake, or an atypical disaster such as a nuclear
emergency, it is of vital importance to respond swiftly from
the initial stages of the impact and carry out such tasks as
information gathering on the extent and nature of the damage
from the air by aircrafts, rescue operations and emergency
repairs. In this regard, the SDF will develop a response
posture sustainable for long-term operation, through swift
transportation and deployment of appropriately size units,
and by establishing a rotating staffing posture based on a joint
operational approach.
i. Responses focused on international peace cooperation
activities and other similar activities

In international peace cooperation activities and other similar
activities, the SDF will strengthen the necessary protective
capabilities to carry out its operations, ensuring the safety
of personnel and units. Moreover, the SDF will work on
enhancing transport and deployment capability, information
communication capability with a view to long term activities
in Africa and other remote locations, and strengthening logistic
and medical service structure for smooth and continuous
operation.
From the standpoint of carrying out international peace
cooperation activities more effectively, Japan will consider
measures for making more effective use of the SDF Operational
Facility for Deployed Air Force for Anti-Piracy Operation in
Djibouti.
Furthermore, while strengthening intelligence gathering
capability required for operations, the SDF will enhance
its education, training and personnel management systems
in order to facilitate the continuous dispatch of adequate
personnel for overseas cooperation activities.
3. Architecture of each service of the Self-Defense Forces
The organization, equipment and disposition in each service of
the SDF are outlined in (1) to (3) below. The specifics of major
organizations and equipment in the future are as shown in the Annex
table.
(1) Ground Self-Defense Force (GSDF)
a. In order to be able to respond swiftly and deal effectively
and nimbly with an attack on offshore islands and various
other situations, the GSDF will maintain rapidly deployable
basic operational units (rapid deployment divisions, rapid
deployment brigades and an armored division) furnished with
advanced mobility and ISR capabilities. In addition, the GSDF
will maintain mobile operating units sustaining specialized
functions in order to effectively perform such operations
as airborne operations, amphibious operations, special
operations, air transportation, defense against NBC (nuclear,
biological, and chemical) weapons, and international peace
cooperation activities.
Keeping in mind that the role of these highly-proficient
rapidly deployable basic operational units is to swiftly deploy
and move via the integrated transport capacity referred to in 2
(2) c. above, the GSDF will maintain half of these in Hokkaido,
given the excellent training environment there.
The defense posture in the remote islands of the


southwestern region will be enhanced and strengthened via
the permanent stationing of the units where the SDF is not
currently stationed, the deploy ability of the aforementioned
units, and the establishment of organic partnerships and
networks with the MSDF and ASDF.
b. The GSDF will maintain surface-to-ship guided missile units
in order to prevent invasion of Japan’s remote islands while
still at sea, as far as possible.
c. The GSDF will maintain surface-to-air guided missile units in
order to effectively provide air defense to protect operational
units and key areas, working in tandem with the surface-to-air
guided missile units referred to in (3) d. below.
d. The GSDF will review the organization and equipment of the
basic operational units (divisions and brigades) other than the
rapidly deployable ones referred to in a. above, with a particular
focus on tanks/howitzers and rockets. Following thorough
rationalization and streamlining, these units will be deployed
appropriately, according to geographical characteristics.
(2) Maritime Self Defense Force (MSDF)
a. The MSDF will maintain destroyer units and ship-based
patrol helicopter units strengthened by increased numbers
of equipment, including the new destroyers, with additional
multifunctional capability and with a compact-type hull, in
order to effectively conduct persistent ISR and antisubmarine
operations etc., thereby facilitating agile response in such areas
as the defense of the seas surrounding Japan, the security of
maritime traffic, and international peace cooperation activities
etc.
Along with the surface-to-air guided missile units referred
to in (3) d. below, the destroyer units will maintain Aegisequipped destroyers capable of providing Japan with multilayered defense against ballistic missile attacks.
b. The MSDF will maintain submarine units strengthened by
increased numbers of them, in order to effectively conduct
patrol and defense of the seas surrounding Japan, as well as
regularly engage in broad underwater intelligence gathering
and warning and surveillance in those seas.
c. The MSDF will maintain fixed-wing patrol aircraft units in
order to effectively conduct patrol and defense of the seas
surrounding Japan, as well as regularly engage in broad
maritime intelligence gathering and warning and surveillance
in those seas.
d. The MSDF will maintain minesweeper units in order to
effectively conduct minesweeping operations in the seas
surrounding Japan in collaboration with the new destroyers
with additional multifunctional capability and with the
compact-type hull referred to in a. above.
(3) Air Self-Defense Force (ASDF)
a. The ASDF will maintain air warning and control units
consisting of warning and control units and air warning units.
Warning and control units will be equipped with groundbased warning and control radar that can detect and track any
ballistic missiles flying into Japanese air space, as well as
providing persistent ISR in most air space over Japan and the
surrounding areas. Air warning units will be enhanced in order
to conduct effective warning, surveillance and control in the air
over long periods in the event of “gray zone” situations.
b. The ASDF will maintain fighter aircraft units reinforced
by highly capable fighter aircrafts in order to provide aerial
defense for Japan based on a comprehensive posture that
brings together fighter aircrafts and relevant support functions.
In addition, the ASDF will maintain enhanced aerial refueling
and transport units that will enable fighter aircraft units and air
warning units, etc. to carry out various operations sustainably
in the air space surrounding Japan.
c. The ASDF will maintain air transport units in order to
effectively carry out the mobile deployment of ground-based
units etc., and international peace cooperation activities etc.
d. The ASDF will maintain surface-to-air guided missile units
providing multi-layered defense for Japan against ballistic
missile attacks, together with the Aegis destroyers referred
to in (2) a. above, as well as protecting key areas in tandem
with the surface-to-air guided missile units referred to in (1) c.
above.
**V. Basic Foundations for SDF**
To ensure that the diverse activities required of the SDF are carried
out in a timely and appropriate manner, it is not sufficient simply to


-----

upgrade the main elements of the organization and its equipment; it is
also imperative to strengthen the various foundations underpinning the
defense force, in order to ensure that it can function as effectively as
possible. The key aspects of this are as follows.
1. Training and Exercises
Through routine training and exercises, the SDF will ceaselessly
review and examine various plans for dealing with situations, as
well as strive to enhance and strengthen its training and exercises in
order to improve the tactical skills in each of its branches. In doing
so, as well as making more effective use of the excellent training
environment in Hokkaido, the SDF will work in partnership with
relevant organizations and the civilian sector, in order to ensure
systematic implementation of more practical training and exercises.
In the southwestern region, where there are limitations on the
exercise areas, etc. of the SDF, the SDF will secure a favorable
training environment through the joint use of U.S. military facilities
and areas, while remaining sensitive to relationships with the local
community, so that timely and appropriate training and exercises
can be carried out, including Japan-U.S. bilateral training and
exercises.
2. Operational Infrastructure
The SDF will improve survivability, including the recovery
capabilities of military camps and bases, etc., in order to maintain
the support functions that serve as the operational infrastructure for
units, so that units can be deployed swiftly and respond to various
situations effectively.
Moreover, in light of the fact that some SDF facilities are
currently dilapidated, the SDF will implement a steady repair
and maintenance program, as well as expansion of the necessary
quarters in order to ensure an emergency call-up of personnel in the
event of various situations, thereby enhancing readiness.
The SDF will undertake necessary deliberations concerning
civilian airports and ports, including approaches to the various
systems on a day-to-day basis, in order to ensure that such facilities
can be used as part of the operational infrastructure for the SDF, etc.
from an early stage, depending on the situation. Furthermore, it will
implement various family support measures, in order to alleviate
the anxieties both of troops serving away from home and of their
families while they are away.
The SDF will enhance and strengthen the operational
infrastructure in terms of equipment and materials, such as
improving the operational availability of equipment, by taking all
possible measures to maintain and upgrade SDF equipment, as well
as securing and stockpiling the necessary ammunition.
3. Personnel and Education
Given that equipment has become more advanced and complex,
and missions more diverse and internationalized in recent years, the
SDF will implement measures to reform the personnel management
system, in order to ensure the edge of its troops and the effective
use of human resources amid a severe fiscal situation, taking into
consideration a variety of elements, including skills, experience,
physical strength and morale.
Accordingly, the SDF will implement measures to ensure an
appropriate composition of ranks and age distribution, taking into
account the various missions and characteristics of each branch of
the SDF.
The SDF will implement measures to make effective use
of human resources, such as more effective use of female SDF
personnel and expansion of reappointment, and measures related to
honors and privileges. In order to strengthen the joint operations
structure, the SDF will enhance education and training, and, through
secondments to the Joint Staff and relevant ministries and agencies,
retain adequate personnel who have a broad outlook and ideas, as
well as wide-ranging experience in Japan’s security-affairs, and
who can respond flexibly and rapidly to various situations as part
of the government.
In light of the deterioration of the recruiting environment
resulting from social factors such as the declining birthrate and
popularization of higher education, the SDF will promote a diverse
range of recruitment measures to spread the perception that the SDF
is an attractive job option.
Furthermore, as it is the responsibility of the Government
of Japan to secure the livelihoods of the SDF personnel, who are
compelled to resign at a younger age than ordinary civil servants,
the SDF will promote support for re-employment by strengthening
collaboration with local governments and relevant organizations.
In order to support sustainable operation of units in situations


that are becoming increasingly diversified and protracted, the
SDF will promote utilization of reserve personnel in broad areas,
including those with professional skills such as aviators, and will
take measures to improve the sufficiency of reserve personnel.
4. Medical
In order to keep SDF personnel in good health and enhance their
ability to engage in a diverse range of missions, such as various
situation responses and international peace cooperation activities,
the SDF will establish an efficient and high-quality medical care
structure, through endeavors including upgrading of SDF hospitals
into hubs with enhanced functions, and improvements in the
management of the National Defense Medical College Hospital.
The SDF will also attach greater importance to securing and training
of such medical staff as medical officers, nurses and emergency
medical technicians.
The SDF will consider such matters as revisions of regulations
of emergency medical treatment on situation responses, and improve
first aid capabilities on the frontline, and will put in place a posture
for rapid medical evacuation that takes into account the viewpoints
of enhanced joint capabilities.
5. Defense Production and Technological Bases
Retaining an adequate level of defense production and technological
bases is essential not only for the production, operation, maintenance
and upkeep of equipment, but also for research and development
of equipment that fits the operational environment, and for the
expected potential to contribute to enhancing deterrence.
At the same time, against the backdrop of the severe fiscal
situation and rises in the equipment unit price as it becomes
increasingly sophisticated and complex, the numbers of units of
procured equipment are on the decline. Moreover, the environment
surrounding Japan’s defense production and technological bases is
becoming more severe. For instance, the competitiveness of foreign
companies is growing, as a result of the advance of large-scale and
cross-border restructuring and consolidation of the defense industry.
In this kind of environment, the Ministry of Defense will
formulate a strategy that sets forth its future vision for Japan’s
defense production and technological bases as a whole and will
promote participation in international joint development and
production and adapting defense equipment to civilian use, in order
to maintain and reinforce such bases without delay.
With regard to contribution to peace and international
cooperation, there are increasing opportunities to cooperate in a more
effective manner through, for example, the utilization and provision
to disaster-stricken countries and others of heavy machinery and
other defense equipment carried to sites by the SDF. Moreover,
internationally, it has become the mainstream to participate in
international joint development and production projects in order to
improve the performance of defense equipment while dealing with
the rising costs of the equipment. In this context, from the perspective
of “Proactive Contribution to Peace” based on the principle
of international cooperation, Japan is required to engage more
proactively in peacebuilding efforts and international cooperation by
utilizing defense equipment in various ways, and to participate in joint
development and production of defense equipment and other related
items.
Against this backdrop, while giving due consideration to the
roles that the Three Principles on Arms Exports and their related
policy guidelines have played so far, the Government of Japan will
set out clear principles on the overseas transfer of arms and military
technology, which fit the new security environment. In this context,
considerations will be made with regard to defining cases where
transfers are prohibited; limiting cases where transfers could be
allowed with strict examination; and ensuring appropriate control
over transfers in terms of unauthorized use and third party transfer.
6. Efficient Acquisition of Equipment
In order to achieve effective and efficient acquisition of equipment,
including in research and development activities, the Ministry of
Defense will strengthen project management throughout the lifecycle of equipment through introducing a project manager system,
as well as through considering the possibility of further introducing
long-term contracts and further upgrading the contract system to
provide cost reduction incentives to companies, aiming to improve
cost-effectiveness throughout the life-cycle of equipment.
Moreover, the Ministry of Defense will try to improve readiness
and response capabilities through reforms of the logistics posture
through effective use of capacity in the private sector. Furthermore,
it will ceaselessly pursue greater transparency in the acquisition


-----

process and increased rationalization of the contract system, and
strive to achieve more rigorous procedures for the acquisition of
equipment.
7. Research and Development
The Ministry of Defense will ensure consistency with the priorities
for upgrading defense capability when commencing research and
development, in order to guarantee that research and development
that meets the operational needs of the SDF is prioritized in view of
the severe fiscal situation.
In conjunction with this, the Ministry of Defense will promote
research and development based on a medium- to long-term
perspective, taking into account the latest trends in science and
technology, changes in combat modality, cost-effectiveness and the
potential for international joint research and development, with a
view to implementing research and development that can ensure
Japan’s technological superiority against new threats in strategically
important areas.
From the aspect of security, it is necessary to utilize civilian
technology effectively also in the field of security through regularly
assessing the trend in science and technology including information
related to technological development as well as consolidating the
capabilities of the government, industry and academia. Under such
recognition, the Ministry of Defense will strive to make effective
use of civilian technology that can also be applied to defense (dualuse technologies), by enhancing partnerships with universities
and research institutes, while strengthening technology control
functions to prevent the outflow of advanced technologies.
The Ministry of Defense will examine its research and
development initiative for achieving the aforementioned objectives.
8. Collaboration with Local Communities
The Ministry of Defense and the SDF will further strengthen
collaboration with relevant organizations, including local
governments, the police and the fire service, in order to enable the
SDF to provide accurate response to various situations. Such close
partnerships with local governments, etc. are exceedingly important
from the perspective not only of the effective improvement and
smooth operation of defense facilities, but also of the recruitment of
SDF personnel, as well as the provision of re-employment support
for them.
Accordingly, as well as continuing to advance measures
targeting the areas around defense facilities, with a view to their
improvement and operation, the Ministry of Defense and SDF
will routinely engage in various measures such as intensive public
relations activities focused on their policies and activities, in order
to secure the understanding and cooperation of local governments
and communities.
Given that the presence of SDF units makes a substantial
contribution to the maintenance and revitalization of local
communities in some areas, and supports community medicine
through emergency patient transport using SDF search and rescue
aircraft in others, the Ministry of Defense and the SDF will give
consideration to the attributes of each area in the reorganization of
units and deployment of military camps and bases, etc., in order
to secure the understanding of local governments and residents. At
the same time, in operating the military camps and bases, etc., the
Ministry of Defense will pay attention to the contribution of the
operation to the local economy.
9. Boosting Communication Capabilities
The Ministry of Defense and SDF will strengthen strategic public
relations and communication to enhance the dissemination of
information via a diverse range of media, in order to secure
domestic and overseas understanding which is vital to effectively
conduct SDF duties.
10. Enhancing the Intellectual Base
The Ministry of Defense will promote education on security-related
matters at educational institutions, in order to enhance understanding
of security and crisis management among the populace. Moreover,
in addition to strengthening the Ministry of Defense and SDF
research systems, with a particular focus on the National Institute
for Defense Studies, the Ministry of Defense will promote various
partnerships, including education and research exchange with other
research and educational institutions within the government, as well
as universities and think-tanks both within Japan and overseas.
11. Promoting Reform of the Ministry of Defense
The Ministry of Defense will further promote reforms by constantly
reviewing its work methods and organization in order to foster a
sense of unity among civilian officials and uniformed personnel,


total optimization in building up defense capability, strengthening
SDF’s joint operation functions and enhancing policy-making and
communication functions.
**VI. Additional Points**
1. These Guidelines set out the form of Japan’s defense force over
the next decade or so. The National Security Council will conduct
regular, systematic review over the course of implementation of
the various measures and programs. Smooth, swift and accurate
transition to the future defense force will be facilitated through
validations based on joint operational capability assessment while
advancing such initiatives in a timely and appropriate manner.
2. When major changes in the situation are anticipated during the
review and verification process, necessary examination of the
security environment at that time will be taken into account and
these guidelines will be revised adequately.
3. In light of the increasingly tough fiscal conditions, Japan will
strive to achieve greater efficiency and streamlining in the defense
capability buildup to curb costs, and harmonize with other initiatives
in other fields to ensure that Japan’s defense force as a whole can
smoothly fulfill its expected function.

|Category|Col2|Col3|Present (as of the end of FY2013)|Future|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|GSDF|Authorized Number of personnel Active-Duty Personnel Reserve-Ready Personnel||approx. 159,000 approx. 151,000 approx. 8,000|159,000 151,000 8,000|
||Major units|Rapid Deployment Units|Central Readiness Force 1 armored division|3 rapid deployment divisions 4 rapid deployment brigades 1 armored division 1 airborne brigade 1 amphibious rapid deployment brigade 1 helicopter brigade|
|||Regional Deployment Units|8 divisions 6 brigades|5 divisions 2 brigades|
|||Surface-to-Ship Guided Missile Units|5 surface-to-ship guided missile regiments|5 surface-to-ship guided missile regiments|
|||Surface-to-Air Guided Missile Units|8 anti-aircraft artillery groups/regiments|7 anti-aircraft artillery groups/regiments|
|MSDF|Major units|Destroyer Units Submarine Units Minesweeping Units Patrol aircraft Units|4 flotillas (8 divisions) 5 divisions 5 divisions 1 flotilla 9 squadrons|4 flotillas (8 divisions) 6 divisions 6 divisions 1 flotilla 9 squadrons|
||Major equipment|Destroyers (Aegis-Equipped Destroyers) Submarines Combat Aircraft|47 (6) 16 approx.170|54 (8) 22 approx.170|
|ASDF|Major units|Air Warning & Control Units Fighter Aircraft Units Air Reconnaissance Units Air Refueling/Transport Units Air Transport Units Surface-to-Air Guided Missile Units|8 warning groups 20 warning squadrons 1 AEW group (2 squadrons) 12 squadrons 1 squadron 1 squadron 3 squadrons 6 groups|28 warning squadrons 1 AEW group (3 squadrons) 13 squadrons — 2 squadrons 3 squadrons 6 groups|
||Major equipment|Combat aircraft Fighters|approx. 340 approx. 260|approx. 360 approx. 280|



Notes:The current number of tanks and howitzers/rockets (authorized number as of
the end of FY2013) are respectively approx. 700 and approx. 600, which will be
reduced respectively to approx. 300 and approx. 300 in the future.
Regarding major equipment/units that may also serve for BMD missions, their
acquisition/formation will be allowed within the number of Destroyers (AegisEquipped Destroyers), Air Warning & Control Units and Surface-to-Air Guided
Missile Units specifi ed above.


-----

**Reference 7** **Medium Term Defense Program (FY2014-FY2018)**

(December 17, 2013 Approved by
National Security Council and the Cabinet)
The Five-Year Defense Program (FY2014-FY2018) in accordance
with the National Defense Program Guidelines for FY2014 and
beyond (approved by the National Security Council and the Cabinet
on December 17, 2013) has been established as shown in the attached
document.
(Attachment)
Medium Term Defense Program (FY2014-FY2018)
**I. Program Guidelines**
In carrying out the Defense Program for FY2014 to FY2018 in
accordance with the National Defense Program Guidelines for FY2014
and beyond (approved by the National Security Council and the Cabinet
on December 17, 2013) (hereinafter “NDPG2013”), Japan will develop
a Dynamic Joint Defense Force. It will provide an effective defense
which enables the SDF to conduct a diverse range of activities based
on joint operations seamlessly and dynamically, adapting to situations
as they demand, while prioritizing particularly important functions
and capabilities through optimal resource allocation. At the same time,
the Dynamic Joint Defense Force will serve as a defense force which
emphasizes soft and hard readiness capabilities, sustainability, resiliency
and connectivity, reinforced by advanced technology and Command,
Control, Communications and Intelligence (C3I) capabilities, with
a consideration to establish a wide range of infrastructure to support
operations by the Self-Defense Forces (SDF). In strengthening the
SDF structure, a highly effective joint defense force will be efficiently
developed by comprehensively prioritizing particularly important
functions and capabilities identified through joint operation-based
capability assessments of the SDF’s overall functions and capabilities
against various scenarios.
Given the considerations mentioned above, the SDF will effectively
and efficiently build, maintain and operate defense forces based on the
following program guidelines:
1. The defense forces will seamlessly and dynamically fulfill its
responsibilities including providing an effective deterrence and
response to a variety of security situations, supporting stability in
the Asia-Pacific, and improving the global security environment.
With a focus on enhancement of joint operability, the SDF will
place particular emphasis on Intelligence, Surveillance, and
Reconnaissance (ISR), intelligence, transport, and C3I capabilities.
In addition, defense forces will enhance their capabilities to respond
to an attack on remote islands, ballistic missile attacks, outer space
and cyberspace threats, large-scale disasters, and international
peace cooperation efforts (activities cooperatively carried out
by the international society to improve the international security
environment such as U.N. Peace Keeping Operations, Humanitarian
Assistance/Disaster Relief (HA/DR), and others in the fields of nontraditional security). The SDF will steadily develop the foundations
for maximizing the effectiveness of these functions and capabilities.
2. In relevant efforts, the SDF will prioritize the development of
capacities to ensure maritime supremacy and air superiority,
which is the prerequisite for effective deterrence and response to
various situations, including defense posture buildup in Japan’s
southwestern region. Furthermore, the SDF will emphasize the
establishment of rapid deployment capabilities.
At the same time, regarding preparation for a Cold-War era style
invasion such as the landing of large-scale ground forces, the SDF
will establish the minimum necessary level of expertise and skill
required to respond to unforeseen changes in its security situation in
the future and to maintain them, and thereby further promote efforts
to achieve even greater efficiency and rationalization of its activities.
3. Regarding equipment acquisition and maintenance, by properly
combining the introduction of new, high-performance equipment,
with life extension and improvement of existing equipment etc., the
SDF will efficiently secure defense capabilities adequate both in
quantity and quality. In this effort, the Ministry of Defense (MOD)
will strengthen its project management throughout its equipment
life-cycle, including during its research and development activities,
and reduce the life-cycle costs to improve cost-effectiveness.
4. Given the more advanced and complex equipment, and more
diverse and internationalized missions in recent years, to ensure
SDF’s strength and the effective use of defense force personnel, the
SDF will implement measures, including the more effective use of
female SDF personnel and reserve personnel, in order to reform its


personnel management system.
5. In order to address an increasingly severe security environment and
to strengthen deterrence and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S.
Alliance, in conjunction with the U.S. policy of strategic rebalancing
towards the Asia-Pacific region, Japan will further promote a
variety of cooperation and consultations with the United States in
a wide range of areas including the revision of the Guidelines for
Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation. Japan will also actively facilitate
measures for furthering smooth and effective stationing of U.S.
forces in Japan.
6. Considering the increasingly difficult situation in Japan’s public
finance, Japan will strive to achieve greater efficiencies and
streamline the buildup of its defense forces, while harmonizing
these efforts with other measures taken by the Government.
**II. Reorganization of the Major SDF Units**
1. Regarding the reorganization of the Ground Self-Defense Force
(GSDF), given the changes in the security environment surrounding
Japan, for the purpose of carrying out swift and flexible nation-wide
operations of basic operational units (rapid deployment divisions/
brigades, an armored division, and divisions/brigades) and various
units under the joint operations, the GSDF will establish the Ground
Central Command. In addition, the GSDF promote efficiency and
rationalize the command and control function of each regional army
headquarters, as well as review other functions of some regional
army headquarters. As part of such efforts, the Central Readiness
Force will be disbanded and its subsidiary units will be integrated
into the Ground Central Command.
In order to be able to respond swiftly to and deal effectively
and nimbly with an attack on remote islands and various other
situations, the GSDF will transform two divisions and two brigades
respectively into two rapid deployment divisions and two rapid
deployment brigades that are furnished with advanced mobility
and ISR capabilities. By establishing a coast observation unit, area
security units in charge of initial response activities and so on,
the defense posture of the remote islands in the southwest region
will be strengthened. In a bid to develop sufficient amphibious
operational capabilities, which enable the SDF to land, recapture
and secure without delay any remote islands that might be invaded,
an amphibious rapid deployment brigade consisting of several
regiment-scale units specializing in amphibious operations will be
established.
From the perspective of enabling swift and flexible operations,
while thoroughly facilitating efficiency and rationalizing
preparations for invasion, such as the landing of large-scale ground
forces, the GSDF will steadily implement programs towards
successive formation of units equipped with newly-introduced
mobile combat vehicles and removal of tanks deployed in basic
operational units stationed in locations other than Hokkaido and
Kyushu. It will also concentrate tanks located in Kyushu into newly
organized tank units under direct command of the Western Army. In
addition, the GSDF will steadily carry out programs that concentrate
howitzers deployed in basic operational units stationed in locations
other than Hokkaido into field artillery units to be newly organized
under the direct command of the respective regional armies.
2. For the purpose of defending the seas surrounding Japan and
ensuring the security of maritime traffic in the region, through
the effective conduct of various operations such as persistent ISR
operations and anti-submarine operations, as well as for agile
response in international peace cooperation activities, the Marine
Self-Defense Force (MSDF) will retain four flotillas mainly
consisting of one helicopter destroyer (DDH), and two Aegisequipped destroyers (DDG). Five divisions will consist of other
destroyers as well. Necessary measures to increase the number of
submarines will also be continued.
3. To enhance the air defense posture in the southwestern region, the
Air Self-Defense Force (ASDF) will relocate one fighter squadron
to Naha Air Base, and newly organize and deploy one airborne early
warning squadron at Naha Air Base.
To prevent the relative decline of Japan’s air defense capabilities
and ensure sustained air superiority, ASDF units equipped with
training support functions will be integrated for further effective
enhancement of advanced tactical skills.
4. The total number of authorized GSDF personnel at the end of
FY2018 will be approximately 159,000, with approximately
151,000 being active-duty personnel, and approximately 8,000
being reserve-ready personnel. The authorized number of active

-----

duty personnel of the MSDF and ASDF through FY2018 will be
approximately at the same levels as at the end of FY2013.
**III. Major Programs regarding SDF’s Capabilities**
1. Effective Deterrence and Response to Various Situations
(1) Ensuring Security of the Sea and Airspace Surrounding Japan
In order to strengthen the posture to conduct persistent ISR in
broad areas and to detect any signs of significant development
at an early stage, the SDF will procure additional Aegisequipped destroyers (DDG), destroyer (DD), submarines, fixedwing patrol aircraft (P-1) and patrol helicopters (SH-60K),
and conduct service-extension work on existing destroyers,
submarines, fixed-wing patrol aircraft (P-3C) and patrol
helicopters (SH-60J), as well as take necessary measures after
fully reviewing the value of ship-based unmanned aerial vehicles
with patrol capabilities. With a view to increasing the number of
destroyers, the SDF will also introduce new, compact-type hull
destroyers with additional multifunctional capabilities. The SDF
will procure new airborne early warning and control aircraft or
airborne early warning aircraft, and fixed air defense radar, as
well as continuously improve its existing airborne warning and
control systems (AWACS) (E-767). In addition, the introduction
of unmanned aerial vehicles will support the establishment of a
joint unit with persistent ISR capabilities in broad areas. The SDF
will also undertake organizational reform that integrate groundbased aerial search and rescue functions into the ASDF, which
are currently performed by both the MSDF and ASDF.
(2) Response to an Attack on Remote Islands
(a) Development of a Persistent ISR Structure
With a view to organizing the structure required to carry
out regular and persistent ISR activities which enable an
immediate response in the case of various contingencies, the
SDF will deploy a coast observation unit to Yonaguni Island.
Considering the current operational situation of the existing
AWACS (E-767) and airborne early warning aircraft (E2C), the SDF will procure new airborne early warning and
control aircraft or airborne early warning aircraft as stated in
(1), and establish one squadron consisting of airborne early
warning aircraft (E-2C) in the air warning unit and deploy
it at Naha Air Base as stated in Section II-3. By preparing
a deployment structure for mobile air defense radar on
remote islands in the southwestern region, a fully-prepared
surveillance posture will be maintained.
(b) Obtaining and Securing Air Superiority
For overall improvement of air defense capabilities
including cruise missile defense capability, the SDF will
increase the number of fighter aircraft units at Naha Air
Base from one squadron to two as stated in Section II3, continue to facilitate procurement of fighter aircraft
(F-35A), modernize its fighter aircraft (F-15), and improve
the air-to-air combat capabilities and network functions of
its fighter aircraft (F-2). In addition, after considering its
options, it will take necessary measures to replace fighter
aircraft (F-15) unsuitable for modernization with more
capable fighter aircraft. Along with continuing to procure
middle-range surface-to-air guided missiles, the SDF will
further improve its surface-to-air guided missile PATRIOT
systems by equipping them with new advanced interceptor
missiles (PAC-3 MSE) that can be used both for response to
cruise missiles and aircraft and for ballistic missile defense
(BMD). The SDF will also procure new aerial refueling/
transport aircraft, and continuously work to equip transport
aircraft (C-130H) with aerial refueling capabilities and
procure rescue helicopters (UH-60J). In addition, the SDF
will examine what is the appropriate air defense posture in
remote islands in the Pacific.
(c) Obtaining and Securing Maritime Supremacy
In defense of the seas surrounding Japan and to ensure
the security of maritime traffic, the SDF will effectively
conduct various activities including holding persistent ISR
and anti-submarine operations; procuring Aegis-equipped
destroyers (DDG), destroyer (DD), submarines, fixedwing patrol aircraft (P-1) and patrol helicopters (SH-60K);
and conducting service- extension activities on existing
destroyers, submarines, fixed-wing patrol aircraft (P-3C)
and patrol helicopters (SH-60J) as stated in (1). At the same
time, it will introduce new compact-type hull destroyers


with multifunctional capabilities. In addition, the SDF will
introduce ship-based multipurpose helicopters required for
enabling destroyer units to sustainably conduct activities as
situations demand, and continue to procure Mine Sweeper
Ocean (MSO) vessels, amphibious rescue aircraft (US-2),
and surface-to-ship guided missiles.
(d) Improvement of Capabilities for Rapid Deployment and
Response

In order to secure capabilities for swift and large-scale
transportation and deployment operations and improve
effective response capabilities, transport aircraft (C-2)
and transport helicopters (CH-47JA) will continue to be
procured. Besides the ship-based multipurpose helicopters
mentioned in (c), the SDF will introduce tilt-rotor aircraft
that complement and strengthen the capabilities of transport
helicopters (CH-47JA) in terms of cruising speed and range.
In addition, the SDF will take necessary measures after
considering the possibility of new multipurpose helicopters
that will success the existing multipurpose helicopters (UH1J). In developing such aerial transport capabilities, the SDF
will avoid functional redundancy by clarifying the roles and
assignments among the various means of transportation.
The SDF will reinforce transportation and deployment
capabilities, by such means as acquiring amphibious
vehicles that support units’ amphibious landing efforts on
remote islands, and refitting existing Tank Landing Ships
(LST). The SDF will consider what the role should be of
a multipurpose vessel with capabilities for command and
control, large-scale transportation, and aircraft operations,
which can be utilized in various operations such as
amphibious operations, and reach a conclusion regarding its
acquisition. With a view to efficiently conducting large-scale
transportation movements in coordination with the SDF’s
transport capabilities, the SDF will take necessary measures
after considering active utilization of civilian transport
capabilities including methods for utilizing the funds and
know-how of the private sector and reserve personnel.
Mobile combat vehicles transportable by airlift will
be introduced in the rapidly deployable basic operational
units (rapid deployment divisions/brigades) highlighted
in Section II-1, and rapid deployment regiments that
immediately respond to various situations will be organized.
The SDF will also establish area security units in charge
of initial responses on remote islands in the southwestern
region, as well as conduct maneuver deployment training for
prompt unit deployment to remote islands. While improving
guidance capability of existing precision-guided bombs and
procuring surface-to-ship guided missiles, the SDF will also
promote the development of improved capabilities of shipto-ship guided missiles, such as increasing their firing range.
(e) Development of C3I
From the perspective of improving joint force capabilities,
aimed at establishing a command and control system which
enables the dynamic operation of units across the country
so as to immediately concentrate necessary units into the
area to be dealt with, such as remote islands, the SDF will
take steps to station GSDF, MSDF and ASDF personnel in
the main headquarters of each of the other services, making
effective use of the knowledge and experience held by each
respective service. In addition, as stated in Section II-1, the
SDF will expedite the establishment of the Ground Central
Command, while promoting efficiency and rationalizing
the command and control functions of each regional army
headquarters, as well as reviewing the functions of some
regional army headquarters.
With regard to the information and communications
capabilities which serve as a foundation for nationwide operations, and the goal of strengthening the
communications infrastructure on remote islands, the SDF
will extend the secured exclusive communication link for
the SDF to Yonaguni Island, and newly deploy mobile
multiplex communication equipment at Naha Air Base.
The SDF will strive to enhance data link functions among
the three services, upgrade the field communications
systems, continue to promote the utilization of outer space
for defense-related purposes, and develop an X-Band


-----

communications satellite with high performance. The SDF
will take additional necessary measures after considering
the necessity of further enhancements to its communications
systems.
(3) Response to Ballistic Missile Attacks
Given North Korea’s improved ballistic missile capabilities, the
SDF will pursue the comprehensive improvement of its response
capabilities against the threat of ballistic missiles.
For reinforcing its multi-layered and sustainable defense
posture for the entire territory of Japan against ballistic missile
attacks, the SDF will procure additional Aegis-equipped
destroyers (DDG), and continue to improve the capabilities of its
existing DDGs. As stated in (2)(b), the SDF will pursue further
improvement of its surface-to-air guided missile PATRIOT
system so as to equip it with new advanced interceptor missiles
(PAC-3 MSE) that can be used both for response to cruise
missiles and aircraft and for BMD. In addition, to reinforce its
ballistic missile detecting and tracking capabilities, the SDF will
promote the improvement of its automated warning and control
systems (Japan Aerospace Defense Ground Environment), as
well as procurement and improvement of its fixed air defense
radar (FPS-7) systems.
Along with the continuous promotion of Japan-U.S.
cooperative development of advanced interceptor missiles for
BMD (SM-3 Block IIA), the MOD will, after examining options,
take necessary measures for the transition to the production and
deployment phases. The SDF will conduct bilateral training and
exercises to enhance the effectiveness of the Japan-U.S. bilateral
BMD response posture, and make an effort to establish the basis
for deployment of the SDF to respond to a ballistic missile attack.
The MOD will conduct studies on the best mix of the overall
posture of its future BMD system, including the new BMD
equipment. Also, based on appropriate role-sharing between
Japan and the U.S., with a view to strengthening the deterrence
capacity of Japan-U.S. Alliance as a whole by enhancing Japan’s
own deterrence and response capabilities, the MOD will study
its possible response capability to address the means of ballistic
missile launches and related facilities, and will take necessary
measures.
In preparation for an attack by guerrilla or special operations
forces concurrent with a ballistic missile attack, the SDF will
continue to procure a variety of surveillance equipment, light
armored vehicles, NBC reconnaissance vehicles, and transport
helicopters (CH-47JA) in order to improve its ISR posture, and its
ability to protect key facilities such as nuclear power plants, and
search and destroy infiltrating units. In sensitive locations such as
where a number of nuclear power plants are located, the SDF will
conduct training with relevant agencies to confirm coordination
procedures, and take necessary measures after considering the
basis for deployment in areas neighboring nuclear power plants.
(4) Response in Outer Space and Cyberspace
(a) Promoting Utilization of Outer Space
The SDF will continue to enhance information gathering
capabilities through the use of various space satellites
equipped with diverse sensors, and strengthen C3I
capabilities by continuing to develop a sophisticated
X-Band satellite communications system. With a view to
ensuring the constant availability of these capabilities in
a variety of contingencies, the SDF will actively promote
space situational awareness efforts, and research on
satellite protection, and work to enhance the resiliency of
its satellites. In making such efforts, given that relevant
domestic organizations and the United States possess the
latest technologies and knowledge related to outer space,
the MOD will facilitate cooperation including in the area of
personnel development with such organizations.
(b) Response to Cyber Attacks
To continuously ensure sufficient security against cyber
attacks, with consideration to enhancing capabilities through
joint operations and efficiency in resource allocations, the
SDF will establish the necessary system by such measures
as to enhance the survivability of the command and control
systems and information communication networks of the
three services, to strengthen capabilities for information
gathering and research and analysis, and to develop a
practical training environment where response capabilities


against cyber attacks can be tested. Through its efforts to
secure response capabilities in cyberspace where attackers
have an overwhelming advantage, the SDF may consider
the acquisition of capabilities to prevent them from using
cyberspace. In addition, the SDF will strive to keep abreast
of the latest risks, response measures and technological
trends, including through cooperation with the private
sector, and strategic talks and joint exercises with allies.
Given that it is essential to employ personnel with
expertise on a continuing basis and that methods of cyber
attack are increasingly sophisticated and complicated, the
SDF plans to develop personnel with strong cyber security
expertise, through efforts such as improving the in-house
curriculum for specialized education, expanding learning
opportunities at institutions of higher education at home
and abroad, and cultivating expertise through personnel
management efforts.
To enable a comprehensive response to cyber attacks
through a whole-of-government approach, the SDF will
enhance close coordination with relevant government
agencies by regularly providing expertise and MOD/SDF
personnel, and improve training and exercises.
(5) Response to Large-scale Disasters
In the event of a large-scale natural disaster such as the Nankai
Trough earthquake, or a special disaster such as a nuclear
emergency, the SDF will respond by immediately transporting and
deploying sufficient numbers of SDF units, as well as establishing
a rotating staff posture based on a joint operational approach.
These efforts will enable a sustained response over the long term.
In these efforts, the SDF will leverage lessons of vital importance
learned from the Great East Japan Earthquake, to gather
information on the extent and nature of the damage by aircraft
from the initial stages of the impact and immediately engage in
rescue activities, for the purpose of protecting people’s lives, In
addition, it will implement prompt emergency reconstruction
activities including elimination of road obstacles indispensable
for the private sector’s efforts including the smooth transportation
of relief materials. With close coordination and cooperation with
relevant government agencies, local governments and private
sector organizations, the MOD will promote such measures as
to establish contingency planning and to conduct training and
exercises, and secure alternative capabilities when the basis for
the SDF’s disaster and deployment operations is affected.
(6) Strengthening Intelligence Capabilities
Given that advanced intelligence functions lay the foundation
for MOD/SDF to sufficiently fulfill their roles, the MOD will
strengthen all stages of its intelligence capabilities, including
gathering, analyzing, sharing and securing intelligence.
With regards to the methods for intelligence gathering
and analysis, with a view to flexibly meeting the demands of
changes in the security environment, the MOD will promote
the development and improvement of its intelligence gathering
facilities, and actively utilize the outer space and unmanned
aerial vehicles so as to drastically reinforce its capability to
gather intelligence from the diverse sources including SIGINT
and IMINT. In a related move, the MOD will develop the ability
to utilize sophisticated GEOINT by such means as visualization
and prediction of situations with a variety of information and
intelligence overlaid on a map or image, while promoting the
comprehensive and efficient geospatial database development.
The MOD will take measures to enhance its HUMINT gathering
capabilities including by increasing the number of personnel to
be newly dispatched as Defense Attachés. It will also reinforce
its posture for gathering and analyzing information from overseas
through cooperation with the ally and partners, and use of
advanced system for collecting public information.
In an effort to meet the increasingly complex and diverse
needs from policy departments and operational sides, in a
timely and precise manner, in the increasingly severe security
environment surrounding Japan, the MOD will strengthen its
comprehensive information gathering and analysis capabilities,
through such efforts as the review of its recruitment efforts
and the composition of its human resources to develop highly
competent analysts, integration and enhancement of its crossorganizational intelligence curriculum, and regularization of the
efforts to place the intelligence side personnel for a given period


-----

in the policy departments and operational sides.
Considering the importance of information security, under
the current severe fiscal situation, and in pursuit of more efficient
intelligence gathering, the MOD will promote the all-source
analysis expected to create great synergies, through seeking to
enhance the posture of and the effective collection management,
and facilitating complete information sharing between those who
need to know, including relevant government agencies.
2. Stabilization of the Asia-Pacific Region and Improvement of the
Global Security Environments

From the perspective of “Proactive Contribution to Peace” based
on the principle of international cooperation, aimed at stabilizing
the Asia-Pacific region, Japan will enhance bilateral and multilateral
cooperative relations and conduct various activities including
training and exercises in a timely and appropriate manner, as well
as actively engage in international peace cooperation activities to
properly address global security challenges. The following elements
will be particularly important to these efforts:
(1) Holding Training and Exercises
In addition to timely and appropriate implementation of
SDF training and exercises, Japan will promote bilateral and
multilateral combined training and exercises in the AsiaPacific region, proactively and visibly demonstrating our
nation’s resolve and advanced capabilities focused on regional
stabilization. In addition, it will seek to improve interoperability
and build and strengthen practical cooperative relationships
with relevant countries.
(2) Promoting Defense Cooperation and Exchanges
Enhancing mutual understanding and relationships of trust with
other countries and international organizations is important as
the cornerstone of efforts to stabilize the security environment.
Japan will take further steps to promote bilateral and multilateral
defense cooperation and exchanges on various levels not limited
to high-level exchanges, but including unit-level exchanges, such
as building and strengthening cooperative relationships focused
on wide-ranging security issues of common interest including
HA/DR, maritime security, and ensuring the stable use of outer
space and cyberspace.
(3) Promoting Capacity Building Assistance
By utilizing the capabilities the SDF has accumulated, the
MOD will help countries concerned to enhance their military
capabilities in such fields as HA/DR, disposal of landmines and
unexploded ordnance, and military medicine, so as to stabilize
the security environment, as well as strengthen relations with
defense authorities of those countries. Cooperating with partners
actively engaged in capacity building such as the United States
and Australia, with due consideration for coordination with
diplomatic policies such as the Official Development Assistance
(ODA), Japan will provide effective and efficient support in
capacity building.
(4) Ensuring Maritime Security
For the purpose of maintaining “Open and Stable Seas”, which
serve as the cornerstone of Japan’s peace and prosperity efforts
as a maritime state, and ensuring security of maritime traffic, the
MOD will further cooperate with allies to engage in anti-piracy
activities off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden, as
well as help gulf countries improve their own capabilities. In
other ocean not surrounding Japan such as the Indian Ocean
and the South China Sea, the SDF will also leverage a variety
of opportunities to promote combined training and exercises
with countries which share Japan’s goal of maintaining maritime
security.
(5) Implementing International Peace Cooperation Activities
To immediately commence international peace cooperation
activities, the SDF will reinforce its emergency response and
transport capabilities. To steadily engage in its activities for the
long term, the SDF will work to further ensure the safety of its
activities by strengthening information-gathering and equipment
protection capabilities, as well as continue efforts to improve
communications, supplies, military medicine, and support for
families of military personnel. By improving the capacity of
the engineer units which are highly appreciated at the SDF’s
activity areas, the SDF will work to facilitate international peace
cooperation activities that more effectively meet the needs of the
SDF’s activity areas. Japan will strengthen the development of
personnel who can play an active role in the field of international


peace cooperation activity, and will send more personnel to
mission headquarters of the U.N. Peace Keeping Operation and
U.N. Department of peacekeeping operations which would help
Japan in making more contribution in the field.
The Japan Peacekeeping Training and Research Center will
expand its curriculum, and strengthen cooperation with relevant
government agencies, foreign countries, and non-governmental
organizations through efforts such as providing educational
opportunities to not only SDF personnel, but also candidates
from various backgrounds.
To correspond to the reality of the U.N. peacekeeping
operations, Japan will continue to consider how it might expand
its participation in such operations.
(6) Cooperating to Promote Arms Control, Disarmament and
Nonproliferation

In order to contribute to various activities in the field of arms
control and disarmament undertaken by the United Nations and
other organizations, Japan will continue its active engagement
including its contribution of personnel to these efforts. Given
that proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and missiles
that serve as their means of delivery pose a severe threat to the
peace and stability not only to Japan, but also to the international
community as a whole, in cooperation with relevant countries
and international organizations, Japan will facilitate efforts
towards nonproliferation such as participation in the Proliferation
Security Initiative (PSI).
3. Basic Structure to Maximize Defense Capability
(1) Training and Exercises
To effectively respond to various contingencies and enhance its
deterrence effectiveness, the SDF’s joint training and exercises
and Japan-U.S. bilateral training and exercises will be conducted
in a tailored and visible way. Leveraging the lessons learned from
these training and exercises, the SDF will conduct regular studies
and reviews of its plans to address contingencies. Along with
these efforts, the SDF will expand the use of the good training
environment in Hokkaido, by SDF units across the country, to
conduct effective training and exercises. In addition, the SDF
will facilitate active use of LSTs and transport capabilities of
the civilian sector, and improve unit mobility. Doing so will
enable nation-wide deployment of well-trained units stationed
in Hokkaido. To carry out effective training and exercises in the
SDF’s southwestern region, where only limited space is available
for SDF training, and accounting for relations with local
communities, the MOD will continue effort to expand the joint/
shared use of U.S. Forces facilities with the SDF. In addition,
actively engaging in bilateral trainings at home and abroad with
U.S. Forces such as the U.S. Marines, the SDF will strive to
promptly develop sufficient amphibious operational capabilities.
Seeking to respond to various situations with a wholeof-government approach, coordination with relevant agencies
including police and firefighters, and the Japan Coast Guard will
be reinforced. In addition, the government will conduct various
simulation exercise and comprehensive training and exercises
regarding various situations including civil protection on a
regular basis in a tailored manner.
(2) Operational Infrastructure
Given that SDF camps and bases are indispensable for rapid
deployment and response to various contingencies as well as
for ensuring a sustained response posture for the long term,
the resiliency of military camps and bases will be enhanced.
In particular, the SDF will strengthen its capabilities to
immediately rebuild various camp and base support functions
such as runways, information-communication infrastructure, and
stable fuel supply. For the SDF to immediately utilize civilian
airports and ports in contingency situations, necessary measures
will be taken with consideration especially to developing a
deployment structure in the southwestern region. In addition,
for the purpose of establishing readiness capabilities, the SDF
will store necessary ammunition and spare ports in locations
most appropriate for operations, as well as steadily construct
and maintain necessary living quarters surrounding SDF camps
and bases. From the perspective of enabling a sustained response
posture over the long term, various measures supporting families
of military personnel will be promoted.
To keep availability ratio of equipment at higher standards
with lower costs, the MOD will conduct research as to what


-----

activities hamper improvement of availability ratio. In addition,
given that longer-term contracts raise predictability and enhance
cost-effectiveness, the MOD will expand the use of its new
contract system, Performance Based Logistics (PBL), under
which the price is to be determined according to realized
performance.
(3) Personnel and Education
Given the more advanced and complex equipment, and more
diverse and internationalized missions in recent years, the
SDF will, from a long-standing perspective, promote feasible
measures to ensure the strength of its troops and the effective
use of personnel amid the severe fiscal situation, taking into
consideration a variety of elements, including skills, experience,
physical strength and morale.
(a) Composition of Ranks and Age Distribution
Given the characteristics of respective units, for the purpose
of achieving a composition of ranks that enables the three
services to accomplish their respective missions in the most
appropriate and sustainable way, the SDF will promote
measures to secure and nurture appropriate-numbers
of officers, warrant officers and sergeants/petty officers
equipped with necessary capabilities, as well as recruit in a
planned manner high-quality privates/seaman/airman.
To ensure an appropriate age distribution, in addition
to reviewing the retirement age of 60, the SDF will work
to adjust the age distribution in the respective officer,
warrant officer, sergeant/petty officer, and private/seaman/
airman ranks, by encouraging early retirement and more
appropriately managing its privates/seaman/airman. While
taking into consideration the status guarantee of SDF
personnel, the SDF will conduct research on new systems for
early retirement including systems used by other countries.
With a view to maintaining the proper age distribution
among airplane pilots, the SDF will take measures to allow
them to be re-employed in the private sector. In addition, the
SDF will review the final promotion rate of officers, warrant
officers and sergeants/petty officers, and manage personnel
more appropriately with consideration to personnel’s
physical strength so as to maintain SDF’s strength.
(b) Effective Utilization of Human Resources
In order to more effectively make use of its personnel,
including its female personnel, the SDF will actively
reappoint retiring personnel possessing advanced
knowledge, skills and experience where such personnel
prove beneficial to the overall SDF’s strength.
To enable SDF personnel to pursue their missions with
high morale and a strong feeling of pride, the SDF will
promote measures related to honors and privileges including
expansion of the Defense Meritorious Badge program.
In order to strengthen the joint operations structure,
the SDF will enhance education and training, and, through
secondment to the Joint Staff Office and relevant ministries
and agencies, retain adequate personnel in the government
who have a broad outlook and ideas, as well as wide-ranging
experience in Japan’s security-affairs, and who can respond
flexibly and rapidly to a variety of situations.
(c) Recruitment and Re-employment Support
In light of the deteriorating recruiting environment, resulting
from social factors such as the declining birthrate and the
increased pursuit of higher education, in order to continue
to secure competent personnel in the coming years, the
SDF will work to enhance public understanding of national
defense and security issues, effectively engage in public
relations to adjust to the changing times, and coordinate and
cooperate with relevant ministries and agencies and local
governments, so as to spread the perception that the SDF is
an attractive job option.
As it is the responsibility of the Government of Japan
(GOJ) to provide financially for SDF personnel, compelled
to resign at a younger age than ordinary civil servants, by
strengthening collaboration with local governments and
relevant organizations, through sharing the knowledge, skills
and experience of retired SDF personnel with society, the
GOJ will facilitate such efforts as measures to provide more
incentives for companies to employ retired SDF personnel, and
encourage employment of retired SDF personnel in the public


sector, so as to improve their re-employment environment.
(d) Utilization of Personnel including Reserve Staff
In order to support sustainable unit operations in situations
that are becoming increasingly diversified and protracted,
the SDF will promote the use of ready reserve personnel and
reserve personnel in broad areas To that end, the SDF will
facilitate the appointment of reserve personnel and their
assignment to duties commensurate with their specialized
knowledge and skills including possible opportunities to
work at headquarters, and will also improve training for callups. Aiming at active use of the private sector’s transport
capabilities, necessary measures will be taken to utilize
reserve personnel including those who have experience as
ship crew. The SDF will also encourage the appointment of
reserve personnel equipped with specialized skills, including
airplane pilots who the SDF releases to the private sector
for re-employment. Other necessary measures will be taken
as well with broad consideration to using reserve personnel,
including for call-ups in various situations. Furthermore, to
increase the adequacy of reserve personnel, the SDF will seek
to increase public awareness of the reserve program, and take
measures to provide more incentives for reserve personnel
themselves and companies to employ reserve personnel.
(4) Medical
In order to keep SDF personnel in good health and enhance its
military medicine capabilities to enable the SDF to cope with
a diverse range of missions in responses to various situations
and international peace cooperation activities, the SDF will
upgrade its hospitals to hubs with enhanced functions, and
promote the formation of networks across hospitals and medical
treatment rooms. Along with contributions to medical services
in local communities, the SDF will establish an efficient and
high-quality medical care structure, including improvements
in the management of the National Defense Medical College
Hospital. By reinforcing education for medical officers, nurses
and emergency medical technicians, the SDF will make efforts
to secure personnel with more specialized and advanced skills.
In addition, the SDF will consider such matters as revision
of regulations of emergency medical treatment on situation
responses, and improve frontline first aid capabilities, and will
put in place a posture for rapid medical evacuation that takes
into account the need for enhanced joint service capabilities.
Furthermore, the SDF will also reinforce the functions of the
National Defense Medical College, establishing it as a hub for
education, and research in the field of defense medical science.
(5) Defense Production and Technology Base
Retaining an adequate level of defense production and a
technology base is essential not only for the production, operation,
sustainment of equipment, but also for research and development
of equipment that fits the operational environment in Japan, and
for the expected potential to contribute to enhancing deterrence.
Given that and Japan’s intention to maintain and reinforce abovementioned base, the MOD will formulate a strategy that sets forth
its future vision for Japan’s defense production and technology
base as a whole.
With a view to enhancing the technological capability
and improving productivity of Japan’s defense production and
technology base, as well as increasing global competitiveness,
Japan will actively promote cooperation on defense equipment
and technology development, such as through international joint
development and production with other countries including the
United States and the United Kingdom, utilizing the technological
fields where Japan enjoys an advantage. In coordination with
relevant government agencies, the MOD will promote adapting
defense equipment, such as aircraft developed by the MOD/SDF,
to civilian uses.
The MOD will promote international joint development and
production and civilian uses of defense equipment in a way that
benefit both manufacturers and the government.
(6) Efficient Acquisition of Equipment
To carry out effective and efficient acquisition of equipment,
a project manager system will be introduced so as to enhance
consistent project management including insertion of a
technological perspective throughout the life-cycle of equipment
design, R&D, full rate production, acquisition, sustainment,
capability upgrade and eventual disposal. In relevant efforts, the


-----

MOD will establish a database of past contracts, which it will
use to develop a simulation model for price estimation, so as to
enable independent estimates of more appropriate acquisition
prices. While utilizing the private sector’s knowledge, the MOD
will actively train and appoint personnel to positions that require
knowledge, skills and specialized expertise in the acquisition
of equipment, such as specialists in cost analysis. In addition,
the MOD will develop a system that allows for reconsideration, including review of specifications and project plans, when
there is a significant discrepancy between the estimated life-cycle
cost derived from the analysis concerned and the real value of the
life-cycle costs.
To allow for prompt and efficient acquisitions, while
ensuring transparency and fairness, parties available for
negotiated contracts will be sorted and ranked as necessary so
as to be useful. To diversify contract types and allow for the
efficient acquisition of various equipment, the government will
take necessary measures after considering further development
of its contract system, to incentivize companies to lower prices,
introduce longer-term contracts, which raise the predictability
for companies and lead to lower costs, and establish a flexible
system for accepting orders such as, the use of a consortium that
enables convergence of technologies from respective, globally
competitive companies.
(7) Research and Development (R&D)
Taking cost-effectiveness into account under Japan’s severe fiscal
situation, the MOD will prioritize R&D projects that best meet
the operational needs of the SDF.
In order to strengthen its air defense capabilities, the MOD
will promote technical review of next-generation surface-toair guided missiles in view of replacing the functions both of
the GSDF middle-range surface-to-air guided missile and the
ASDF PATRIOT surface-to-air guided missiles. In addition,
the MOD will promote strategic studies including empirical
research to accumulate and enhance fighter aircraft-related
technologies in Japan so as to keep an option for development
of next-generation fighter aircraft including the possibility of
international joint development of an aircraft to replace the F-2
when it is time to retire it. Based on the findings, the MOD will
take necessary measures. In an effort to improve ISR capability,
the MOD will promote development of SIGINT aircraft as
well as research on new fixed air defense radar, and sonars
with higher detecting capabilities through simultaneous use of
multiple sonars. In addition, the MOD will conduct research on
unmanned equipment available for flexible operations in case of
various contingencies including large-scale natural disasters, and
promote R&D to improve existing equipment including vehicles,
ships and aircraft.
With a view to addressing emerging threats and securing
technological advantage in the areas of strategically important
fields, the MOD will set a vision of future equipment which
shows a direction of medium- and long-term R&D with regard
to development of major equipment, in order to systematically
conduct advanced research from medium and long term
perspectives. It will do this while considering the latest trends
in science and technology, changes in battle field techniques, the
potential for international joint research and development, and
availability of effective joint operations among major pieces of
equipment.
From a security standpoint, the MOD will also make an effort
to actively utilize civilian technologies applicable to defense
needs (dual-use technologies) by such means as enhancement
of coordination with universities and research institutions, while
strengthening the function of technology control to prevent outflow
of advanced technologies. In doing so, the MOD will always pay
attention to keeping abreast of scientific technological trends
including information relevant to technological development and
gathering industry-academic-government strengths. In a related
effort, the MOD will also promote to have military technologies
employed in civilian activities.
In order to achieve effective and efficient R&D in
consideration of the items stated above, the MOD will reexamine its research and development posture, and take necessary
measures.
(8) Collaboration with Local Communities
As it is essential to closely coordinate with local governments in


such efforts as effective response to various contingencies, and
recruitment and re-employment support for SDF personnel, in
pursuit of facilitated harmonization between defense facilities
and their surrounding local communities, the MOD will continue
to advance measures targeting the areas around defense facilities,
as well as engage in various measures such as intensive public
relations activities focused on their policies and activities, in
order to secure the understanding and cooperation of local
governments and communities.
Given that the presence of SDF units makes a substantial
contribution to the maintenance and revitalization of local
communities in some areas, and supports medical services in
communities through emergency patient transport by SDF search
and rescue aircraft, etc., the MOD/SDF will give consideration
to the attributes of each area in the reorganization of units, and
deployment and administration of SDF camps and bases, etc.
in order to secure the understanding of local governments and
residents. In these efforts, based on the governmental contract
policies vis-a-vis small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs),
while considering efficiencies, the MOD will promote various
measures conducive to local economies such as securing
opportunities for local SMEs to receive orders.
(9) Boosting Communication Capabilities
Given that understanding and support from Japanese people
and foreign countries are of utmost importance for successful
accomplishment of SDF missions, the MOD will strive to
provide information actively and effectively via various media
sources such as social media networks with due consideration
to consistency in the information content. Efforts to provide
information to foreign countries about MOD/SDF activities
abroad will be facilitated by such means as improvement of its
English web site.
(10) Enhancing its Intellectual Base
To enhance understanding among Japanese citizens on security
and crisis management, the MOD will contribute to the
promotion of education on security-related matters at educational
institutions, including by MOD personnel presenting academic
papers and sending MOD lecturers as experts in security and
crisis management. The role of the National Institute for Defense
Studies (NIDS) as a think tank associated with the MOD will
be strengthened, through such efforts as facilitating coordination
with policy-making divisions by relocating the institute to the
Ichigaya district (where the MOD’s headquarters is located),
and to by promoting academic exchanges with foreign research
institutions. The MOD will also strive to administer the NIDS in
such a way that it is capable of dealing with policy issues that the
MOD faces in a timely and appropriate manner.
(11) Promoting Reform of the MOD
The MOD will further promote its reforms by regularly
reviewing its work methods and organization in order to foster a
sense of unity among civilian officials and uniformed personnel,
and to optimize the build-up of defense capabilities, promote
SDF joint operation functions and enhance policy-making and
communication functions. In doing so, with the intention of
optimizing its defense force build-up, the MOD will establish
a planning system for defense build-up with a focus on joint
operation-based capability assessments, and take measures to
facilitate efficiency and optimization in acquisition of equipment,
keeping in mind an option to establish a new agency in the
MOD. Also, to enhance the prompt and efficient operation of the
SDF, by such effort as integration of duties related to actual unit
operations into the Joint Staff Office, the MOD will eliminate
overlapping duties in the Internal Bureau and the Joint Staff
Office, and conduct an organizational review including the
reorganization or disbanding of the Bureau of Operational Policy.
**IV. Measures for Strengthening the Japan-U.S. Alliance**
1. Strengthening Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation
In order to maintain and strengthen the U.S. commitment to Japan
and the Asia-Pacific region and to ensure Japan’s national security,
Japan will continue the revision of and revise the Guidelines for
Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation while strengthening Japan’s own
capabilities as a premise for these efforts.
Meanwhile, Japan will expand bilateral training and exercises,
joint ISR activities and the joint/shared use of facilities and areas by
the SDF and the U.S. forces. In addition, Japan will further deepen
various Japan-U.S. operational cooperation and policy coordination


-----

in areas such as BMD, bilateral planning, and bilateral Extended
Deterrence Dialogue.
Japan will also strengthen cooperation not only in the fields of
counter-piracy, capacity building assistance, HA/DR, peacekeeping
and counter-terrorism, but also in maritime affairs, outer space and
cyberspace.
Furthermore, Japan will strengthen and expand Japan-U.S.
cooperative relationship over a broad range of fields, including
intelligence cooperation and information security, and defense
equipment and technology cooperation.
2. Measures for furthering Smooth and Effective Stationing of U.S.
Forces in Japan

From the perspective of making the stationing of the U.S. Forces
in Japan more smooth and effective, Japan will steadily ensure the
Host Nation Support (HNS).
**V. Quantities of Major Procurement**
The Annex Table shows details of the quantities of major procurement
described in Section III. With a view to developing the defense forces
described in the Annex Table of NDPG2013 over 10-year time frame,
this program will focus on build-up of defense forces the best adapted
to the current security environment.
**VI. Expenditures**
1. The expenditures required to implement the defense force
developments described in this program amount to approximately
¥24, 670 billion in FY2013 prices.
2. For the duration of this program, in harmony with other measures
taken by the Government, approximately ¥700 billion will be
secured by means of further streamlining and rationalization
through efforts such as equipment procurement reform. The annual
defense budgets for the implementation of this program will be
allocated within a limit of approximately ¥23, 970 billion over the
next five years.
3. This program will be reviewed after three years as necessary, with
consideration to such factors at home and abroad as the international
security environment, trends in technological standards including
information communication technology, and fiscal conditions.


**VII. Other**
While maintaining the deterrence of U.S. Forces, Japan will steadily
implement specific measures including the realignment of the U.S.
forces in Japan and SACO (Special Action Committee on Okinawa)
related programs to mitigate the impact on local communities, including
those in Okinawa.

|Service|Equipment|Quantity|
|---|---|---|
|GSDF|Mobile Combat Vehicles Armored Vehicles Amphibious Vehicles Tilt-Rotor Aircraft Transport Helicopters (CH-47JA) Surface-to-Ship Guided Missiles Mid-Range Surface-to-Air Guided Missiles Tanks Howitzers (expect mortars)|99 24 52 17 6 9 companies 5 companies 44 31|
|MSDF|Destroyers (Aegis-Equipped Destroyers) Submarines Other Ships Total (Tonnage) Fixed-Wing Patrol Aircraft (P-1) Patrol Helicopters (SH-60K) Multipurpose Helicopters (Ship-Based)|5 (2) 5 5 15 (approx. 52,000 t) 23 23 9|
|ASDF|New Airborne Early Warning (Control) Aircraft Fighters (F-35A) Fighter Modernization (F-15) New Aerial Refueling/Transport Aircraft Transport Aircraft (C-2) Upgrade of PATRIOT Surface-to-Air Guided Missiles (PAC-3 MSE)|4 28 26 3 10 2 groups & education|
|Joint units|Unmanned Aerial Vehicles|3|



Note: Acquisition of ship-based unmanned aerial vehicles will be allowed within the
number of Patrol Helicopters (SH-60K) specifi ed above.


**Reference 8** **The Number of Tanks and Major Artillery Owned**
(As of March 31, 2016)

|Type|Recoilless Guns|Mortars|Field Artillery|Rocket Launchers, etc.|Anti-aircraft Machine Guns|Tanks|Armored Vehicles|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Approximate number owned|2,500|1,100|450|100|50|690|960|



Notes: Each type of gun, except those of tanks and armored vehicles, includes self-propelled guns.


**Reference 9** **Number of Major Aircraft and Performance Specifications**


||Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|(As of March 31, 2016)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Service|Type|Model|Use|Number Owned|Maximum Speed (knots)|Crew (number)|Full Length (m)|Full (m)|Engine|
|GSDF|Fixed-wing|LR-1|Liaison and Reconnaissance|1|290|2(5)|10|12|Turboprop, twin-engines|
|||LR-2|Liaison and Reconnaissance|7|300|2(8)|14|18|Turboprop, twin-engines|
||Rotary-wing|AH-1S|Anti-tank|60|120|2|14|3|Turboshaft|
|||OH-6D|Observation|48|140|1(3)|7|2|Turboshaft|
|||OH-1|Observation|38|140|2|12|3|Turboshaft, twin-engines|
|||UH-1H /J|Utility|131|120|2(11)|12/13|3|Turboshaft|
|||CH-47J/JA|Transport|58|150/140|3(55)|16|4/5|Turboshaft, twin-engines|
|||UH-60JA|Utility|39|150|2(12)|16|3|Turboshaft, twin-engines|
|||AH-64D|Combat|12|150|2|18|6|Turboshaft, twin-engines|
|MSDF|Fixed-wing|P-1|Patrol|9|450|11|38|35|Turbofan, quadruple-engine|
|||P-3C|Patrol|68|400|11|36|30|Turboprop, quadruple- engine|
||Rotary-wing|SH-60J|Patrol|42|150|3|20|16|Turboshaft, twin-engine|
|||SH-60K|Patrol|49|140|4|20|16|Turboshaft, twin-engine|
|||MH-53E|Minesweeping and transport|4|150|8|30|24|Turboshaft, triple engine|
|||MCH-101|Minesweeping and transport|8|150|4|23|19|Turboshaft, triple engine|


-----

|Service|Type|Model|Use|Number Owned|Maximum Speed (knots)|Crew (number)|Full Length (m)|Full (m)|Engine|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|ASDF|Fixed-wing|F-15J/DJ|Fighter|201|mach 2.5|1/2|19|13|Turbofan, twin-engine|
|||F-4EJ|Fighter|54|mach 2.2|2|19|12|Turbojet, twin-engine|
|||F-2A/B|Fighter|92|mach 2|1/2|16|11|Turbofan, single-engine|
|||RF-4E/EJ|Reconnaissance|13|mach 2.2|2|19|12|Turbojet, twin-engine|
|||C-1|Transport|22|440|5(60)|29|31|Turbofan, twin-engine|
|||C-130H|Transport|14|340|6(92)|30|40|Turboprop, quadruple- engine|
|||KC-767|Aerial refueling Transport|4|460|4-8(200)|49|48|Turbofan, twin-engine|
|||KC-130H|Addition of aerial refueling functions|2|340|6(92)|30|40|Turboprop, quadruple- engine|
|||E-2C|Early warning|13|330|5|18|25|Turboprop, twin-engine|
|||E-767|Early warning and control|4|450|20|49|48|Turbofan, twin-engine|
||Rotary-wing|CH-47J|Transport|15|150|3(55)|16|4|Turboshaft, twin-engine|


Notes: 1. Parenthetical figures in the item “Crew” represents the number of people transported.
2. F-4EJs include 48 improved versions of the F-4EJ.

3. The number of aircraft possessed indicates numbers registered in the national property ledger as of March 31, 2015.

**Reference 10** **Number of Major Ships Commissioned into Service**


||Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|(As of March 31, 2016)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Category|Destroyer|Submarine|Mine warfare ship|Patrol combatant craft|Amphibious ship|Auxiliary ship|
|Number (vessels)|47|17|27|6|11|29|
|Standard Displacement (1,000 tons)|240|48|26|1|28|125|


Note: Figures are rounded off, so the totals may not tally.

**Reference 11** **Guided Missile Specifications**

||Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|(As of March 31, 2016)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Use|Name|Service|Weight (kg)|Full Length (m)|Diameter (cm)|Guidance System|
|Antiballistic|Patriot (PAC-3)|ASDF|Approx.300|Approx.5.2|Approx.26|Program + command + radar homing|
||SM-3|MSDF|Approx.1,500|Approx.6.6|Approx.35|Command + IR image homing|
|Antiaircraft and antimissile|Patriot (PAC-2)|ASDF|Approx.900|Approx.5.3|Approx.41|Program + command + TVM|
||Improved Hawk|GSDF|Approx.640|Approx.5.0|Approx.36|Radar homing|
||Type-03 medium-range surface-to-air missile (Middle- range SAM)||Approx.570|Approx.4.9|Approx.32|Radar homing|
||Type-81 short-range surface-to-air missile (C) (SAM-1C)||Approx.100|Approx.2.7/ 2.9|Approx.16|Image + IR homing Radar homing|
||Type-81 short-range surface-to-air missile (SAM-1)|GSDF/ ASDF|Approx.100|Approx.2.7|Approx.16|IR homing|
||Type-91 portable surface-to-air missile (SAM-2)|GSDF|Approx.12|Approx.1.4|Approx.8|Image + IR homing|
||Type-91 portable surface-to-air missile (B) (SAM-2B)||Approx.13|Approx.1.5|Approx.8|IR image homing|
||Type-93 short-range surface-to-air missile (SAM-3)||Approx.12|Approx.1.4|Approx.8|Image + IR homing|
||Type-11 short-range surface-to-air missile||Approx.100|Approx.2.9|Approx.16|Active radar homing|
||Surface-to-air missile for base air defense|ASDF|Approx.100|Approx.2.9|Approx.16|Active radar homing|
||Standard (SM-1)|MSDF|Approx.590|Approx.4.6|Approx.34|Radar homing|
||Standard (SM-2)||Approx.710|Approx.4.7|Approx.30|Command + radar homing|
||Sea Sparrow (RIM-7F/M)||Approx.230|Approx.3.7|Approx.20|Radar homing|
||Sea Sparrow (RIM-162)||Approx.300|Approx.3.8|Approx.25|Inertial guidance + radar homing|
||RAM (RIM-116)||Approx.73|Approx.2.8|Approx.13|Passive radar homing + IR homing|
||Sparrow (AIM-7E/F/M)|ASDF|Approx.230|Approx.3.7|Approx.20|Radar homing|
||Sidewinder (AIM-9L)||Approx.89|Approx.2.9|Approx.13|IR homing|
||Type-90 air-to-air missile (AAM-3)||Approx.91|Approx.3.0|Approx.13|IR homing|
||Type-99 air-to-air missile (AAM-4)||Approx.220|Approx.3.7|Approx.20|Radar homing|
||Type-99 air-to-air missile (B) (AAM-4B)||Approx.220|Approx.3.7|Approx.20|Radar homing|
||Type-04 air-to-air missile (AAM-5)||Approx.95|Approx.3.1|Approx.13|IR homing|


-----

|Use|Name|Service|Weight (kg)|Full Length (m)|Diameter (cm)|Guidance System|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Antiship|Type-88 surface-to-ship missile (SSM-1)|GSDF|Approx.660|Approx.5.1|Approx.35|Inertial guidance + radar homing|
||Type-12 surface-to-ship missile||Approx.700|Approx.5.0|Approx.35|Inertial guidance + radar homing + GPS|
||Harpoon (SSM)|MSDF|Approx.680|Approx.4.6|Approx.34|Inertial guidance + radar homing|
||Harpoon (USM)||Approx.680|Approx.4.6|Approx.34|Inertial guidance + radar homing|
||Harpoon (ASM)||Approx.530|Approx.3.8|Approx.34|Inertial guidance + radar homing|
||Type-90 ship-to-ship missile (SSM-1B)||Approx.660|Approx.5.1|Approx.35|Inertial guidance + radar homing|
||Type-91 air-to-ship missile (ASM-1C)||Approx.510|Approx.4.0|Approx.35|Inertial guidance + radar homing|
||Type-80 air-to-ship missile (ASM-1)|ASDF|Approx.600|Approx.4.0|Approx.35|Inertial guidance + radar homing|
||Type-93 air-to-ship missile (ASM-2)||Approx.540|Approx.4.0|Approx.35|Inertial guidance + IR image homing|
||Type-93 air-to-ship missile (B) (ASM-2B)||Approx.530|Approx.4.0|Approx.35|Inertial guidance + IR image homing + GPS|
|Antitank|Type-87 anti-tank missile|GSDF|Approx.12|Approx.1.1|Approx.11|Laser homing|
||Type-01 light anti-tank missile||Approx.11|Approx.0.9|Approx.12|IR image homing|
||TOW||Approx.18|Approx.1.2|Approx.15|IR semi-automatic wire guidance|
|Antilanding craft and antitank|Type-79 anti-landing craft and anti-tank missile|GSDF|Approx.33|Approx.1.6|Approx.15|IR semi-automatic wire guidance|
||Type-96 multipurpose guided missile system (MPMS)||Approx.59|Approx.2.0|Approx.16|Inertial guidance + IR image Optic f iber TVM|
||Middle range multi-purpose missile||Approx.26|Approx.1.4|Approx.14|IR image homing Laser homing|
||Hellf ire|MSDF|Approx.47|Approx.1.6|Approx.18|Laser homing|
||Maverick||Approx.300|Approx.2.5|Approx.31|IR image homing|


**Reference 12** **Pattern of Defense-Related Expenditures (Original Budget Basis)**


(Unit: 100 million yen, %)

|IItteemm FFiissccaall YYeeaarr|GNP/GDP (Original Estimates) (A)|Annual Expenditures on General Account (B)|Growth Rate from Previous Year|General Annual Expenditures (C)|Growth Rate from Previous Year|Defense- Related Expenditures (D)|Growth Rate from Previous Year|Ratio of Defense- Related Expenditures to GNP/GDP (D/A)|Ratio of Defense- Related Expenditures to Annual Expenditures on General Account (D/ B)|Ratio of Defense- related Expenditures to General Annual Expenditures (D/C)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1955|75,590|9,915|△0.8|8,107|△2.8|1,349|△3.3|1.78|13.61|16.6|
|1965|281,600|36,581|12.4|29,198|12.8|3,014|9.6|1.07|8.24|10.3|
|1975|1,585,000|212,888|24.5|158,408|23.2|13,273|21.4|0.84|6.23|8.4|
|1985|3,146,000|524,996|3.7|325,854|△0.0|31,371|6.9|0.997|5.98|9.6|
|1995|4,928,000|709,871|△2.9|421,417|3.1|47,236|0.9|0.959|6.65|11.2|
|2008|5,269,000|830,613|0.2|472,845|0.7|47,426 47,796|△0.8 △0.5|0.900 0.907|5.71 5.75|10.0 10.1|
|2009|5,102,000|885,480|6.6|517,310|9.4|47,028 47,741|△0.8 △0.1|0.922 0.936|5.31 5.39|9.1 9.2|
|2010|4,752,000|922,992|4.2|534,542|3.3|46,826 47,903|△0.4 0.3|0.985 1.008|5.07 5.19|8.76 8.96|
|2011|4,838,000|924,116|0.1|540,780|1.2|46,625 47,752|△0.4 △0.3|0.964 0.987|5.05 5.17|8.62 8.83|
|2012|4,796,000|903,339|△2.2|512,450|△5.2|46,453 47,138|△0.4 △1.3|0.969 0.983|5.14 5.22|9.06 9.20|
|2013|4,877,000|926,115|2.5|527,311|2.9|46,804 47,538|0.8 0.8|0.975|5.05 5.13|8.88 9.02|
|2014|5,004,000|958,823|3.5|564,697|7.1|47,838 48,848|2.2 2.8|0.956 0.976|4.99 5.09|8.47 8.65|
|2015|5,049,000|963,420|0.5|573,555|1.6|48,221 49,801|0.8 2.0|0.955 0.986|5.01 5.17|8.41 8.68|
|2016|5,188,100|967,218|0.4|578,286|0.8|48,607 50,541|0.8 1.5|0.937 0.974|5.03 5.23|8.41 8.74|



Notes: 1. The fi gures provided show GNP in and before FY1985, and GDP from FY1995 onward, in each case based on original estimates.
2. The upper fi gures for defense-related expenditures for FY2008 and thereafter exclude SACO-related expenses (18.0 billion yen in FY2008, 11.2 billion yen in FY2009, 16.9 billion
yen in FY2010, 10.1 billion yen in FY2011, 8.6 billion yen in FY2012, 8.8 billion yen inFY2013, 12.0 billion yen in FY2014, 4.6 billion yen in FY2015, and 2.8 billion yen in FY2016),
U.S. Forces realignment-related expenses (portion meant to reduce the burden on the local community) (19.1 billion yen in FY2008, 60.2 billion yen in FY2009, 90.9 billion yen
in FY2010, 102.7 billion yen in FY2011, 59.9 billion yen in FY2012, 64.6 billion yen in FY2013, 89.0 billion yen in FY2014, 142.6 billion yen in FY2015, and 176.6 billion yen in
FY2016), as well as expenses associated with the introduction of a new government aircraft (10.8 billion yen in FY2015 and 14.0 billion yen in FY2016), while the lower fi gures
include them.


-----

**Reference 13** **Changes in Major Area of Expenditures on General Account Budget (Original Budget Basis)**


(Unit: 100 million yen, %)

|IItteemm FFiissccaall yyeeaarr|Annual Expenditures on General Accou|National Defense|Composition Ratio|Social Security|Composition Ratio|Education and Science|Composition Ratio|Public Works|Composition Ratio|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|2008|830,613|47,426 47,796|5.7 5.8|217,824|26.2|53,122|6.4|67,352|8.1|
|2009|885,480|47,028 47,741|5.3 5.4|248,344|28.0|53,104|6.0|70,701|8.0|
|2010|922,992|46,826 47,903|5.1 5.2|272,686|29.5|55,872|6.1|57,731|6.3|
|2011|924,116|46,625 47,752|5.0 5.2|287,079|31.1|55,100|6.0|49,743|5.4|
|2012|903,339|46,453 47,138|5.1 5.2|263,901|29.2|54,057|6.0|45,734|5.1|
|2013|926,115|46,804 47,538|5.1 5.1|291,224|31.4|53,687|5.8|52,853|5.7|
|2014|958,823|47,838 48,848|5.0 5.1|305,175|31.8|54,421|5.7|59,685|6.2|
|2015|963,420|48,221 49,801|5.0 5.2|315,297|32.7|53,613|5.6|59,711|6.2|
|2016|967,218|48,607 50, 541|5.0 5.2|391,738|33.1|53,580|5.5|59,737|6.2|



Notes: 1. The education and science expenditures for FY2010 are post-overhaul fi gures.
2. The upper fi gures for defense expenditures exclude SACO-related expenses (18.0 billion yen in FY2008, 11.2 billion yen in FY2009, 16.9 billion yen in FY2010, 10.1 billion yen in
FY2011, 8.6 billion yen in FY2012, 8.8 billion yen in FY2013, 12.0 billion yen in FY2014, 4.6 billion yen in FY2015, and 2.8 billion yen in FY2016), U.S. Forces realignment-related
expenses (portion meant to reduce the burden on the local community) (19.1 billion yen in FY2008, 60.2 billion yen in FY2009, 90.9 billion yen in FY2010, 102.7 billion yen in
FY2011, 59.9 billion yen in FY2012, 64.6 billion yen in FY2013, 89.0 billion yen in FY2014, 142.6 billion yen in FY2015, and 176.6 billion yen in FY2016), as well as expenses
associated with the introduction of a new government aircraft (10.8 billion yen in FY2015 and 14.0 billion yen in FY2016), while the lower fi gures include them.


**Reference 14** **Changes in Composition of Defense-Related Expenditures (Original Budget Basis)**


(Unit: 100 million yen, %)

|FFiissccaall yyeeaarr IItteemm|2012|Col3|2013|Col5|2014|Col7|2015|Col9|2016|Col11|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Budget|Composition Ratio|Budget|Composition Ratio|Budget|Composition Ratio|Budget|Composition Ratio|Budget|Composition Ratio|
|Personnel and provisions|20,701|44.6 43.9|19,896|42.5 41.9|20,930|43.8 42.8|21,121|43.8 42.4|21,473|44.2 42.5|
|Materials|25,751 26,437|55.4 56.1|26,908 27,642|57.5 58.1|26,909 27,918|56.2 57.2|27,100 28,680|56.2 57.6|27,135 29,069|55.8 57.5|
|Equipment acquisition|7,565|16.3 16.0|7,442|15.9 15.7|7,964|16.6 16.3|7,404|15.4 14.9|7,659|15.8 15.2|
|R&D|944|2.0 2.0|1,541|3.3 3.2|1,477|3.1 3.0|1,411|2.9 2.8|1,055|2.2 2.1|
|Facility improvement|999|2.1 2.1|950|2.0 2.0|950|2.0 1.9|1,293|2.7 2.6|1,461|3.0 2.9|
|Maintenance|11,057|23.8 23.5|11,134|23.8 23.4|11,361|23.7 23.3|11,808|24.5 23.7|11,707|24.1 23.2|
|Base countermeasures|4,418|9.5 9.4|4,381|9.4 9.2|4,397|9.2 9.0|4,425|9.2 8.9|4,509|9.3 8.9|
|The cost for SACO-related projects|86|0.2|88|0.2|120|0.2|46|0.1|28|0.1|
|U.S. Forces realignment related expenses (reduction of burden on local communities)|599|1.3|646|1.4|890|1.8|1,426|2.9|1,766|3.5|
|Introduction of government aircraft|—|—|—|—|—|—|108|0|140|0.3|
|Others|769|1.7 1.6|1,460|3.1 3.1|760|1.6 1.6|758|1.6 1.5|744|1.5 1.5|
|Total|46,453 47,138|100|46,804 47,538|100.0|47,838 48,848|100|48,221 49,801|100|48,607 50,541|100|



Notes: 1. Personnel and food provisions expenses include personnel wage and food expenditures.
2. Equipment acquisition expenses include the purchase of arms, vehicles and aircraft, and the construction of ships.
3. R&D expenses include those of equipment.
4. Facility improvement expenses include those of airfi elds and barracks.
5. Maintenance costs include those for housing, clothing and training.
6. Base countermeasures expenses include those for areas surrounding base countermeasures and burden by the USFJ.
7. The “others” category in FY2013 includes an expenditure amounting to 68.9 billion yen which is necessary to be carried over to the Special Account for Reconstruction from the
Great East Japan Earthquake.
8. Figures are rounded off, so the totals may not tally.
9. The upper fi gures for Budgets and Composition Ratio exclude the cost for SACO-related expenses (8.6 billion yen in FY2012, 8.8 billion yen in FY2013, 12.0 billion yen in FY2014,
4.6 billion yen in FY2015, and 2.8 billion yen in FY2016), U.S. Forces realignment-related expenses (portion meant to reduce the burden on the local community; 59.9 billion
yen in FY2012, 64.6 billion yen in FY2013, 89.0 billion yen in FY2014, 142.6 billion yen in FY2015, and 176.6 billion yen in FY2016), as well as expenses associated with the
introduction of a new government aircraft (10.8 billion yen in FY2015 and 14.0 billion yen in FY2016), while the lower fi gures include them.


-----

**Reference 15** **Trend of Defense Expenditures of Major Countries**

|FFiissccaall yyeeaarr CCoouunnttrryy|2012|2013|2014|2015|2016|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Japan (100 million yen)|46,453 47,138 △0.4% △1.3%|46,804 47,538 0.8% 0.8%|47,838 48,848 2.2% 2.8%|48,221 49,801 0.8% 2.0%|48,607 50,541 0.8% 1.5%|
|U.S. (U.S. 1 million dollar)|650,851 △4.0%|607,795 △6.6%|577,897 △4.9%|562,499 △2.7%|576,329 2.5%|
|China (100 million yuan)|6,503 11.4%|7,202 10.7%|8,082 12.2%|8,896 10.1%|9,544 7.6%|
|Russia (100 million RR)|18,124 19.6%|21,036 16.1%|24,791 17.9%|31,814 28.3%|31,493 △1.0%|
|Republic of Korea (100 million won)|329,576 5.0%|344,970 4.7%|357,057 3.5%|374,560 4.9%|387,995 3.6%|
|Australia (1 million Australian dollar)|24,217 △8.8%|25,434 5.0%|29,303 15.2%|32,695 11.6%|32,882 0.6%|
|U.K. (1 million GBP)|34,260 △7.8%|34,800 1.6%|34,500 △0.9%|35,200 2.0%|35,000 △0.6%|
|France (1 million euro)|38,001 1.6%|38,092 0.3%|38,921 2.1%|36,791 △5.5%|—|



Notes: 1. Data sources are national budget books, defense white papers and others.
2. % represents a rate of growth over the previous year.
3. U.S. defense expenditures represent the expense narrowly defined by the Historical Table. Figures for FY2016 are estimated values.
4. The figures for China are based on the initial budget for the central government expenditure in the Finance Budget Report to the National People’s Congress (However, in FY20152016, only the defense expenditure in the central ministry expenditure [a portion of the central government expenditure] was released. For FY2015, the defense expenditure of the
central government expenditure was calculated by combining the local transfer expenditure, etc. that were separately released.) In addition, through FY2015, the rate of growth
over the previous year was calculated from the central government expenditure. For FY2016, as only the defense expenditure in the central ministry expenditure was released, the
rate of change was calculated by comparing with the FY2015 defense expenditure (886.9 billion yuan) in the central ministry expenditure.
5. Russia’s defense expenditure is based on the FY2012-2015 expenditures and the FY2016 budget amount (as of February 2016) in the Information on Excecution of Budgets of
the Russian Federation released by the Federal Treasury.
6. The figures for Australia are based on the initial budget in the Defence Portfolio Budget Statements published by the Australian Department of Defence.
7. The figures for the United Kingdom up to FY2012 are based on U.K. Defence Statistics 2013 published by the Ministry of Defence. The figures for FY2013 and after are based
on the initial budget in the budget message.
8. The French defense expenditure for FY2016 is undisclosed as of June 2016.
9. In Japan, the figures in the upper row exclude SACO-related expenditures (8.6 billion yen for FY2012, 8.8 billion yen for FY2013, 12.0 billion yen for FY2014, 4.6 billion yen for
FY2015, and 2.8 billion yen for FY2016), the expenditures associated with the U.S. Forces realignment from which the expenses to reduce the burden on the local community
(59.9 billion yen for FY2012, 64.6 billion yen for FY2013, 89.0 billion yen for FY2014, 142.6 billion yen for FY2015, and 176.6 billion yen for FY2016), as well as expenses
associated with the introduction of a new government aircraft (10.8 billion yen for FY2015 and 14.0 billion yen for FY2016), while the figures in the lower row are based on the
initial budget and include them.


**Reference 16** **Authorized and Actual Strength of Uniformed SDF Personnel**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|(As of March 31, 2|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Category|GSDF|MSDF|ASDF|Joint Staff etc.|Total|
|Authorized|150,863|45,364|46,940|3,987|247,154|
|Actual|138,610|42,052|43,027|3,650|227,339|
|Staffing Rate (%)|91.9|92.7|91.7|91.5|92.0|


|Category|Non-Fixed-Term Personnel|Col3|Col4|Col5|Fixed-Term Personnel|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Off icer|Warrant Off icer|Enlisted (upper)|Enlisted (lower)||
|Authorized|45,427|4,954|140,136|56,637||
|Actual|42,478 (2,118)|4,491 (39)|137,898 (7,613)|18,897 (1,280)|23,575 (2,426)|
|Staffing Rate (%)|93.5|90.7|98.4|75.0||



Notes: 1. Figures in parentheses denote the number of females included in the preceding value.
2. The number of authorized personnel is determined based on the budget.


(As of March 31, 2016)


-----

**Reference 17** **Status of Application and Recruitment of Uniformed SDF Personnel (FY2015)**

|Classification|Col2|Col3|Col4|Number Applied|Number Recruited|Competition Ratios|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Officer candidates|||GSDF|3,201 ( 434)|165 ( 14)|19.4 ( 31.0)|
||||MSDF|1,714 ( 259)|111 ( 14)|15.4 ( 18.5)|
||||ASDF|2,419 ( 475)|46 ( 4)|52.6 (118.8)|
||||Total|7,334 (1,168)|322 ( 32)|22.8 ( 36.5)|
|Non- commissioned officers|Technical Petty Officer||MSDF|56 ( 17)|6 ( 2)|9.3 ( 8.5)|
||Technical Sergeant||ASDF|0|0|—|
||GSDF personnel (Nursing)||GSDF|6 ( 5)|4 ( 3)|1.5 ( 1.7)|
|Aviation students|||MSDF|606 ( 54)|83 ( 6)|7.3 ( 9.0)|
||||ASDF|2,820 ( 255)|52 ( 1)|54.2 (255.0)|
||||Total|3,426 ( 309)|135 ( 7)|25.4 ( 44.1)|
|Non-commissioned officer candidates|||GSDF|13,939 (1,940)|2,638 (199)|5.3 ( 9.7)|
||||MSDF|4,183 ( 603)|993 ( 42)|4.2 ( 14.4)|
||||ASDF|6,970 (1,368)|697 (227)|10.0 ( 6.0)|
||||Total|25,092 (3,911)|4,328 (468)|5.8 ( 8.4)|
|Uniformed SDF personnel candidates (Privates)|||GSDF|18,018 (2,114)|5,215 (564)|3.5 ( 3.7)|
||||MSDF|4,389 ( 486)|987 ( 79)|4.4 ( 6.2)|
||||ASDF|5,730 ( 885)|1,636 (171)|3.5 ( 5.2)|
||||Total|28,137 (3,485)|7,838 (814)|3.6 ( 4.3)|
|National Defense Academy Students||Recommended|Humanity and social science|159 ( 49)|21 ( 5)|7.6 ( 9.8)|
||||Science and engineering|256 ( 29)|86 ( 10)|3.0 ( 2.9)|
||||Total|415 ( 78)|107 ( 15)|3.9 ( 5.2)|
|||Selective exam|Humanity and social science|111 ( 26)|12 ( 3)|9.3 ( 8.7)|
||||Science and engineering|122 ( 15)|31 ( 2)|3.9 ( 7.5)|
||||Total|233 ( 41)|43 ( 5)|5.4 ( 8.2)|
|||General exam (first term)|Humanity and social science|6,454 (2,696)|65 ( 21)|99.3 (128.4)|
||||Science and engineering|8,930 (1,781)|236 ( 19)|37.8 ( 93.7)|
||||Total|15,384 (4,477)|301 ( 40)|51.1 (111.9)|
|||General exam (second term)|Humanity and social science|208 ( 49)|14 ( 2)|14.9 ( 24.5)|
||||Science and engineering|527 ( 60)|28 ( 1)|18.8 ( 60.0)|
||||Total|735 ( 109)|42 ( 3)|17.5 ( 36.3)|
|National Defense Medical College students||||6,723 (2,046)|85 ( 30)|79.1 ( 68.2)|
|National Defense Medical College nursing students (SDF regular personnel candidate and nursing school students)||||2,302 (1,848)|75 ( 60)|30.7 ( 30.8)|
|GSDF High Technical School Students||Recommended||188|63|3.0|
|||General exam||2,972|283|10.5|
|||Total||3,160|346|9.1|



Notes: 1. Figures in parentheses indicate numbers of females.
2. The numbers are for SDF regular personnel recruited in FY2015.


**Reference 18** **Breakdown of Ministry of Defense Personnel**

| (As of March 31, 2016)|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Personnel of the Ministry of Defense|||||
|Special Service|||Regular Service||
|Minister of Defense State Minister of Defense Parliamentary Vice-Ministers of Defense (2) Senior Adviser to the Minister of Defense Special Advisers to the Minister of Defense (up to 3)|Authorized Strength|Non-Authorized Strength|Authorized Strength|Non-Authorized Strength|
||Private Secretary of the Minister of Defense||Administrative Officials, and others  29|Part-Time Officials|
||SDF Personnel||||
||Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense|Candidates for SDF Personnel|||
||Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs|Reserve Personnel  47,900|||
||Director General, and others  624|Ready Reserve Personnel 8,075|||
||Administrative Officials, and others 20,505|Candidate Reserve Personnel 4,600|||
||SDF Regular Personnel 247,154|National Defense Academy students|||
|||National Defense Medical College students|||
|||GSDF High Technical School students|||
|||Part-Time Officials|||



Note: Number of personnel refers to the numbers specified in the laws and regulations


(As of March 31, 2016)


-----

**Reference 19** **Major Exercises Conducted in FY2015**

|❍ Integrated training|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Exercise|Period|Location|Main Participating Units, etc.|Note|
|SDF joint exercise (field training exercise)|Oct. 23 - Nov. 13, 2015|Waters and airspace surrounding Japan, SDF and U.S. Force bases, etc.|Each Joint Staff, Defense Intelligence Headquarters, Armies of the GSDF, Central Readiness Force, Self-Defense Fleet, Air Defense Command, Air Support Command, etc. Approximately 25,000 personnel|To maintain and enhance the SDF’s joint operations capabilities through studying and practicing SDF joint operations|
|Training for transportation of overseas Japanese nationals and others|Dec. 17 - 18, 2015|Soumagahara Training Area, Iruma Airbase, etc.|Eastern Army, Central Readiness Force, Self- Defense Fleet, Air Defense Command, Air Support Command, Air Training Command, etc. Approximately 450 personnel, 3 aircraft, and 1 transport aircraft|To enhance joint operations capabilities relating to transport of overseas Japanese nationals and others, and strengthen coordination between SDF and relevant organizations|


|❍ GSDF|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Exercise|Period|Location|Main Participating Units, etc.|Note|
|Army Corps field training exercise (Northern Army)|Oct. 1 - 12, 2015|Northern District|Northern Army Headquarters, 7th Division, 1st Artillery Brigade, 1st Antiaircraft Artillery Brigade, etc. Approximately 4,500 personnel|To maintain and enhance Army’s capability to respond to various situations|
|Army Corps field training exercise (Western Army)|Oct. 19 - Nov. 19, 2015|Western District|Western Army, Central Readiness Force, 2nd Division, 5th Brigade, etc. Approximately 15,000 personnel||
|Army Corps field training exercise (Eastern Army)|Dec. 6 - 19, 2015|Eastern District|Eastern Army Headquarters, 1st Division, 12th Brigade, 1st Engineer Brigade, Eastern Army Combined Brigade, etc. Approximately 4,000 personnel||
|Joint relocation exercises (camp relocation for divisions)|Jun. 22 - Jul. 16, 2015|Central-Northern Districts (Hamataiki Training Area, Yausubetsu Training Area, etc.)|13th Brigade Headquarters Approximately 2,000 personnel and 600 vehicles|To enhance control capability and adjustability necessary for long-range mobility|
|Joint relocation exercises (camp relocation for regiments)|Sep. 29 - Oct. 19, 2015|Eastern-Northern Districts (Hokkaido-Dai Maneuver Area, etc.)|One Infantry Regiment of the 12th Brigade Approximately 1,000 personnel and 350 vehicles||
|Joint relocation exercises (camp relocation for regiments)|Sep. 30 - Oct. 19, 2015|Central-Eastern Districts (Higashi- and Kita-Fuji Training Areas, etc.)|One Infantry Regiment of the 14th Brigade Approximately 890 personnel and 190 vehicles||
|Joint relocation exercises (camp relocation for regiments)|Oct. 20 - Nov. 17, 2015|Northern-Western Districts (Oyanohara Training Area, Kirishima Training Area, etc.)|One Infantry Regiment of the 2nd Division and 5th Brigade, 1st Artillery Brigade, Northern Army Engineer Troop, etc. Approximately 1,600 personnel and 500 vehicles||

|❍ MSDF|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Exercise|Period|Location|Main Participating Units, etc.|Note|
|MSDF exercise (map exercise)|Aug. 31 - Sep. 4, 2015|MSDF Staff College and the locations of other participating Units|Commands of the Self-Defense Fleet, District Headquarters, Material Command, etc. Approximately 3,000 personnel|To conduct drills for unit operations, maritime operations, etc.|
|MSDF exercise (field training exercise)|Nov. 16 - 25, 2015|Waters and airspace surrounding Japan|Self-Defense Fleet Approximately 25 vessels and 60 aircraft U.S. Navy Approximately 10 vessels|To conduct joint training with the U.S. Navy to strengthen coordination for anti-submarine, anti-surface, and anti- air warfares|


**Reference 20** **Results of Firing Training and Related Training by Dispatch of Each of the Self-Defense Forces to the United States (FY2015)**

|Col1|Name of Training|Date|Location|Dispatched Unit|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|GSDF|HAWK/Medium-range SAM unit level live-fire training|Oct. 5 – Dec. 14, 2015|McGregor Range in New Mexico, U.S.|14 anti-aircraft companies Approximately 470 personnel|
||Surface-to-ship missile unit level live- fire training|Oct. 9 – 31, 2015|Point Mugu Range in California, U.S.|3 surface-to-ship missile regiments and others Approximately 240 personnel|
|MSDF|Training in the U.S. by dispatch of aircraft|Aug. 10 – 24, 2015|Airspace surrounding Guam|2 aircraft|
||Training in the U.S. by dispatch of destroyer and others|Sep. 15 – Oct. 20, 2015|Sea areas surrounding Hawaii|2 destroyers 2 aircraft|
||(First) Training in the U.S. by dispatch of submarine|Sep. 23 – Dec. 19, 2015|Sea areas surrounding Hawaii|1 submarine|
||(First) Training in the U.S. by dispatch of group of destroyers|Jan. 9 – 30, 2016|Sea areas and airspace surrounding Guam|7 destroyers 1 aircraft|
||(Second) Training in the U.S. by dispatch of submarine|Jan. 18 – Apr. 9, 2016|Sea areas surrounding Hawaii|1 submarine|
||(Second) Training in the U.S. by dispatch of group of destroyers|Feb. 28 – Mar. 20, 2016|Sea areas and airspace surrounding Guam|4 destroyers|
|ASDF|Annual practice by antiaircraft units|Sep. 1 – Nov. 19, 2015|McGregor Range in New Mexico, U.S.|12 Air Defense Missiles (6 groups), Air Defense Missile Training Group Approximately 380 personnel|


-----

**Reference 21** **Main Measures for Re-employment Support**

|Items|Measures for employment support|Description|
|---|---|---|
|Measures for retiring uniformed SDF personnel|Occupational aptitude testing|Testing aimed to provide retiring uniformed SDF personnel with guidance based on individual aptitudes|
||Technical training|Provide retiring uniformed SDF personnel with skills usable in society after retirement (large sized vehicle operation, large sized special motor vehicle operation, information processing, crane operation, motor vehicle repair, boiler maintenance, nursing care [home helper], etc.)|
||Disaster prevention and risk control training|Provide uniformed SDF personnel retiring at an early age with technical knowledge on disaster prevention administration and the Civil Protection Plan|
||Correspondence courses|Provide retiring uniformed SDF personnel with the capability to acquire public qualification (certified insurance labor consultant, health supervisor, real estate transaction specialist, etc.)|
||Business management training|Support uniformed SDF personnel retiring at an early age to cultivate social adaptability, as well as provide necessary knowledge to lead a stable life after reemployment and retirement|
||Career guidance|Provide retiring uniformed SDF personnel with knowhow to choose new occupation and attitude toward reemployment|
||Outsourcing career counseling, etc.|Outsource career counseling, etc. to external experts to meet the needs of each retiring uniformed SDF personnel|
|Measures for internal support personnel|Training for support personnel|Training of labor administration, support activities, etc. to improve quality of support personnel|
|Measures for promotion outside of SDF|Support publicizing to business owners|Publicizing to business owners, etc. the effectiveness of retiring uniformed SDF personnel who plan to retire|
||Inviting business owners on unit tours|Invite business owners to SDF units, etc. and provide them with tours, explanations of the employment support situation, etc.|



**Reference 22** **Employment situation of retired uniformed SDF Personnel in disaster prevention-related bureaus in local government**



|Prefectural Government|Employment situation|
|---|---|
|Hokkaido|Hokkaido Prefectural Government (three persons), Obihiro City Government (two persons), Chitose City Government (three persons), Bibai City Government, Sapporo City Government (two persons), Shikabe Town Offcie, Bihoro Town Offcie, Tomakomai City Government, Hokuto City Government, Iwamizawa City Government (two persons), Asahikawa City Government (two persons), Eniwa City Government (two persons), Kushiro City Government, Kushiro Town Offcie, Nayoro City Government, Kitami City Government, Nanae Town Offcie, Rumoi City Government, Engaru Town Offcie, Takigawa City Government, Akabira City Government, Kitahiroshima City Government, Noboribetsu City Government, Shibecha Town Offcie, Shiraoi Town Offcie, Teshikaga Town Offcie, Shikaoi Town Offcie, Hakodate City Government (two persons), Muroran City Government, Memuro Town Offcie, Shinhidaka Town Offcie, Naganuma Town Offcie, Ashibetsu City Government, Kamifurano Town Offcie, Matsumae Town Offcie|
|Aomori|Aomori Prefectural Government, Hachinohe City Government (two persons), Aomori City Government (three persons), Hirosaki City Government, Oirase Town Office, Misawa City Government, Sannohe Town Office|
|Iwate|Iwate Prefectural Government, Hanamaki City Government, Shiwa Town Office, Takizawa City Government, Tono Town Office, Hachimantai City Government, Kuji City Government, Morioka City Government, Miyako City Government, Yamada Town Office|
|Miyagi|Miyagi Prefectural Government, Sendai City Government (two persons), Ishinomaki City Government (two persons), Tagajo City Government, Oohira Village Office, Iwanuma City Government|
|Akita|Akita Prefectural Government, Daisen City Government, Yokote City Government, Senboku City Government, Odate City Government, Yuzawa City Government|
|Yamagata|Yamagata Prefectural Government (two persons), Higashine City Government, Sakata City Government, Tendo City Government|
|Fukushima|Fukushima Prefectural Government, Fukushima City Government (two persons), Koriyama City Government|
|Ibaraki|Ibaraki Prefectural Government, Ushiku City Government (two persons), Ryugasaki City Government, Shimotsuma City Government|
|Tochigi|Tochigi Prefectural Government, Utsunomiya City Government|
|Gunma|Gunma Prefectural Government, Maebashi City Government (two persons), Shibukawa City Government, Numata City Government|
|Saitama|Saitama Prefectural Government, Soka City Government, Saitama City Government, Wako City Government, Asagiri City Government, Fukaya City Government|
|Chiba|Chiba Prefectural Government, Urayasu City Government, Ichikawa City Government, Nagareyama City Government, Isumi City Government, Narashino City Government, Funabashi City Government, Matsudo City Government (two persons), Katsuura City Government, Narita City Government, Oamishirasato City Government, Nagareyama City Government, Tateyama City Government|
|Tokyo|Tokyo Metropolitan Government (four persons), Itabashi Ward Office (two persons), Arakawa Ward Office, Adachi Ward Office, Shinagawa Ward Office (two persons), Toshima Ward Office|
|Kanagawa|Kanagawa Prefectural Government (three persons), Yokohama City Government (eight persons), Kawasaki City Government (two persons), Fujisawa City Government (two persons), Chigasaki City Government, Zushi City Government, Sagamihara City Government, Zama City Government, Ebina City Government, Yokosuka City Government, Kamakura City Government|
|Niigata|Niigata Prefectural Government, Tainai City Government, Jouetsu City Government, Sado City Government|
|Toyama|Toyama Prefectural Government, Toyama City Government|
|Ishikawa|Ishikawa Prefectural Government, Kanazawa City Government, Komatsu City Government, Kaga City Government|
|Fukui|Fukui Prefectural Government (two persons), Fukui City Government, Awara City Government, Takahama Town Office|
|Yamanashi|Yamanashi Prefectural Government (two persons), Minami-alps City Government, Fujiyoshida City Government|
|Nagano|Nagano Prefectural Government, Ina City Government, Matsumoto City Government, Chino City Government|
|Gifu|Gifu Prefectural Government (two persons), Kaizu City Government, Kakamigahara City Government, Gifu City Government|



-  Provided by the Ministry of Defense as of March 31, 2016 (part-time personnel included).

|Col1|(as of March 31, 2016: 372 persons)|
|---|---|
|Prefectural Government|Employment situation|
|Shizuoka|Shizuoka Prefectural Government (fvie persons), Hamamatsu City Government, Gotenba City Government (two persons), Susono City Government, Oyama Town Offcie, Fukuroi City Government, Shizuoka City Government, Makinohara City Government, Izunokuni City Government, Shimada City Government, Atami City Government|
|Aichi|Aichi Prefectural Government, Seto Town Office, Kitanagoya City Government (two persons), Miyoshi City Government, Mihama Town Office, Taketoyo Town Office, Aisai City Government, Toyohashi City Government, Gamagori City Government, Tobishima Village Office, Ama City Government, Obu City Government, Kiyosu City Government, Oharu Town Office, Nishio City Government, Tokai City Government, Handa City Government, Toyoake City Government, Toyoyama Town Office, Minamichita Town Office (two persons), Yatomi City Government, Nagakute City Government, Hagashiura Town Office, Kanie Town Office|
|Mie|Mie Prefectural Government, Tsu City Government, Ise City Government, Kameyama City Government, Nabari City Government, Shima City Government, Toba City Government, Kuwana City Government, Owase City Government|
|Shiga|Shiga Prefectural Government, Konan City Government|
|Kyoto|Kyoto Prefectural Government, Seika Town Office, Kizugawa City Government, Yawata City Government, Kyotango City Government|
|Osaka|Osaka Prefectural Government, Sakai City Government, Ikeda City Government, Osaka City Government (two persons), Kawachinagano City Government, Matsubara City Government, Izumi City Government, Hirakata City Government, Izumisano City Government, Toyono Town Office, Osakasayama City Government, Takaishi City Government, Shijonawate City Government, Tondabayashi City Government|
|Hyogo|Hyogo Prefectural Government, Akashi City Government, Toyooka City Government, Miki City Government, Yabu City Government, Nishiwaki City Government|
|Nara|Nara Prefectural Government (three persons), Nara City Government (four persons), Gojo City Government|
|Wakayama|Wakayama Prefectural Government, Wakayama City Government, Koya Town Office|
|Tottori|Tottori Prefectural Government (two persons), Tottori City Government, Yurihama Town Office, Hokuei Town Office, Yonago City Government|
|Shimane|Shimane Prefectural Government, Matsue City Government, Hamada City Government|
|Okayama|Okayama Prefectural Government, Kurashiki City Government, Asakuchi City Government|
|Hiroshima|Hiroshima Prefectural Government (two persons), Hatsukaichi City Government, Hiroshima City Government|
|Yamaguchi|Yamaguchi Prefectural Government, Yamaguchi City Government, Iwakuni City Government, Shimonoseki City Government, Shunan City Government, Nagato City Government|
|Tokushima|Tokushima Prefectural Government (two persons), Komatsushima City Government, Anan City Government, Yoshinogawa City Government (two persons), Miyoshi City Government|
|Kagawa|Kagawa Prefectural Government, Marugame City Government, Sakade City Government, Zentsuji City Government|
|Ehime|Ehime Prefectural Government, Matsuyama City Government, Imabari City Government|
|Kochi|Kochi Prefectural Government, Konan City Government|
|Fukuoka|Fukuoka Prefectural Government, Kurume City Government, Iizuka City Government, Nogata City Government, Kasuga City Government, Tagawa City Government, Nakagawa Town Offcie, Dazaifu City Government, Chikuzen Town Offcie, Onojo City Government, Munakata City Government, Kasuya Town Offcie, Itoshima City Government|
|Saga|Saga Prefectural Government (three persons), Karatsu City Government|
|Nagasaki|Nagasaki Prefectural Government (fvie persons), Sasebo City Government (two persons), Nagasaki City Government, Omura City Government (three persons), Minamishimabara City Government, Shimabara City Government, Matsuura City Government|
|Kumamoto|Kumamoto Prefectural Government (three persons), Kumamoto City Government, Kikuchi City Government, Ozu Town Office, Takamori Town Office|
|Oita|Oita Prefectural Government (two persons), Saiki City Government, Kitsuki City Government|
|Miyazaki|Miyazaki Prefectural Government (five persons), Miyazaki City Government, Miyakonojo City Government (three persons) , Nobeoka City Government, Ebino City Government, Tsuno Town Office, Kobayashi City Government, Saito City Government, Hyuga City Government, Kushima City Government, Nichinan City Government|
|Kagoshima|Kagoshima Prefectural Government (four persons), Satsuma-Sendai City Government, Kirishima City Government (two persons), Tarumizu City Government|


-----

**Reference 23** **Development of Seamless Security Legislation to**
**Ensure Japan’s Survival and Protect its People**

(Approved by the National Security Council and the Cabinet on
July 1, 2014)
Since the end of World War II, Japan has consistently followed the path
of a peace-loving nation under the Constitution of Japan. While adhering
to a basic policy of maintaining an exclusively national defenseoriented policy, not becoming a military power that poses a threat to
other countries, and observing the Three Non-Nuclear Principles, Japan
has flourished as an economic power through continuous efforts of its
people and built a stable and affluent livelihood. Japan, as a peace-loving
nation, has also been cooperating with the international community and
international organizations including the United Nations (U.N.), and
has proactively contributed to their activities, adhering to the Charter of
the United Nations. The course that Japan has taken as a peace-loving
nation has garnered significant praise and respect from the international
community, and Japan must continue these steps to further fortify such
a position.
During the 67 years since the Constitution of Japan came into
effect, the security environment surrounding Japan has fundamentally
transformed and is continuing to evolve, and Japan is confronted by
complex and significant national security challenges. There exist no
prospects of the realization of the so-called formal “U.N. forces”,
an ideal proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations. Moreover,
even when considering only the quarter-century since the end of the
Cold War, the shift in the global power balance, rapid progress of
technological innovation, development and proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and ballistic missiles, and threats such as international
terrorism have given rise to issues and tensions in the Asia-Pacific
region, and there exists a situation in which any threats, irrespective of
where they originate in the world, could have a direct influence on the
security of Japan. Furthermore, in recent years, risks that can impede
the utilization of and free access to the sea, outer space and cyberspace
have been spreading and become more serious. No country can secure
its own peace only by itself, and the international community also
expects Japan to play a more proactive role for peace and stability in the
world, in a way commensurate with its national capability.
Maintaining the peace and security of Japan and ensuring its survival
as well as securing its people’s lives are the primary responsibility of the
Government. In order to adapt to the changes in the security environment
surrounding Japan and to fulfill its responsibility, the Government,
first and foremost, has to create a stable and predictable international
environment and prevent the emergence of threats by advancing
vibrant diplomacy with sufficient institutional capabilities, and has to
pursue peaceful settlement of disputes by acting in accordance with
international law and giving emphasis to the rule of law.
Moreover, it is important to appropriately develop, maintain and
operate Japan’s own defense capability, strengthen mutual cooperation
with the United States, which is Japan’s ally, and deepen trust and
cooperative relations with other partners both within and outside the
region. In particular, it is essential to avoid armed conflicts before they
materialize and prevent threats from reaching Japan by further elevating
the effectiveness of the Japan-United States security arrangements and
enhancing the deterrence of the Japan-United States Alliance for the
security of Japan and peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region. On
that basis, in order to resolutely secure the lives and peaceful livelihood
of its people under any situation and contribute even more proactively
to the peace and stability of the international community under the
policy of “Proactive Contribution to Peace” based on the principle of
international cooperation, it is necessary to develop domestic legislation
that enables seamless responses.
In accordance with the basic orientation presented by Prime
Minister Abe at the May 15 press conference which took place after
the report of “the Advisory Panel on Reconstruction of the Legal Basis
for Security” was submitted on the same day, discussions have been
repeatedly held in the ruling parties and examination has also been
conducted by the Government. Based on the result of the discussions
of the ruling coalition, the Government will promptly develop domestic
legislation necessary for securing the lives and peaceful livelihood of its
people, in accordance with the following basic policies:
1. Response to an Infringement that Does Not Amount to an Armed
Attack
(1) Considering the increasingly severe security environment
surrounding Japan, situations that are neither pure peacetime
nor contingencies are liable to occur, posing risks which could


develop into more serious situations. In such situations of
infringement that does not amount to an armed attack, it is an even
more important task to prepare and ensure seamless and sufficient
responses to any unlawful acts through closer cooperation
between relevant agencies, including police organizations, and
the Self-Defense Forces (SDF), premised on the basic allocation
of their roles.
(2) Specifically, in order to respond to various unlawful acts, under
the basic policy that relevant agencies including the police
and Japan Coast Guard are to respond in close cooperation in
accordance with their respective duties and authorities, the
Government will further strengthen necessary measures in all
areas, which include enhancing the respective agency’s response
capabilities, strengthening collaboration among agencies
including information sharing, examining and developing
concrete response guidelines, accelerating procedures to issue
orders, and improving exercises and training.
(3) As for accelerating procedures, in cases of responding to a
situation where an infringement from the outside that does not
amount to an armed attack occurs in areas surrounding remote
islands, etc., and police forces are not present nearby or police
agencies cannot respond immediately (including situations in
which police agencies cannot respond because of the weapons
possessed by the armed groups, etc.), the Government will
thoroughly examine the application of related provisions to order
public security operations or maritime security operations in
advance and establish a common understanding among relevant
agencies. At the same time, in order to avoid the spread of
damages caused by unlawful acts while internal administrative
procedures are taken, the Government will also make concrete
considerations on measures for issuing orders swiftly and
accelerating procedures in light of circumstances.
(4) Moreover, for ensuring Japan’s security, it is important for the
SDF and the United States armed forces to respond seamlessly
in close cooperation to a situation where an attack occurs
against the units of the United States armed forces currently
engaged in activities which contribute to the defense of Japan
and such situation escalates into an armed attack depending on
its circumstances. Assuming a situation where an infringement
that does not amount to an armed attack occurs in the course of
various peacetime activities carried out in coordination between
the SDF and the United States armed forces and referring to
the concept of “use of weapons” for the purpose of protecting
its own weapons and other equipment under Article 95 of the
SDF Law, the Government will develop legislation that enables
the SDF to carry out very passive and limited “use of weapons”
to the minimum extent necessary to protect weapons and other
equipment of the units of the United States armed forces, if they
are, in cooperation with the SDF, currently engaged in activities
which contribute to the defense of Japan (including joint
exercises), in line with the provisions of Article 95 of the SDF
Law, premised on request or consent by the United States.
2. Further Contributions to the Peace and Stability of the International
Community
(1) So-called Logistics Support and “Ittaika with the Use of Force”
A. So-called logistics support is an activity that does not
in itself constitute a “use of force”. For instance, when
international peace and security are threatened and the
international community is united in responding to the
situation in accordance with a U.N. Security Council
resolution, there exist situations in which it is necessary for
Japan to conduct such support activities to armed forces of
other countries carrying out legitimate “use of force” based
on the resolution. As for Japan’s support activities, however,
legal frameworks limiting the area of such activities to
“rear area” or so-called “noncombat area”, etc. have been
established in past legislations to ensure that the issue of
“ittaika with the use of force” (forming an “integral part”
of the use of force) does not arise, in relation to Article 9 of
the Constitution. This is intended to avoid Japan from being
legally evaluated as carrying out by itself the “use of force”
which is not permitted under the Constitution because its
support activities would form an “integral part” of the use of
force (“ittaika with the use of force”) by other countries.
B. The SDF, even under such legal frameworks, has steadily
accumulated its records of various support activities, and


-----

the expectations to and trust in Japan have been growing.
Amid a major change in the security environment, from the
perspective of “Proactive Contribution to Peace” based on
the principle of international cooperation, it is necessary
to enable the SDF to play sufficient roles in wide-ranging
support activities for peace and stability of the international
community. It is also vital from the viewpoint of ensuring
Japan’s peace and security to enable the carrying out of such
activities more than before without hindrance.
C. The Government, while premising on the theory of socalled “Ittaika with the use of force” itself, based on the
accumulation of discussions related to the “ittaika with the
use of force” and considering factors such as the SDF’s actual
experiences to date and the reality of U.N. collective security
measures, no longer takes the current framework uniformly
limiting SDF’s activities to such areas as “rear area” or socalled “non-combat area” where the issue of “ittaika with
the use of force” does not arise. Instead, the Government
takes the recognition that Japan’s support activities such
as supply and transportation conducted at a place which is
not “the scene where combat activities are actually being
conducted” by a foreign country are not regarded as “ittaika
with the use of force” by that country. From the viewpoint of
the following positions which is based on that recognition,
the Government will proceed with developing legislation
which enables necessary support activities to armed forces
of foreign countries engaging in activities for ensuring
Japan’s security or for peace and stability of the international
community:
(a) Do not conduct support activities in “the scene where
combat activities are actually being conducted” by
armed forces of a foreign country to which Japan
provides support.
(b) Immediately pause or cease support activities if the place
where Japan is conducting support activities becomes
“the scene where combat operations are actually being
conducted” due to changes of the situation.
(2) Use of Weapons Associated with International Peace Cooperation
Activities
A. To date, Japan has developed necessary legislation and has
conducted international peace cooperation activities for over
20 years. In conducting such activities, Japan has limited
the right of SDF personnel to use weapons when engaging
in international peace cooperation activities to so-called
self-preservation type and protection of its own weapons
and other equipment since use of weapons associated
with so-called “kaketsuke-keigo” (coming to the aid of
geographically distant unit or personnel under attack) or
“use of weapons for the purpose of execution of missions”
could constitute the “use of force” prohibited by Article 9 of
the Constitution, if such use of weapons are directed against
“a state or a quasi-state organization.”
B. From the perspective of a “Proactive Contribution to Peace”
based on the principle of international cooperation, Japan
needs to enhance its efforts to promote the peace and
stability of the international community. To that end, it is
important to be able to participate in international peace
cooperation activities including peace keeping operations
(PKOs) sufficiently and proactively. Moreover, given that
many Japanese nationals are actively working overseas
and face risks of being involved in emergency situations
such as terrorism, it is necessary to enable the rescuing of
Japanese nationals abroad by use of weapons subject to the
consent of acceptance from the territorial State which, under
international law, has the obligation to extend protection to
foreigners who are within its territories.
C. Based on the above, the Government will proceed with
developing legislation based on the following positions in
order to enable the SDF’s use of weapons associated with
so-called “kaketsuke-keigo” and the “use of weapons for
the purpose of execution of missions” in international peace
cooperation activities that do not invoke “use of force”
including U.N. peacekeeping operations as well as policelike activities that do not invoke “use of force” including
the rescuing of Japanese nationals with a consent from the
territorial State, through ensuring that “a state or a quasi

state organization” does not appear as the adversary:
(a) As for U.N. peacekeeping operations, etc., since
“consent by the State to which the areas in which
activities are conducted belong” and “consent by the
parties to the conflict to activities conducted” are
necessary under the framework of the Five Principles
for PKOs, “a quasi-state organization” other than parties
to the conflict who have given consent of acceptance is,
in principle, not expected to appear as the adversary.
For more than 20 years, this has been demonstrated by
Japan’s experience of U.N. peacekeeping operations, etc.
When the use of weapons for the execution of missions
is expected to exceed selfpreservation and protection
of its own weapons and other equipment including
when the SDF is tasked with the maintenance of order
such as the protection of population, which is deemed
as an important mission in recent U.N. peacekeeping
operations, it is necessary that consent from the parties
to the conflict is stably maintained, especially because
of the nature of the activities.
(b) When the SDF units conduct police-like activities that
do not involve “use of force” including the rescuing of
Japanese nationals in a foreign country based on the
consent of the territorial State’s Government, it is natural
that the activities be conducted in the area within which
the consent of the territorial State’s Government is valid,
i.e. the area within which its authority is maintained.
This means that no “quasi-state organization” exists in
that area.
(c) The Cabinet will make a decision on whether the consent
ofacceptance is stably maintained or the area within
which the consent of the territorial State’s Government
is valid, etc. based on deliberations etc. at the National
Security Council.
(d) Use of weapons in these activities is subject to
the inherent constraint of the strict principle of
proportionality which is similar to the principle of
police proportionality.
3. Measures for Self-Defense Permitted under Article 9 of the
Constitution
(1) In order to adapt to the changes in the security environment
surrounding Japan and secure the lives and peaceful livelihood
of its people under any situations, the Government has examined
what constitutional interpretation would be appropriate, as
sufficient responses would not necessarily be possible if the
constitutional interpretation to date were maintained. In this
regard, logical consistency and legal stability are required for the
Government’s constitutional interpretation.

Accordingly, it is necessary to draw a logical conclusion for
securing the lives and peaceful livelihood of its people within the
limit of the basic logic of the interpretation of Article 9 of the
Constitution as expressed by the Government to date.
(2) The language of Article 9 of the Constitution appears to prohibit
“use of force” in international relations in all forms. However,
when considered in light of “the right (of the people) to live in
peace” as recognized in the Preamble of the Constitution and
the purpose of Article 13 of the Constitution which stipulates,
“their (all the people’s) right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness” shall be the supreme consideration in governmental
affairs, Article 9 of the Constitution cannot possibly be
interpreted to prohibit Japan from taking measures of selfdefense necessary to maintain its peace and security and to ensure
its survival. Such measures for self-defense are permitted only
when they are inevitable for dealing with imminent unlawful
situations where the people’s right to life, liberty and the pursuit
of happiness is fundamentally overturned due to an armed attack
by a foreign country, and for safeguarding these rights of the
people. Hence, “use of force” to the minimum extent necessary
to that end is permitted. This is the basis, or so-called the basic
logic, of the view consistently expressed by the Government to
date with regard to “use of force” exceptionally permitted under
Article 9 of the Constitution, and clearly shown in the document
“Relationship between the Right of Collective Self-Defense and
the Constitution” submitted by the Government to the Committee
on Audit of the House of Councilors on October 14, 1972.

This basic logic must be maintained under Article 9 of the


-----

Constitution
(3) To date, the Government has considered that “use of force”
under this basic logic is permitted only when an “armed
attack” against Japan occurs. However, in light of the situation
in which the security environment surrounding Japan has been
fundamentally transformed and continuously evolving by shifts
in the global power balance, the rapid progress of technological
innovation, and threats such as weapons of mass destruction, etc.
as mentioned at the outset, in the future, even an armed attack
occurring against a foreign country could actually threaten
Japan’s survival, depending on its purpose, scale and manner, etc.

Japan, as a matter of course, will make the utmost diplomatic
efforts, should a dispute occur, for its peaceful settlement and take
all necessary responses in accordance with the existing domestic
laws and regulations developed based upon the constitutional
interpretation to date. It is still required, however, to make all
necessary preparations in order to ensure Japan’s survival and
protect its people.

Under such recognition and as a result of careful examination
in light of the current security environment, the Government has
reached a conclusion that not only when an armed attack against
Japan occurs but also when an armed attack against a foreign
country that is in a close relationship with Japan occurs and as
a result threatens Japan’s survival and poses a clear danger to
fundamentally overturn people’s right to life, liberty and pursuit
of happiness, and when there is no other appropriate means
available to repel the attack and ensure Japan’s survival and
protect its people, use of force to the minimum extent necessary
should be interpreted to be permitted under the Constitution as
measures for self-defense in accordance with the basic logic of
the Government’s view to date.
(4) As a matter of course, Japan’s “use of force” must be carried out
while observing international law. At the same time, a legal basis

**Reference 24** **Main Operations of the Self-Defense Forces**


in international law and constitutional interpretation need to be
understood separately. In certain situations, the aforementioned
“use of force” permitted under the Constitution is, under
international law, based on the right of collective self-defense.
Although this “use of force” includes those which are triggered
by an armed attack occurring against a foreign country, they
are permitted under the Constitution only when they are taken
as measures for self-defense which are inevitable for ensuring
Japan’s survival and protecting its people, in other words for
defending Japan.
(5) Moreover, even when “use of force” is permitted under the
Constitution, since they are carried out to secure the lives and
peaceful livelihood of the people, it is natural to require an
assurance of democratic control. The Government will stipulate
in the draft legislation that prior approval of the Diet is in
principle required upon issuing orders of operations to the SDF
for carrying out “use of force” permitted under the Constitution
when an armed attack occurs not against Japan but against a
foreign country, in the same manner as the procedures related to
defense operations stipulated in the current laws and regulations.
4. The Way Forward for Developing Domestic Legislation
When these activities are to be conducted by the SDF, the Cabinet
shall make a decision in accordance with deliberations, etc. at the
National Security Council. Including such procedures, domestic
legislation which serves as the legal basis is necessary in order to
enable the SDF to actually conduct such activities. Based on the basic
policies described above, the Government will herewith commence
the tasks of drafting legislation that enables seamless responses to
any situations in order to secure the lives and peaceful livelihood
of its people. The Government will give adequate consideration,
and as soon as it completes its preparation, it will submit the draft
legislation to the Diet for its deliberations.

|Operation|Applicable Situations|Conditions Required for Operations|Main Type of Authorized Actions|
|---|---|---|---|
|Defense operation (Article 76, Self-Defense Forces Law)|(1) When there is a situation in which armed attack against Japan from outside occur or when it is considered that there is an imminent and clear danger of armed attack, and therefore it is necessary to defend Japan against these attacks. (2) When there is a situation in which an armed attack against a foreign country that is in a close relationship with Japan occurs, which in turn poses an imminent and clear danger of Japan’s survival to be threatened and fundamentally overturns people’s right to life, liberty and pursuit of happiness, and therefore it is necessary to defend Japan against such a situation.|(1) Authorized by: Prime Minister (2) Consent of the Diet: required (prior consent required in principle)|❍ Use of force (only if the case fulfils 3 conditions for exercising the right of self-defense) ❍ Maintenance of public order (same as for public security operation)1 ❍ Others (including control over the Japan Coast Guard, emergency passage, appropriation of supplies, marine transportation restriction, treatment of prisoners, civil protection etc.)1|
|Establishment of defense facilities (Article 77-2, Self-Defense Forces Law)|When there are areas in which the deployment of SDF units under the order for defense operations is expected and the reinforcement of defensive preparations is deemed necessary (intended deployment area) before the deployment of SDF units for possible operation in cases where the situation has intensified and the order for defense operations (only for armed attack situations) is likely to be issued|(1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense (2) Consent of the Diet: required (after the Cabinet decision on the Basic Response Plan)1 (3) Additional requirements: approval of the Prime Minister|❍ Establishment of positions and defense facilities in the intended deployment area ❍ Use of weapons to protect one’s own life or body or other personnel on duty|
|Measures to be taken before a defense operation Order (Article 77-3, Self-Defense Forces Law and U.S. and Others’ Military Actions Related Measures Act)|When a defense operation order is expected under a tense situation|(1) Authorized by: supplies — Minister of Defense or person delegated authority by the Minister; services — Minister of Defense (2) Consent of the Diet: supplies — not required; services — required (after the Cabinet decision on the Basic Response Plan)2|❍ Provision of supplies to the U.S. military forces as a measure related to the actions based on U.S. and others’ Military Actions Related Measures Act ❍ Provision of services as a related measure ❍ Use of weapons to protect one’s own life or body or other personnel on duty|
|Civil Protection Dispatch (Article 77-4, Self-Defense Forces Law)|When deemed unavoidable upon request by prefectural governors in accordance with the Civil Protection Law, or when requested by the Armed Attack Situation, etc., Task Force Chief or the Emergency Response Situation Task Force Chief in accordance with the Law|(1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense (2) Consent of the Diet: not required (3) Additional requirements: approval of the Prime Minister|❍ Measures concerning guidance of fleeing residents, emergent pursuant to the provision of the Civil Protection Law ❍ Partial application of the Police Duties Law weapons (Measures for Refuge, etc. Prevention and Suppression of Crime, Entry, etc.)3 ❍ Partial application of the Japan Coast Guard Law (requests for cooperation, on- the-spot inspections, use of weapons, etc.) ❍ Use of weapons|


-----

|Operation|Applicable Situations|Conditions Required for Operations|Main Type of Authorized Actions|
|---|---|---|---|
|Public security operation by order (Article 78, Self-Defense Forces Law)|When it is deemed that the public security cannot be maintained by the law enforcement force in the event of indirect aggression or other such emergencies|(1) Authorized by: Prime Minister (2) Consent of the Diet: required (to be referred to the Diet within 20 days of the order’s issuance)|❍ Application of the Police Duties Law (Questioning, Measures for Refuge, etc. Prevention and Suppression of Crime, Entry, etc.) ❍ Partial application of the Japan Coast Guard Law (requests for cooperation, on- the-spot inspections, etc.) ❍ Use of weapons ❍ Control over the Japan Coast Guard|
|Information gathering before public security operation order (Article 79-2, Self-Defense Forces Law)|When situations have intensified and a public security operation order and illicit activity by those armed with rifles, machine guns, or other weapons are expected; and there is a special need to gather Information|(1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense (2) Consent of the Diet: not required (3) Additional requirements: approval of the Prime Minister after consulting with the National Public Safety Commission|❍ Use of weapons to protect one’s own life and body or other personnel on duty|
|Public security operation by request (Article 81, Self-Defense Forces Law)|When deemed unavoidable if public peace is to be maintained in serious situations by the prefectural governors and by the Prime Minister|(1) Authorized by: Prime Minister (2) Consent of the Diet: not required (3) Additional requirements: prefectural governor makes a request to the Prime Minister after consulting with the prefectural Public Safety Commission|❍ Application of the Police Duties Law (Questioning, Measures for Refuge, etc. Prevention and Suppression of Crime, Entry, etc.) ❍ Partial application of the Japan Coast Guard Law (requests for cooperation, on- the-spot inspections, etc.) ❍ Use of weapons|
|Guarding operation (Article 81-2, Self-Defense Forces Law)|When special measures are deemed necessary to prevent damage due to likely large-scale terrorist attacks on SDF or U.S. forces facilities and areas in Japan|(1) Authorized by: Prime Minister (2) Consent of the Diet: not required (3) Additional requirements: Minister of Defense consults with the National Public Safety Commission after hearing opinions from the relevant prefectural governor|❍ Partial application of the Police Duties Law (interrogation; measures such as evacuation, etc.; entry (all only when police officers are not present); crime prevention and control) ❍ Use of weapons|
|Maritime security operations (Article 82, Self-Defense Forces Law)|When special measures are deemed necessary to protect lives and property or maintain order at sea|(1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense (2) Consent of the Diet: not required (3) Additional requirements: approval of the Prime Minister|❍ Partial application of the Japan Coast Guard Law (requests for cooperation, on- the-spot inspections, etc.) ❍ Use of weapons|
|Counter-Piracy Operations (Article 82-2, Self-Defense Forces Law and Anti-Piracy Law)|When special measures are deemed necessary to combat acts of piracy|(1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense (2) Consent of the Diet: not required (to be reported to the Diet when the Prime Minister has approved the counterpiracy operation or when a mission has been completed) (3) Additional requirements: approval of the Prime Minister (the Minister of Defense submits the response procedures to the Prime Minister)|❍ Partial application of the Japan Coast Guard Law (requests for cooperation, on- the-spot inspections, etc.) ❍ Use of weapons|
|Destruction measures against ballistic missiles, etc. (Article 82-3, Self-Defense Forces Law)|When it is anticipated that ballistic missiles are flying toward Japan and the measures are deemed necessary to protect lives and properties in Japan’s territory from the damage caused by the missiles|(1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense (2) Consent of the Diet: not required (after-the fact report required) (3) Additional requirements: approval of the Prime Minister (for an urgent case, the order can be made in advance according to the emergency response procedures approved by the Prime Minister)|❍ Use of weapons|
|Disaster relief dispatch (Article 83, Self-Defense Forces Law)|When judged necessary in order to protect lives and property in the event of natural calamities or other disasters4|(1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense or those designated by the Minister (2) Consent of the Diet: not required (3) Additional requirements: at the request of prefectural governors or other parties designated by Government ordinance (excluding particularly urgent situations when it is deemed there is no time to wait for a request to be made)|❍ Partial application of the Police Duties Law (Refuge, entry, etc.) (all only when police officers are not present) ❍ Partial application of the Japan Coast Guard Law (request for cooperation) ❍ Authority provided for under the Disaster Measures Basic Law (Designation of alert zones, guarantee of passage for emergency vehicles, etc.; only when no municipal mayor or police officer is present)|
|Earthquake disaster relief dispatch (Article 83-2, Self-Defense Forces Law)|When the Director-General of the Earthquake Disaster Warning Headquarters deems the support of the SDF to be necessary for the swift and appropriate implementation of emergency measures to deal with earthquakes and other disasters (Article 13-2 of the Special Law Concerning Countermeasures for Large-Scale Earthquakes)|(1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense (2) Consent of the Diet: not required (3) Additional requirements: request of the Director- General of the Earthquake Disaster Warning Headquarters (Prime Minister)|❍ Partial application of the Police Duties Law (the same as in the case of a disaster relief dispatch) ❍ Partial application of the Japan Coast Guard Law (the same as in the case of a disaster relief dispatch)|
|Nuclear disaster relief Dispatch (Article 83-3, Self-Defense Forces Law)|When the Director-General of the Nuclear Disaster Response Headquarters deems the support of the SDF to be necessary for the swift and appropriate implementation of measures to deal with emergency situations (Article 20-4 of the Special Law Concerning Countermeasures for Nuclear Disasters)|(1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense (2) Consent of the Diet: not required (3) Additional requirements: request of the Director- General of the Nuclear Disaster Response Headquarters (Prime Minister)|❍ Same as in disaster relief dispatch|
|Action against violation of territorial airspace (Article 84, Self-Defense Forces Law)|When a foreign aircraft intrudes Japan’s territorial airspace in violation of international law and/ or the provisions of the Aviation Law or other relevant laws and regulations|(1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense (2) Consent of the Diet: not required|❍ The action necessary to make intruding aircraft land or withdraw from the territorial airspace of Japan (guiding intruders away, issuing radio transmission warnings, use of weapons, etc.)5|
|Elimination of mines and other dangerous objects (Article 84-2, Self-Defense Forces Law)||(1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense (2) Consent of the Diet: not required|❍ Elimination and disposition of mines and other dangerous explosive objects found on the sea|
|Measures to Rescue Japanese Nationals Overseas (Article 84-3, Self-Defense Forces Law)|Emergency situations overseas|(1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense (2) Consent of the Diet: not required (3) Additional requirements: request of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to conduct rescue measures such as guarding and rescue of Japanese nationals who are at risk for harm to their life or body, and the approval of the Prime Minister|❍ Use of weapons to protect one’s own life or body or other personnel on duty, and to execute duties.|


Emergency situations overseas (1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense ❍ Use of weapons to protect one’s own life or body

Evacuation of Japanese nationals

(2) Consent of the Diet: not required or other personnel on duty

residing abroad

(3) Additional requirements: request of the Minister

(Article 84-4, Self-Defense

for Foreign Affairs to evacuate Japanese

Forces Law)

nationals whose lives and bodies are threatened


-----

|Operation|Applicable Situations|Conditions Required for Operations|Main Type of Authorized Actions|
|---|---|---|---|
|Logistics support and other activities (Article 84-5, Self-Defense Forces Law Act on Measures to Ensure the Peace and Security of Japan in Perilous Situations in Areas Surrounding Japan, Ship Inspection Operations Act)|Situations that will have an important influence on Japan’s peace and security|(1) Authorized by: supplies — Minister of Defense or person who is a delegated authority by the Minister; services, search and rescue activities, and ship inspection operations (2) Consent of the Diet: prior consent required in principle (3) Additional requirements: approval of the Prime Minister in accordance with the implementation guidelines|❍ Use of weapons to protect one’s own life or body or other personnel on duty|
|Logistics support and other activities (Article 84-5, Self-Defense Forces Law International Peace Support Act, Ship Inspection Operations Act)|Situations where the peace and security of the international community is threatened, where the international community is collectively addressing the situation to remove the threat in accordance with the objectives of the United Nations Charter, and where Japan needs to make independent and proactive contributions to these activities as a member of the international community|(1) Authorized by: supplies — Minister of Defense or person who is a delegated authority by the Minister; services, search and rescue activities, and ship inspection operations (2) Consent of the Diet: prior consent required with no exception (3) Additional requirements: approval of the Prime Minister in accordance with the implementation guidelines|❍ Use of weapons to protect one’s own life or body or other personnel on duty|
|International disaster relief activities (Self-Defense Forces Law Article 84-5, International Disaster Relief Law)||(1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense (2) Consent of the Diet: not required (3) Additional requirements: request of the government of the disaster-stricken country to dispatch international disaster relief teams, and consultation with the Minister for Foreign Affairs||
|International peace cooperation activities (Self-Defense Forces Law Article 84-5, International Peace Cooperation Law)|When a request is made from the United Nations or other international organizations and agencies to take part in international peace cooperation activities compatible with the International Peace Cooperation Law|(1) Authorized by: Minister of Defense (2) Consent of the Diet: prior consent required in principle only in the cases where the SDF units, etc. conduct ceasefire monitoring and security of specified areas as well as implementing tasks such as providing protection for the purpose of security of specified areas requiring protection (3) Additional requirements: Request of the Chief of the International Peace Cooperation Headquarters (Prime Minister)|❍ Use of weapons to protect one’s own life or body or other personnel on duty ❍ Use of weapons to defense of mandate (when implementing tasks such as providing protection for the purpose of security of specified areas requiring protection as well as providing protection of lives and bodies of individuals engaging in the United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, etc. or support for those Operations, in response to urgent requests|


(All authority referred to in the table is prescribed by applicable law)
Notes: 1. Measures based on an assumption of direct armed attacks against Japan and physical damage are not applicable to the situations where an armed attack against a foreign country results
in threatening Japan’s survival.

2. If the Prime Minister gives approval to services in connection with defense facility construction, as well as U.S. military actions before a defense operations order is issued, such approval is
specified in the Basic Response Plan and presented to the Diet for consent (Article 9, Law Concerning Measures to Ensure National Independence and Security in a Situation of Armed Attack).

3. Full title: Law Concerning the Execution of Duties of Police Officials. The law shall apply mutatis mutandis only when police officers are not present.

4. Moreover, SDF unit commanders are authorized to dispatch units, should a fire or other disaster occur in or near the Defense Ministry’s facilities.

5. The use of weapons is not specifically defined, but is generally covered under “necessary actions.”

**Reference 25** **Statutory Provisions about Use of Force and Use of Weapons by SDF Personnel**

|Type of Operation|Provision|Content|
|---|---|---|
|Defense operation|Article 88, Self-Defense Forces Law|SDF and units under defense operations may take necessary military action to defend Japan.|
||Article 92 (2), Self-Defense Forces Law|Article 7 of The Police Duties Execution Act, Article 90 (1) of the Self-Defense Forces Law and Article 20 (2) of the Japan Coast Guard Law apply mutatis mutandis to the execution of duties to maintain public order by SDF personnel under defense operations.|
|Establishment of defense Facilities|Article 92-4, Self-Defense Forces Law|SDF personnel engaged in construction of defense facilities may use weapons to the extent judged to be reasonably necessary depending on the situation when there are reasonable grounds for judging that no appropriate means of overcoming existing danger other than the use of weapons to protect their own lives and bodies and those of other SDF personnel engaged in duties together. The use of weapons shall not cause harm to persons, except for cases falling under Article 36 (self defense) or Article 37 (averting present danger) of the Penal Code.|
|Civil protection dispatch|Article 92-3 (2), Self- Defense Forces Law|Article 7 of The Police Duties Execution Act applies mutatis mutandis to SDF personnel ordered to civil protection dispatches only when police officers, Japan Coast Guard Officers, including assistant cast guard officers, are not present.|
|Public security operation|Article 89 (1), Self-Defense Forces Law|Article 7 of the Police Duties Execution Act applies mutatis mutandis to the execution of duties of SDF personnel under public security operations.|
||Article 90 (1), Self-Defense Forces Law|SDF personnel who are ordered into public security operations may, in addition to cases where they use weapons under Article 7 of The Police Duties Execution Act, use weapons under certain cases, such as when they reasonably consider that persons to be guarded in the line of duty and others may suffer violence or infringement or are apparently exposed to such danger and no appropriate means of overcoming it other than the use of weapons.|
||Article 91 (2), Self-Defense Forces Law|Article 20 (2) of the Japan Coast Guard Law, which allows stopping the progression of the vessel that meet certain conditions, applies mutatis mutandis to the execution of duties of SDF personnel under public security operations.|
|Information- gathering duties before public security operation order|Article 92-5, Self-Defense Forces Law|SDF personnel engaged in information-gathering duties before public security operation order may use weapons within the limit judged to be reasonably necessary depending on situation when there are reasonable grounds for judging that no appropriate means of overcoming such danger other than the use of weapons to protect their own lives and bodies and those of other SDF personnel engaged in duties together. The use of weapons shall not cause harm to persons, except for cases falling under Article 26 (self-defense) or Article 37 (averting present danger) of the Penal Code.|
|Guarding operation|Article 91-2 (2), Self- Defense Forces Law|Article 7 of The Police Duties Execution Act applies mutatis mutandis to the execution of duties of SDF personnel under guarding operations.|
||Article 91-2 (3), Self- Defense Forces Law|SDF personnel who are ordered into guarding operations may, in addition to cases where they use weapons under Article 7 of The Police Duties Execution Act, use weapons in execution of their duties to the extent judged to be reasonably necessary depending on the situation when a clear danger of devastating destruction to the installation being guarded exists and there are reasonable grounds for judging that no appropriate means of overcoming such danger exists other than the use of weapons.|
|Maritime security Operation|Article 93 (1), Self-Defense Forces Law|Article 7 of The Police Duties Execution Act applies mutatis mutandis to the execution of duties of SDF personnel under maritime security operations.|
||Article 93 (3), Self-Defense Forces Law|Article 20 (2) of the Japan Coast Guard Law, which allows stopping the progression of the vessel that meet certain conditions, applied mutatis mutandis to the execution of duties of SDF personnel under maritime security operations.|
|Counter-piracy operations|Article 8 (2), Anti-Piracy Law|Article 7 of The Police Duties Execution Act applies mutatis mutandis to the execution of duties of SDF personnel under counter-piracy operations.|
|||If any party perpetrating acts of piracy, including approaching excessively close to a ship or trailing around a ship, continues their acts despite the counter-piracy measures of the other party, and there are reasonable grounds to believe that no other means are available to stop the passage of the ship in question, the use of weapons is permitted to the extent that is considered reasonably necessary in accordance with the situation.|


-----

|Type of Operation|Provision|Content|
|---|---|---|
|Destruction Measures against ballistic missiles|Article 93-3, Self-Defense Forces Law|SDF units ordered to destroy ballistic missiles flying headed toward Japan may use weapons as required.|
|Action against violation of Territorial airspace|Article 84, Self-Defense Forces Law|The use of force that falls under Article 36 (self-defense) or Article 37 (averting present danger) of the Penal Code is allowed as part of necessary actions to make aircraft land or withdraw from the territorial airspace of Japan.1|
|Measures to Rescue Japanese Nationals Overseas|Article 94-5, Self-Defense Forces Law|SDF personnel engaged in duties related to rescue measures for Japanese nationals and others overseas may use weapons to the extent considered proper and necessary in light of the situations when: (1) there are reasonable grounds for judging that there are no appropriate means of overcoming such situations other than the use of weapons to protect their own lives and bodies and those of Japanese nationals and others, or to eliminate actions which obstruct their duties stated above; (2) there are reasonable grounds for the use of weapons to protect their own lives or bodies, those of other SDF personnel engaged in duties together, or of those who, while conducting their duties, have come under the protection of SDF personnel. The use of weapons shall not cause harm to persons, except for cases falling under Article 26 (self-defense) or Article 37 (averting present danger) of the Penal Code.|
|Evacuation of Japanese nationals residing abroad|Article 94-6, Self-Defense Forces Law|SDF personnel engaged in evacuation of Japanese nationals and others overseas may use weapons to the extent considered proper and necessary in light of the situation when there are reasonable grounds for the use of weapons to protect their own lives and bodies, those of other SDF personnel engaged in the evacuation, or of Japanese nationals to be evacuated under the management of SDF personnel or of those granted permission to ride the same means of transport. The use of weapons shall not cause harm to persons, except for cases falling under Article 36 (self-defense) or Article 37 (averting present danger) of the Penal Code.|
|Article 11, Law Concerning Measures to Ensure the Peace and Security of Japan in Situations that Will Have an Important Influence on Japan’s Peace and Security - Logistics support activities, etc.||SDF personnel ordered to provide services as logistics support activities or to conduct search and rescue operations may use weapons to the extent considered proper and necessary in light of the situations: (1) when there are reasonable grounds for judging that no appropriate means of overcoming such situations other than the use of weapons to protect their own lives or bodies, those of other SDF personnel engaged in duties together, or of those who, while conducting their duties, have come under the protection of SDF personnel; (2) in the case where there are attacks against camps, which were established within foreign territories and where SDF units and SDF personnel jointly stationed with personnel from other countries such as the U.S. Forces personnel, when there are no other places but the camps in the vicinity to ensure the safety of the SDF units and others, and when there are reasonable grounds for the use of weapons jointly with those foreign personnel to protect their own lives or bodies as well as those of other personnel stationed together at the camps. The use of weapons shall not cause harm to persons, except for cases falling under Article 26 (self-defense) or Article 37 (averting present danger) of the Penal Code.|
|Article 6, Ship Inspection Operations Law - Ship inspection operations||SDF personnel ordered to provide services, etc., as rear area support or to implement rear area search and rescue activities may use weapons to the extent considered proper and necessary in light of the situation when there are reasonable grounds for the use of weapons to protect their own lives and bodies and those of others engaged in duties together. The use of weapons shall not cause harm to persons, except for cases falling under Article 36 (self-defense) or Article 37 (averting present danger) of the Penal Code.|
|Article 25 and 26, International Peace Cooperation Act – International peace cooperation operations||SDF personnel engaged in duties in international peace cooperation operations may use weapons to the extent considered proper and necessary in light of the situations: (1) when there are reasonable grounds for judging that no appropriate means of overcoming such situations other than the use of weapons to protect their own lives or bodies, those of other SDF personnel engaged in duties together, of International Peace Cooperation Corps, or of those who, while conducting their duties, have come under the protection of SDF personnel; (2) in the case where there are attacks against SDF personnel jointly stationed with personnel from other countries such as personnel of foreign armed forces’ units, and when there are reasonable grounds for the use of weapons jointly with those foreign personnel to protect their own lives or bodies as well as those of other personnel stationed together at the camps; (3) with regard to SDF personnel engaged in so-called “safety-ensuring” operations, when there are reasonable grounds for judging that no appropriate means of overcoming such situations other than the use of weapons to protect their own lives, bodies or assets, or those of other individuals, or to eliminate actions which obstruct their duties, in addition to (1) and (2) above; (4) with regard to SDF personnel engaged in so-called “kaketsuke-keigo (coming to protection of individuals related to operations in response to urgent request)” operations, when there are reasonable grounds for judging that there are no appropriate means of overcoming such situations other than the use of weapons to protect their own lives or bodies, or those of other individuals involved in the operations whom they intend to protect, in addition to (1) and (2) above. The use of weapons shall not cause harm to persons, except for cases falling under Article 26 (self-defense) or Article 37 (averting present danger) of the Penal Code.|
|Protection of SDF’s Weapons and Other Equipment|Article 95, Self-Defense Forces Law|SDF personnel engaged in duties of protecting weapons, etc. of the SDF may use weapons to the extent judged to be reasonably necessary in the situation when there are reasonable grounds for the use of weapons to protect the weapons, etc. The use of weapons shall not cause harm to person, except for cases falling under Article 36 (self-defense) or Article 37 (averting present danger) of the Penal Code.|
|Protection of the weapons and other equipment of the units of the U.S. Forces, armed forces of other countries|Article 95-2, Self-Defense Forces Law|SDF personnel engaged in duties of guarding weapons, etc. of the U.S. Forces and other foreign armed forces, which are actually engaged in activities that contribute to the defense of Japan in cooperation with the SDF (including joint exercises and training, and excluding the activities carried out in the scene where combat activities are actually being conducted), may use weapons to the extent judged to be reasonably necessary depending on the situations when there are reasonable grounds for the use of weapons to protect the weapons, etc. The use of weapons shall not cause harm to persons, except for cases falling under Article 26 (self-defense) or Article 37 (averting present danger) of the Penal Code.|
|Guarding facilities|Article 95-3, Self-Defense Forces Law|SDF personnel that meet certain conditions, engaged in duties of guarding the SDF facilities of the SDF in Japan may use weapons to the extent judged to be reasonably necessary in the situation when there are reasonable grounds for the use of weapons to execute their duties or to protect themselves or others. The use of weapons shall not cause harm to persons, except for cases falling under Article 36 (self-defense) or Article 37 (averting present danger) of the Penal Code.|
|Maintenance of internal order|Article 96 (3), Self-Defense Forces Law|Article 7 of The Police Duties Execution Act applies mutatis mutandis to the execution of duties of SDF personnel exclusively engaged in maintaining order within the SDF.|
|Article 12, The U.S. and others’ Military Actions Related Measures Act||SDF personnel and others ordered to provide services in accordance with measures related to U.S. military actions may use weapons to the extent judged to be reasonably depending on necessary in light of the situation when there are reasonable grounds for the use of weapons to protect their own lives or bodies of themselves, those of other the SDF personnel who are with them, or of those who, while conducting their duties, have come under the protection of SDF personnel. The use of weapons shall not cause harm to persons, except for cases falling under Article 36 (self-defense) or Article 37 (averting present danger) of the Penal Code.|
|Article 37, Maritime Transportation Restriction Act||Article 7 of the Law Concerning the Execution of Duties of Police Officials applies mutatis mutandis to MSDF personnel ordered to execute the measures in line with the Marine Transportation Restriction Law. If the crew of the vessel does not obey repeated orders to halt, persistently resists or tries to escape and when there is a considerable reason to believe that there are no other means to halt the vessel, said personnel may use their weapons within an extent that is judged to be reasonably necessary, following the orders of the Captain, etc.|
|Article 152, Prisoners of War Act||SDF personnel ordered into defense operations and engaged in imprisonment and SDF personnel engaged in guarding prisoners may use weapons to the extent considered proper and necessary in light of the situation. The use of weapons shall not cause harm to persons, except for cases falling under Article 36 (self-defense) or Article 37 (averting present danger) of the Penal Code.|
|Article 11, International Peace Support Act||SDF personnel ordered to provide services as cooperation and support operations or to conduct search and rescue operations may use weapons to the extent considered proper and necessary in light of the situations: (1) when there are reasonable grounds for the use of weapons to protect their own lives or bodies, those of other SDF personnel engaged in duties together, or of those who, while conducting their duties, have come under the protection of SDF personnel; (2) in the case where there are attacks against camps, which were established within foreign territories and where SDF units and SDF personnel jointly stationed with personnel from other countries such as those of foreign armed forces, when there are no other places but the camps in the vicinity to ensure the safety of the SDF units and others, and when there are reasonable grounds for the use of weapons jointly with those foreign personnel to protect their own lives or bodies as well as those of other personnel stationed together at the camps. The use of weapons shall not cause harm to persons, except for cases falling under Article 26 (self-defense) or Article 37 (averting present danger) of the Penal Code.|


Note: The use of weapons is not specifically defined, but is generally covered under “necessary actions.”


-----

**Reference 26** **Record of Joint Exercises for Civil Protection Implemented by the National and Local Governments (FY2015)**

**Prefectures that Conducted Joint Exercises More than Once**

|Types of Exercise|Date|Location|
|---|---|---|
|Field exercise|November 19, 2015|Hokkaido Prefecture|
||January 20, 2016|Yamanashi Prefecture|
||January 26, 2016|Kanagawa Prefecture|
|Simulation exercise|October 23, 2015|Shizuoka Prefecture|
||November 11, 2015|Akita Prefecture|
||November 12, 2015|Tokyo|
||November 26, 2015|Ehime Prefecture|
||December 18, 2015|Hyogo Prefecture|
||January 13, 2016|Toyama Prefecture|
||January 14, 2016|Mie Prefecture|
||January 19, 2016|Iwate Prefecture|
||January 22, 2016|Tokushima Prefecture|
||January 25, 2016|Nara Prefecture|
||February 3, 2016|Yamaguchi Prefecture|
||February 15, 2016|Fukui Prefecture|



Notes: Implemented in 15 Prefectures in FY2007.
Implemented in 18 Prefectures in FY2008.
Implemented in 14 Prefectures in FY2009. Four times
Implemented in 10 Prefectures in FY2010.
Implemented in 12 Prefectures in FY2011.
Implemented in 11 Prefectures in FY2012. Six times Toyama Prefecture (2005, 2010, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015)
Implemented in 13 Prefectures in FY2014. Eight times Ehime Prefecture (2006, 2007, 2008, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015)

|Number of Times Conducted|Location|
|---|---|
|Twice|Tochigi Prefecture (2009, 2014), Chiba Prefecture(2007, 2013), Nagano Prefecture (2007, 2008), Aichi Prefecture (2007, 2013), Kyoto Prefecture(2007, 2010), Okayama Prefecture (2008, 2012), Kagawa Prefecture (2009, 2013), Nagasaki Prefecture (2008, 2011), Oita Prefecture (2008, 2014), Kagoshima Prefecture (2007, 2012)|
|Three times|Hokkaido Prefecture (2006, 2011,2015), Aomori Prefecture (2008, 2010, 2013), Iwate Prefecture (2009, 2010, 2015), Akita Prefecture (2008, 2009, 2015), Kanagawa Prefecture (2008, 2010, 2015), Saitama Prefecture (2005, 2006, 2010), Niigata Prefecture (2008, 2011, 2013), Mie Prefecture (2008,2012, 2015), Gifu Prefecture (2007, 2011, 2014), Hyogo Prefecture (2009, 2011, 2015), Shiga Prefecture (2008, 2012, 2014), Yamaguchi Prefecture (2007, 2008, 2015), Fukuoka Prefecture (2006, 2011, 2014), Kumamoto Prefecture (2007, 2010, 2013), Okinawa Prefecture (2009, 2012, 2013)|
|Four times|Yamagata Prefecture (2008, 2011, 2012, 2014), Ibaraki Prefecture (2006, 2007, 2010, 2014), Tokyo (2006, 2009, 2013, 2015), Tottori Prefecture (2005, 2006, 2006, 2008), Saga Prefecture (2005, 2006, 2011, 2014), Miyazaki Prefecture (2008, 2011, 2012, 2014)|
|Six times|Toyama Prefecture (2005, 2010, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015)|
|Eight times|Tokushima Prefecture (2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015), Ehime Prefecture (2006, 2007, 2008, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015)|
|Ten times|Fukui Prefecture (2005, 2006, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015)|


**Reference 27** **Joint Statement of the Security Consultative**
**Committee**

**** **(April 27, 2015)**
**A STRONGER ALLIANCE FOR A DYNAMIC SECURITY ENVIRONMENT**
**The New Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation**
**1. OVERVIEW**
Minister for Foreign Affairs Fumio Kishida, Minister of Defense Gen
Nakatani, Secretary of State John Kerry, and Secretary of Defense Ashton
Carter convened the Japan-U.S. Security Consultative Committee
(SCC) in New York on April 27, 2015. In light of the evolving security
environment, the Ministers reconfirmed the Alliance’s commitment to
the security of Japan and to the maintenance of international peace and
security.
The Ministers announced the approval and release of new, revised
“Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation” (the Guidelines),
which update the roles and missions of the two countries and promote
a more balanced and effective Alliance to meet the emerging security
challenges of the 21st century. The Ministers discussed a variety of
regional and global challenges, initiatives to enhance bilateral security
and defense cooperation in various areas, promotion of enhanced
regional cooperation, and moving forward on the realignment of U.S.
forces in Japan.
As articulated in its 2015 National Security Strategy, the United
States is actively implementing its rebalance to the Asia-Pacific region.
Central to this is the ironclad U.S. commitment to the defense of Japan,
through the full range of U.S. military capabilities, including nuclear
and conventional. Japan highly values U.S. engagement in the region. In
this context, the Ministers reaffirmed the indispensable role of the JapanU.S. Alliance in promoting regional peace, security, and prosperity.
As Japan continues its policy of “Proactive Contribution to Peace,”
based on the principle of international cooperation, the United States
welcomes and supports Japan’s recent monumental achievements.
Among these are: the cabinet decision by the Government of Japan on
July 1, 2014, for developing seamless security legislation; the creation
of its National Security Council; the Three Principles on Transfer of
Defense Equipment and Technology; the Act on the Protection of
Specially Designated Secrets; the Basic Act on Cybersecurity; the new
Basic Plan on Space Policy; and the Development Cooperation Charter.
The Ministers affirmed that the Japan-U.S. Alliance, strengthened
by the new Guidelines and the two countries’ respective security and
defense policies, continues to serve as the cornerstone of peace and


security in the Asia-Pacific region as well as a platform for promoting a
more peaceful and stable international security environment.
The Ministers also reaffirmed that the Senkaku Islands are
territories under the administration of Japan and therefore fall within
the scope of the commitments under Article 5 of the Japan-U.S. Treaty
of Mutual Cooperation and Security, and that they oppose any unilateral
action that seeks to undermine Japan’s administration of these islands.
**2. THE NEW GUIDELINES FOR JAPAN-U.S. DEFENSE COOPERATION**
The Guidelines, which were first approved on November 27, 1978, and
revised on September 23, 1997, have provided a general framework and
policy direction for the roles and missions of the two countries, as well
as ways of cooperation and coordination. At the SCC meeting in Tokyo
on October 3, 2013, the Ministers shared views on the evolving security
environment and directed the Subcommittee for Defense Cooperation
(SDC) to draft recommended changes to the 1997 Guidelines to
ensure that the Alliance continues its vital role in deterring conflict and
advancing peace and security.
Today, the SCC approved the SDC’s recommended new Guidelines,
which accomplishes the objectives outlined by the Ministers in October
2013. The new Guidelines, which replace the 1997 Guidelines, update
the general framework and policy direction for the roles and missions
of the two countries and manifest a strategic vision for a more robust
Alliance and greater shared responsibilities by modernizing the Alliance
and enhancing its deterrence and response capabilities in all phases,
from peacetime to contingencies.
Recognizing the significance of ensuring consistency between
the new Guidelines and Japan’s efforts to develop seamless security
legislation, the Ministers acknowledged that such legislation would
make bilateral efforts under the new Guidelines more effective. The
United States welcomes and supports the ongoing efforts to develop the
legislation, which is to reflect Japan’s policy of “Proactive Contributions
to Peace” and its July 2014 cabinet decision.
The core of the Guidelines continues to be the steadfast commitment
to Japan’s peace and security. The new Guidelines detail the ways and
means through which the two governments continue to strengthen their
ability to fulfill that commitment through seamless, robust, flexible,
and effective Alliance responses while expanding bilateral cooperation
across a range of other areas, such as:
Alliance Coordination Mechanism: Under the new Guidelines
the two countries are establishing a standing, whole-of-government
mechanism for Alliance coordination, enabling a seamless response in
all phases, from peacetime to contingencies.
Regional and Global Cooperation: The new Guidelines enable


-----

the Alliance to make greater contributions to international security
initiatives wherever appropriate in a way consistent with Japanese
laws and regulations, such as peacekeeping operations, maritime
security, and logistic support. The Ministers reiterated the importance
of cooperating with regional and other partners as well as with
international organizations.
New Strategic Cooperation: A dynamic world requires a modern
Alliance, and the new Guidelines lay a foundation for the two countries
to cooperate in space and cyberspace and in conducting operations
intended to have effects across domains.
Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: The new Guidelines
describe ways the two governments can work together to improve
further the effectiveness of bilateral cooperation in responding to a
large-scale disaster in Japan or around the world.
A Strong Foundation: The new Guidelines also describe programs
and activities that pay dividends in every aspect of bilateral cooperation,
including defense equipment and technology cooperation, intelligence
cooperation and information security, and educational and research
exchanges.
The Ministers confirmed their intention to start bilateral work
under the new Guidelines. In this context, the SCC directed the SDC
to implement the new Guidelines, including establishing the standing
Alliance Coordination Mechanism and upgrading the Bilateral Planning
Mechanism, thereby strengthening bilateral planning. The Ministers
also expressed their intention to negotiate expeditiously an acquisition
and cross-servicing agreement to operationalize the mutual logistics
cooperation envisioned by the new Guidelines.
**3. BILATERAL SECURITY AND DEFENSE COOPERATION**
The Ministers noted with satisfaction ongoing progress to strengthen the
Alliance’s deterrence and response capabilities by enhancing bilateral
security and defense cooperation in a variety of areas. The Ministers:

-  confirmed the strategic importance of deploying the most modern
and advanced U.S. capabilities to Japan, which enhances Alliance
deterrence and contributes to the security of Japan and the AsiaPacific region. In this context, the Ministers welcomed the deployment
of U.S. Navy P-8 maritime patrol aircraft to Kadena Air Base, the
rotational deployment of U.S. Air Force Global Hawk unmanned
aerial vehicles to Misawa Air Base, the deployment of the USS
Green Bay, an upgraded amphibious transport ship, and U.S. plans to
deploy Marine Corps F-35B aircraft to Japan in 2017. In addition, the
Ministers welcomed U.S. plans to deploy additional Aegis ships to
Yokosuka Naval Base by 2017, as well as the swap-out of the aircraft
carrier USS George Washington with the more advanced USS Ronald
Reagan later this year;

-  committed to continued engagement through the bilateral Extended
Deterrence Dialogue, which reinforces the credibility of the U.S.
defense commitment to Japan, including through discussion of
nuclear and conventional capabilities;

-  stressed the importance of sustained cooperation in enhancing
Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD) capabilities, particularly the
deployment of a second AN/TPY-2 radar (X-band radar) system to
Kyogamisaki in December 2014 and the planned deployment of two
additional BMD-capable destroyers to Japan by 2017. Working in
concert, these assets are to directly contribute to the defense of Japan
and the United States;

-  highlighted enhanced collaboration on space security, particularly
in the areas of resiliency and developing capabilities, through the
whole-of-government Japan-U.S. Comprehensive Dialogue on Space
and the Space Security Dialogue. The Ministers also highlighted
increased cooperation resulting from the Japan Aerospace Exploration
Agency’s provision of space situational awareness (SSA) information
to the United States, as well as the establishment of a new framework
to discuss space-related issues between the two defense authorities;

-  called for continued progress in cooperation on cyberspace issues,
particularly in the areas of threat information sharing, mission
assurance, and critical infrastructure protection, through the wholeof-government Japan-U.S. Cyber Dialogue and the Cyber Defense
Policy Working Group;

-  lauded enhanced Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance
(ISR) cooperation, particularly the rotational deployment of U.S. Air
Force Global Hawk unmanned aerial vehicles to Misawa Air Base
and Japan’s plans to procure advanced ISR platforms;

-  praised expanded logistics and defense equipment cooperation, as
reflected by Japan’s new Three Principles on Transfer of Defense
Equipment and Technology and the recent U.S. decision to establish
an F-35 regional maintenance, repair, overhaul, and upgrade capability


in Japan. The Ministers highlighted strengthened defense equipment
cooperation through the linkage of the Systems and Technology
Forum and the Alliance Roles, Missions, and Capabilities dialogue,
which facilitates joint research and development of advanced
capabilities; and

-  affirmed the importance of enhanced information security
cooperation, as reflected by continued progress through the Bilateral
Information Security Consultations and by Japan’s implementation
of the Act on the Protection of Specially Designated Secrets. As a
result of this legislation, the Government of Japan has put in place
the policies, practices, and procedures necessary to facilitate the
secure exchange of sensitive information in peacetime and during
contingencies.
In addition, the Ministers affirmed that host nation support has
demonstrated continued Japanese support for the forward-deployed
presence of U.S. forces in Japan, which contributes to Japan’s peace
and security in an increasingly complex security environment. The
Ministers, noting that the current host nation support commitment,
as stipulated in June 2011 SCC documents, expires in March 2016,
expressed their intention to start consultations on future arrangements
to provide an appropriate level of host nation support.
Recognizing the expanding scope of bilateral activities, the
Ministers affirmed their intent to consider at the earliest opportunity
an appropriate bilateral consultation framework that would enhance the
efficiency and effectiveness of Alliance management processes.
**4. REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION**
Recognizing the Japan-U.S. Alliance as the cornerstone of peace and
security in the Asia-Pacific region as well as a platform for promoting
a more peaceful and stable international security environment, the
Ministers highlighted recent progress in the following areas:

-  Increased cooperation in Humanitarian Assistance/Disaster Relief
operations, as reflected by close coordination in responding to the
November 2013 typhoon in the Philippines;

-  Continued close coordination on partner capacity building,
particularly in Southeast Asia, including through the provision of
coastal patrol vessels and other maritime security capacity building
endeavors; and

-  Expanded trilateral and multilateral cooperation, particularly with
key partners such as the Republic of Korea (ROK) and Australia, as
well as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. The Ministers
highlighted the recent signing of a trilateral information sharing
arrangement with the ROK concerning the nuclear and missile threats
posed by North Korea, and resolved to utilize the framework as the
foundation for expanded trilateral cooperation into the future. The
Ministers also affirmed their intention to pursue closer cooperation
with Australia on capacity building activities in Southeast Asia, and
on security and defense issues through the Security and Defense
Cooperation Forum.
**5. REALIGNMENT OF U.S. FORCES IN JAPAN**
The Ministers reaffirmed the two governments’ continued commitment
to implement the existing arrangements on the realignment of U.S.
forces in Japan as soon as possible, while ensuring operational
capability, including training capability, throughout the process. The
Ministers underscored their commitment to maintaining a robust
and flexible force posture that enhances deterrence by strengthening
the capability to respond effectively to future challenges and threats,
while also mitigating the impact of U.S. forces on local communities.
In this context, the Ministers welcomed the relocation of the KC-130
squadron from Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) Futenma to MCAS
Iwakuni and confirmed their commitment to continue aviation training
relocation, including to locations outside of Okinawa, through efforts
such as the development of training areas and facilities.
As an essential element of this effort, the Ministers reconfirmed
that the plan to construct the Futenma Replacement Facility (FRF) at
the Camp Schwab-Henokosaki area and adjacent waters is the only
solution that addresses operational, political, financial, and strategic
concerns and avoids the continued use of MCAS Futenma. The
Ministers reaffirmed the two governments’ unwavering commitment
to the plan and underscored their strong determination to achieve its
completion and the long-desired return of MCAS Futenma to Japan.
The United States welcomes the steady and continuing progress of FRF
construction projects.
The Ministers also reconfirmed the importance of land returns south
of Kadena Air Base based on the 2006 “Roadmap” and the April 2013
Consolidation Plan, and reiterated the two governments’ determination


-----

to work continuously on the implementation of the plan and anticipated
the update of the plan by Spring 2016. The Ministers highlighted the
on-time return of the West Futenma Housing Area of Camp Zukeran on
March 31 of this year, which marked the most significant land return
completed to date in accordance with the plan.
The Ministers confirmed that the two governments are steadily
implementing the relocation of U.S. Marine Corps personnel from
Okinawa to locations outside of Japan, including Guam, based upon the
amended Guam International Agreement.
The Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to strengthening
cooperation to protect the environment and confirmed the importance
of making further efforts in environmental matters. To that end, the
Ministers welcomed progress on a supplementary Agreement on
Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Stewardship and confirmed
their intention to continue negotiating the ancillary documents of the
Agreement as expeditiously as possible.

**Reference 28 The Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation**
**(April 27, 2015)**

**I. Defense Cooperation and the Aim of the Guidelines**
In order to ensure Japan’s peace and security under any circumstances,
from peacetime to contingencies, and to promote a stable, peaceful,
and prosperous Asia-Pacific region and beyond, bilateral security
and defense cooperation will emphasize:

-  seamless, robust, flexible, and effective bilateral responses;

-  synergy across the two governments’ national security policies;

-  a whole-of-government Alliance approach;

-  cooperation with regional and other partners, as well as international
organizations; and

-  the global nature of the Japan-U.S. Alliance.
The two governments will continuously enhance the JapanU.S. Alliance. Each government will maintain its individual defense
posture based on its national security policy. Japan will possess
defense capability on the basis of the “National Security Strategy”
and the “National Defense Program Guidelines”. The United States
will continue to extend deterrence to Japan through the full range of
capabilities, including U.S. nuclear forces. The United States also
will continue to forward deploy combat-ready forces in the AsiaPacific region and maintain the ability to reinforce those forces
rapidly.
The Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation (“the
Guidelines”) provide the general framework and policy direction
for the roles and missions of Japan and the United States, as well
as ways of cooperation and coordination, with a view to improving
the effectiveness of bilateral security and defense cooperation. In
this way, the Guidelines advance peace and security, deter conflict,
secure the basis for economic prosperity, and promote domestic and
international understanding of the significance of the Japan-U.S.
Alliance.
**II. Basic Premises and Principles**
The Guidelines, as well as actions and activities under the Guidelines,
are and will be consistent with the following basic premises and
principles.
A. The rights and obligations under the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation
and Security between Japan and the United States of America
(the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty) and its related arrangements, as
well as the fundamental framework of the Japan-U.S. Alliance,
will remain unchanged.
B. All actions and activities undertaken by Japan and the United
States under the Guidelines will be consistent with international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations and its provisions
regarding the peaceful settlement of disputes and sovereign
equality of States, as well as other relevant international
agreements.
C. All actions and activities undertaken by Japan and the United
States will be in accordance with their respective constitutions,
laws, and regulations then in effect, and basic positions on
national security policy. Japan will conduct actions and activities
in accordance with its basic positions, such as the maintenance
of its exclusively national defense-oriented policy and its three
non-nuclear principles.
D. The Guidelines do not obligate either government to take
legislative, budgetary, administrative, or other measures, nor
do the Guidelines create legal rights or obligations for either


government. Since the objective of the Guidelines, however, is
to establish an effective framework for bilateral cooperation, the
two governments are expected to reflect in an appropriate way
the results of these efforts, based on their own judgment, in their
specific policies and measures.
**III. Strengthened Alliance Coordination**
Effective bilateral cooperation under the Guidelines will require the
two governments to conduct close, consultative dialogue and sound
policy and operational coordination from peacetime to contingencies.
The two governments must be well informed and coordinate at
multiple levels to ensure successful bilateral security and defense
cooperation. To that end, the two governments will take advantage of
all available channels to enhance information sharing and to ensure
seamless and effective whole-of-government Alliance coordination
that includes all relevant agencies. For this purpose, the two
governments will establish a new, standing Alliance Coordination
Mechanism, enhance operational coordination, and strengthen
bilateral planning.
A. Alliance Coordination Mechanism
Persistent and emerging threats can have a serious and immediate
impact on the peace and security of Japan and the United States.
In order to address seamlessly and effectively any situation that
affects Japan’s peace and security or any other situation that may
require an Alliance response, the two governments will utilize
the Alliance Coordination Mechanism. This mechanism will
strengthen policy and operational coordination related to activities
conducted by the Self-Defense Forces and the United States
Armed Forces in all phases from peacetime to contingencies. This
mechanism also will contribute to timely information sharing as
well as the development and maintenance of common situational
awareness. To ensure effective coordination, the two governments
will establish necessary procedures and infrastructure (including
facilities as well as information and communication systems) and
conduct regular training and exercises.

The two governments will tailor to the situation the procedures
for coordination as well as the exact composition of participating
agencies within the Alliance Coordination Mechanism structure.
As part of these procedures, contact information will be shared
and maintained from peacetime.
B. Enhanced Operational Coordination
Enhanced bilateral operational coordination for flexible and
responsive command and control is a core capability of critical
importance to Japan and the United States. In this context, the two
governments recognize the continued importance of collocating
operational coordination functions to strengthen cooperation
between the Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed
Forces.

The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed Forces
will exchange personnel to ensure robust information sharing,
to facilitate coordination from peacetime to contingencies, and
to support international activities. The Self-Defense Forces
and the United States Armed Forces, in close cooperation and
coordination, will take action through their respective chains-ofcommand.
C. Bilateral Planning
The two governments will continue to develop and update
bilateral plans to ensure smooth and effective execution of
coordinated operations by the Self-Defense Forces and the United
States Armed Forces. To ensure the effectiveness of the plans and
the ability to make flexible, timely, and appropriate responses, the
two governments will exchange relevant information, including
identifying operational and logistic support requirements and
sources in advance, as appropriate.

The two governments will conduct bilateral planning in
peacetime for contingencies relevant to Japan’s peace and
security through an upgraded Bilateral Planning Mechanism,
which includes relevant agencies of the respective governments.
Bilateral plans will be developed with input from relevant
agencies, as appropriate. The Security Consultative Committee
(SCC) will continue to be responsible for presenting directions,
validating the progress of the planning under the mechanism, and
issuing directives as necessary. The SCC will be assisted by an
appropriate subordinate body.

Bilateral plans are to be reflected appropriately in the plans
of both governments.


-----

**IV. Seamlessly Ensuring Japan’s Peace and Security**
Persistent and emerging threats can have a serious and immediate
impact on Japan’s peace and security. In this increasingly complex
security environment, the two governments will take measures
to ensure Japan’s peace and security in all phases, seamlessly,
from peacetime to contingencies, including situations when an
armed attack against Japan is not involved. In this context, the two
governments also will promote further cooperation with partners.
The two governments recognize that these measures need to be
taken based on flexible, timely, and effective bilateral coordination
tailored to each situation and that interagency coordination is
essential for appropriate Alliance responses. Therefore, the two
governments will utilize the whole-of-government Alliance
Coordination Mechanism, as appropriate, to:

-  assess the situation;

-  share information; and

-  develop ways to implement the appropriate Alliance response,
including flexible deterrent options, as well as actions aimed at deescalation.
To support these bilateral efforts, the two governments also will
coordinate strategic messaging through appropriate channels on
issues that could potentially affect Japan’s peace and security.
A. Cooperative Measures from Peacetime
In order to ensure the maintenance of Japan’s peace and security,
the two governments will promote cooperation across a wide
range of areas, including through diplomatic efforts, to strengthen
the deterrence and capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance.

The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed Forces
will enhance interoperability, readiness, and vigilance to prepare
for all possible situations. To these ends, the two governments
will take measures, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance
In order to identify at the earliest possible stage any indications
of threats to Japan’s peace and security and to ensure a
decisive advantage in intelligence gathering and analysis,
the two governments will share and protect information and
intelligence, while developing and maintaining common
situational awareness. This will include enhancing coordination
and cooperation among relevant agencies.

The Self-Defense Forces and the United States
Armed Forces will conduct intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance (ISR) activities based on the capabilities
and availability of their respective assets. This will include
conducting bilateral ISR activities in a mutually supportive
manner to ensure persistent coverage of developments that
could affect Japan’s peace and security.
2. Air and Missile Defense
The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed Forces
will maintain and strengthen deterrence and their defense
postures against ballistic missile launches and aerial incursions.
The two governments will cooperate to expand early warning
capabilities, interoperability, network coverage, and realtime information exchange and to pursue the comprehensive
improvement of capabilities to respond to the threat of ballistic
missiles. Moreover, the two governments will continue to
coordinate closely in responding to provocative missile
launches and other aerial activities.
3. Maritime Security
The two governments will cooperate closely with each other on
measures to maintain maritime order based upon international
law, including freedom of navigation. The Self-Defense
Forces and the United States Armed Forces will cooperate,
as appropriate, on various efforts such as maintaining and
enhancing bilateral presence in the maritime domain through
ISR and training and exercises, while further developing and
enhancing shared maritime domain awareness including by
coordinating with relevant agencies, as necessary.
4. Asset Protection
The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed
Forces will provide mutual protection of each other’s assets,
as appropriate, if engaged in activities that contribute to the
defense of Japan in a cooperative manner, including during
training and exercises.
5. Training and Exercises
The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed Forces
will conduct effective bilateral and multilateral training and


exercises both inside and outside of Japan in order to strengthen
interoperability, sustainability, and readiness. Timely and
realistic training and exercises will enhance deterrence. To
support these activities, the two governments will cooperate to
ensure that training areas, facilities, and associated equipment
are available, accessible, and modern.
6. Logistic Support
Japan and the United States are primarily responsible for
providing logistic support for their respective forces in all
phases. The Self-Defense Forces and the United States
Armed Forces will provide mutual logistic support where
appropriate, including, but not limited to, supply, maintenance,
transportation, engineering, and medical services, for
such activities as set forth in the Agreement between the
Government of Japan and the Government of the United States
of America Concerning Reciprocal Provision of Logistic
Support, Supplies and Services between the Self-Defense
Forces of Japan and the Armed Forces of the United States
of America (the Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement)
and its related arrangements.
7. Use of Facilities
In order to expand interoperability and improve flexibility
and resiliency of the Self-Defense Forces and the United
States Armed Forces, the two governments will enhance joint/
shared use and cooperate in ensuring the security of facilities
and areas. Recognizing the importance of being prepared for
contingencies, the two governments also will cooperate in
conducting site surveys on facilities including civilian airports
and seaports, as appropriate.
B. Responses to Emerging Threats to Japan’s Peace and Security
The Alliance will respond to situations that will have an important
influence on Japan’s peace and security. Such situations cannot
be defined geographically. The measures described in this section
include those that may be taken, in accordance with the two
countries’ respective laws and regulations, in circumstances that
have not yet amounted to such a situation. Early recognition and
adaptable, resolute decision-making on bilateral actions will
contribute to deterrence and de-escalation of such situations.
In addition to continuing cooperative measures from
peacetime, the two governments will pursue all avenues,
including diplomatic efforts, to ensure the peace and security of
Japan. Utilizing the Alliance Coordination Mechanism, the two
governments will take additional measures, based on their own
decisions, including, but not limited to, those listed below.
1. Noncombatant Evacuation Operations
When Japanese and U.S. noncombatants need to be evacuated
from a third country to a safe haven, each government is
responsible for evacuating its own nationals, as well as dealing
with the authorities of the affected area. As appropriate, the
two governments will coordinate in planning and cooperate in
carrying out evacuations of Japanese or U.S. noncombatants.
These evacuations will be carried out using each country’s
capabilities such as transportation means and facilities in a
mutually supplementary manner. The two governments may
each consider extending evacuation assistance to third-country
noncombatants.

The two governments will conduct early-stage
coordination through the Alliance Coordination Mechanism,
as appropriate, to carry out cooperation in fields such as
the safety of evacuees, transportation means and facilities,
customs, immigration and quarantine processing, safe havens,
and medical services. The two governments will enhance
coordination in noncombatant evacuation operations from
peacetime, as appropriate, including by conducting training
and exercises.
2. Maritime Security
Taking into account their respective capabilities, the two
governments will cooperate closely to enhance maritime
security. Cooperative measures may include, but are not
limited to, information sharing and inspection of ships based
on a United Nations Security Council resolution or other basis
under international law.
3. Measures to Deal with Refugees
If a situation develops such that a flow of refugees into Japan
becomes likely or actually begins, the two governments
will cooperate to maintain Japan’s peace and security while


-----

handling refugees in a humane manner consistent with
applicable obligations under international law. Primary
responsibility for such refugee response lies with Japan. The
United States will provide appropriate support upon a request
from Japan.
4. Search and Rescue
The two governments will cooperate and provide mutual
support, as appropriate, in search and rescue operations. The
Self-Defense Forces, in cooperation with relevant agencies,
will provide support to combat search and rescue operations
by the United States, where appropriate, subject to Japanese
laws and regulations.
5. Protection of Facilities and Areas
The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed Forces
are responsible for protecting their own facilities and areas
in cooperation with relevant authorities. Upon request from
the United States, Japan will provide additional protection
for facilities and areas in Japan in close cooperation and
coordination with the United States Armed Forces.
6. Logistic Support
The two governments will enhance mutual logistic support
(which includes, but is not limited to, supply, maintenance,
transportation, engineering, and medical services), as
appropriate, to enable effective and efficient operations. This
includes rapid validation and resourcing of operational and
logistic support requirements. The Government of Japan will
make appropriate use of the authorities and assets of central
and local government agencies as well as private sector
assets. The Government of Japan will provide logistic or other
associated support where appropriate, subject to Japanese laws
and regulations.
7. Use of Facilities
The Government of Japan will provide, as needed, temporary
use of facilities, including civilian airports and seaports, in
accordance with the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty and its related
arrangements. The two governments will enhance cooperation
in joint/shared use of facilities and areas.
C. Actions in Response to an Armed Attack against Japan
Bilateral actions in response to an armed attack against Japan
remain a core aspect of Japan-U.S. security and defense
cooperation.
When an armed attack against Japan is anticipated, the two
governments will take steps to deter the armed attack and to deescalate the situation, while making preparations necessary for
the defense of Japan.
When an armed attack against Japan occurs, the two
governments will conduct appropriate bilateral actions to repel it
at the earliest possible stage and to deter any further attacks. The
two governments also will take necessary measures including
those listed earlier in Chapter IV.
1. When an Armed Attack against Japan is Anticipated
When an armed attack against Japan is anticipated, the two
governments will intensify, through a comprehensive and
robust whole-of-government approach, information and
intelligence sharing and policy consultations, and will pursue
all avenues, including diplomatic efforts, to deter the attack
and to de-escalate the situation.

The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed
Forces will assume appropriate postures for bilateral operations,
including the execution of necessary deployments. Japan
will establish and maintain the basis for its support of U.S.
deployments. The preparations by the two governments may
include, but would not be limited to: joint/shared use of facilities
and areas; mutual logistic support, including, but not limited to,
supply, maintenance, transportation, engineering, and medical
services; and reinforced protection of U.S. facilities and areas in
Japan.
2. When an Armed Attack against Japan Occurs
a. Principles for Coordinated Actions
If an armed attack against Japan occurs despite diplomatic
efforts and deterrence, Japan and the United States will
cooperate to repel promptly the attack and deter any
further attacks to return peace and security to Japan. Such
coordinated actions will contribute to the reestablishment of
peace and security in the region.

Japan will maintain primary responsibility for


defending the citizens and territory of Japan and will take
actions immediately to repel an armed attack against Japan as
expeditiously as possible. The Self-Defense Forces will have
the primary responsibility to conduct defensive operations in
Japan and its surrounding waters and airspace, as well as its air
and maritime approaches. The United States will coordinate
closely with Japan and provide appropriate support. The
United States Armed Forces will support and supplement the
Self-Defense Forces to defend Japan. The United States will
take actions to shape the regional environment in a way that
supports the defense of Japan and reestablishes peace and
security.

Recognizing that all instruments of national power
will be required to defend Japan, the two governments
respectively will employ a whole-of-government approach,
utilizing their respective chains-of-command, to coordinate
actions through the Alliance Coordination Mechanism.

The United States will employ forward-deployed
forces, including those stationed in Japan, and introduce
reinforcements from elsewhere, as required. Japan will
establish and maintain the basis required to facilitate these
deployments.

The two governments will take actions as appropriate
to provide defense of each other’s forces and facilities in
response to an armed attack against Japan.
b. Concept of Operations
i. Operations to Defend Airspace
The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed
Forces will conduct bilateral operations to defend
airspace above and surrounding Japan.

The Self-Defense Forces will have primary
responsibility for conducting air defense operations
while ensuring air superiority. For this purpose, the SelfDefense Forces will take necessary actions, including,
but not limited to, defense against attacks by aircraft and
cruise missiles.

The United States Armed Forces will conduct
operations to support and supplement the Self-Defense
Forces’ operations.
ii. Operations to Counter Ballistic Missile Attacks
The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed
Forces will conduct bilateral operations to counter
ballistic missile attacks against Japan.

The Self-Defense Forces and the United States
Armed Forces will exchange real-time information for
early detection of ballistic missile launches. When there
is an indication of a ballistic missile attack, the SelfDefense Forces and the United States Armed Forces will
maintain an effective posture to defend against ballistic
missile attacks heading for Japan and to protect forces
participating in ballistic missile defense operations.

The Self-Defense Forces will have primary
responsibility for conducting ballistic missile defense
operations to defend Japan.

The United States Armed Forces will conduct
operations to support and supplement the Self-Defense
Forces’ operations.
iii. Operations to Defend Maritime Areas
The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed
Forces will conduct bilateral operations to defend waters
surrounding Japan and to secure the safety of sea lines of
communication.

The Self-Defense Forces will have primary
responsibility for the protection of major ports and straits
in Japan and of ships and vessels in waters surrounding
Japan and for other associated operations. For this
purpose, the Self-Defense Forces will take necessary
actions, including, but not limited to, coastal defense,
anti-surface warfare, anti-submarine warfare, mine
warfare, anti-air warfare, and air interdiction.

The United States Armed Forces will conduct
operations to support and supplement the Self-Defense
Forces’ operations.

The Self-Defense Forces and the United States
Armed Forces will cooperate in the interdiction of
shipping activities providing support to adversaries


-----

involved in the armed attack.

The effectiveness of these activities will be
enhanced through information sharing and other forms of
cooperation among relevant agencies.
iv. Operations to Counter Ground Attacks
The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed
Forces will conduct bilateral operations to counter
ground attacks against Japan by ground, air, maritime, or
amphibious forces.

The Self-Defense Forces will have primary
responsibility for conducting operations to prevent and
repel ground attacks, including those against islands. If
the need arises, the Self-Defense Forces will conduct
operations to retake an island. For this purpose, the SelfDefense Forces will take necessary actions, including, but
not limited to, operations to prevent and repel airborne
and seaborne invasions, amphibious operations, and rapid
deployment.

The Self-Defense Forces, in cooperation with
relevant agencies, also will have primary responsibility
for defeating attacks by special operations forces or any
other unconventional attacks in Japan, including those
that involve infiltration.

The United States Armed Forces will conduct
operations to support and supplement the Self-Defense
Forces’ operations.
v. Cross-Domain Operations
The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed
Forces will conduct bilateral operations across domains
to repel an armed attack against Japan and to deter further
attacks. These operations will be designed to achieve
effects across multiple domains simultaneously.

Examples of cooperation across domains include
the actions described below.

The Self-Defense Forces and the United States
Armed Forces, in cooperation with relevant agencies,
as appropriate, will strengthen their respective ISR
postures, enhance the sharing of intelligence, and provide
protection for each other’s ISR assets.

The United States Armed Forces may conduct
operations involving the use of strike power, to support
and supplement the Self-Defense Forces. When the United
States Armed Forces conduct such operations, the SelfDefense Forces may provide support, as necessary. These
operations will be based on close bilateral coordination, as
appropriate.

The two governments will cooperate to address
threats in the space and cyberspace domains in accordance
with bilateral cooperation set out in Chapter VI.

The Self-Defense Forces and the United States
Armed Forces’ special operations forces will cooperate
during operations, as appropriate.
c. Operational Support Activities
The two governments will cooperate in the following
activities in support of bilateral operations.
i. Communications and Electronics
The two governments will provide mutual support to
ensure effective use of communications and electronics
capabilities, as appropriate.

The Self-Defense Forces and the United States
Armed Forces will ensure effective communication
between the two forces and maintain a common
operational picture for bilateral operations under common
situational awareness.
ii. Search and Rescue
The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed
Forces, in cooperation with relevant agencies, will
cooperate and provide mutual support in search and
rescue operations, including combat search and rescue,
as appropriate.
iii. Logistic Support
When operations require supplementing their respective
logistics resources, the Self-Defense Forces and the
United States Armed Forces will provide flexible and
timely mutual logistic support, based on their respective
capabilities and availability.


The two governments will make appropriate use of
the authorities and assets of central and local government
agencies, as well as private sector assets, to provide
support.
iv. Use of Facilities
The Government of Japan will provide, as needed,
additional facilities in accordance with the Japan-U.S.
Security Treaty and its related arrangements. The two
governments will enhance cooperation in joint/shared use
of facilities and areas.
v. Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear
Protection

The Government of Japan will maintain primary
responsibility for emergency responses to chemical,
biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) incidents
or attacks in Japan. The United States retains primary
responsibility for maintaining and restoring the mission
capability of the United States Armed Forces in Japan. At
Japan’s request, the United States will support Japan in
CBRN incident or attack prevention and response-related
activities in an effort to ensure the protection of Japan, as
appropriate.
D. Actions in Response to an Armed Attack against a Country other
than Japan

When Japan and the United States each decides to take actions
involving the use of force in accordance with international law,
including full respect for sovereignty, and with their respective
Constitutions and laws to respond to an armed attack against
the United States or a third country, and Japan has not come
under armed attack, they will cooperate closely to respond to
the armed attack and to deter further attacks. Bilateral responses
will be coordinated through the whole-of-government Alliance
Coordination Mechanism.

Japan and the United States will cooperate as appropriate
with other countries taking action in response to the armed attack.

The Self-Defense Forces will conduct appropriate operations
involving the use of force to respond to situations where an armed
attack against a foreign country that is in a close relationship with
Japan occurs and as a result, threatens Japan’s survival and poses
a clear danger to overturn fundamentally its people’s right to life,
liberty, and pursuit of happiness, to ensure Japan’s survival, and
to protect its people.

Examples of cooperative operations are outlined below:
1. Asset Protection
The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed Forces
will cooperate in asset protection, as appropriate. Such
cooperation will include, but not be limited to, protection of
assets that are engaged in operations such as Noncombatant
Evacuation Operations or Ballistic Missile Defense.
2. Search and Rescue
The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed Forces,
in cooperation with relevant agencies, will cooperate and
provide support in search and rescue operations, including
combat search and rescue, as appropriate.
3. Maritime Operations
The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed Forces
will cooperate in minesweeping, as appropriate, including to
secure the safety of sea lines of communication.

The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed
Forces, in cooperation with relevant agencies, will cooperate
in escort operations to protect ships and vessels, as appropriate.

The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed
Forces, in cooperation with relevant agencies, will cooperate
in the interdiction of shipping activities providing support to
adversaries involved in the armed attack, as appropriate.
4. Operations to Counter Ballistic Missile Attacks
The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed Forces
will cooperate in intercepting ballistic missiles, as appropriate,
in accordance with their respective capabilities. The two
governments will exchange information to ensure early
detection of ballistic missile launches.
5. Logistics Support
When operations require supplementing their respective
logistics resources, the Self-Defense Forces and the United
States Armed Forces will provide flexible and timely mutual
logistic support, based on their respective capabilities and


-----

availability.

The two governments will make appropriate use of
the authorities and assets of central and local government
agencies, as well as private sector assets, to provide support.
E. Cooperation in Response to a Large-scale Disaster in Japan
When a large-scale disaster takes place in Japan, Japan will have
primary responsibility for responding to the disaster. The SelfDefense Forces, in cooperation with relevant agencies, local
governments, and private actors, will conduct disaster relief
operations. Recognizing that immediate recovery from a largescale disaster in Japan is essential for Japan’s peace and security
and that such a disaster could affect the activities of the United
States Armed Forces in Japan, the United States, in accordance
with its own criteria, will provide appropriate support for
Japan’s activities. Such support may include search and rescue,
transportation, supply, medical services, incident awareness
and assessment, and other specialized capabilities. The two
governments will coordinate activities through the Alliance
Coordination Mechanism, as appropriate.

To improve the effectiveness of the United States Armed
Forces’ cooperation in humanitarian assistance and disaster
relief activities in Japan, the two governments will work together
closely, including through information sharing. In addition, the
United States Armed Forces also may participate in disasterrelated drills, which will increase mutual understanding in
responding to large-scale disasters.
**V. Cooperation for Regional and Global Peace and Security**
In an increasingly interconnected world, Japan and the United States
will take a leading role in cooperation with partners to provide a
foundation for peace, security, stability, and economic prosperity
in the Asia-Pacific region and beyond. For well over half a century,
both countries have worked together to deliver effective solutions to
challenges in diverse regions of the world.
When each of the two governments decides to participate in
international activities for the peace and security of the region and
beyond, the two governments, including the Self-Defense Forces
and the United States Armed Forces, will cooperate closely with
each other and with partners, as appropriate, such as in the activities
described below. This cooperation also will contribute to the peace
and security of both countries.
A. Cooperation in International Activities
The two governments will participate in international activities,
based on their own judgment. When working together, the
Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed Forces will
cooperate to the maximum extent practicable.

The two governments may coordinate the activities through
the Alliance Coordination Mechanism, as appropriate, and
also will pursue trilateral and multilateral cooperation in these
activities. The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed
Forces will share procedures and best practices, as appropriate,
for smooth and effective cooperation. While the two governments
will continue to cooperate on a broad array of issues that may
not be explicitly included in the Guidelines, common areas for
cooperation by the two governments in regional and international
activities will include:
1. Peacekeeping Operations
When the two governments participate in peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations (UN) in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the
two governments will cooperate closely, as appropriate, to
maximize interoperability between the Self-Defense Forces
and the United States Armed Forces. The two governments
also may cooperate in providing logistic support for and
protecting UN and other personnel who participate in the same
mission, as appropriate.
2. International Humanitarian Assistance/Disaster Relief
When the two governments conduct international humanitarian
assistance/disaster relief (HA/DR) operations in response
to requests from governments concerned or international
organizations in the wake of large-scale humanitarian and
natural disasters, the two governments will cooperate closely
to provide mutual support, as appropriate, maximizing
interoperability between participating Self-Defense Forces
and United States Armed Forces. Examples of cooperative
activities may include mutual logistic support and operational
coordination, planning, and execution.


3. Maritime Security
When the two governments conduct activities for maritime
security, the two governments will cooperate closely, as
appropriate. Examples of cooperative activities may include
efforts for: safe and secure sea lines of communication such
as counter-piracy and minesweeping; non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction; and counterterrorism activities.
4. Partner Capacity Building
Proactive cooperation with partners will contribute to
maintaining and enhancing regional and international peace
and security. The two governments will cooperate in capacity
building activities, as appropriate, by making the best use
of their capabilities and experience, with the objective of
strengthening the capability of partners to respond to dynamic
security challenges. Examples of cooperative activities
may include maritime security, military medicine, defense
institution building, and improved force readiness for HA/DR
or peacekeeping operations.
5. Noncombatant Evacuation Operations
In circumstances when international action is required for the
evacuation of noncombatants, the two governments will utilize,
as appropriate, all possible avenues including diplomatic
efforts to ensure the safety of noncombatants, including those
who are Japanese or U.S. nationals.
6. Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance
When the two governments participate in international
activities, the Self-Defense Forces and the United States
Armed Forces will cooperate in ISR activities, as appropriate,
based on the respective capabilities and availability of their
assets.
7. Training and Exercises
In order to enhance the effectiveness of international activities,
the Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed Forces
will conduct and participate in joint training and exercises, as
appropriate, to strengthen interoperability, sustainability, and
readiness. The two governments also will continue to pursue
opportunities to work with partners in training and exercises
to contribute to enhancing interoperability with the Alliance
and the development of common tactics, techniques, and
procedures.
8. Logistic support
When participating in international activities, the two
governments will cooperate to provide mutual logistic support.
The Government of Japan will provide logistic support where
appropriate, subject to Japanese laws and regulations.
B. Trilateral and Multilateral Cooperation
The two governments will promote and improve trilateral and
multilateral security and defense cooperation. In particular,
the two governments will reinforce efforts and seek additional
opportunities to cooperate with regional and other partners, as
well as international organizations.
The two governments also will work together to strengthen
regional and international institutions with a view to promoting
cooperation based upon international law and standards.
**VI. Space and Cyberspace Cooperation**
A. Cooperation on Space
Recognizing the security aspects of the space domain, the two
governments will maintain and strengthen their partnership to
secure the responsible, peaceful, and safe use of space.

As part of such efforts, the two governments will ensure the
resiliency of their space systems and enhance space situational
awareness cooperation. The two governments will provide
mutual support, as appropriate, to establish and improve
capabilities and will share information about actions and events
that might affect the safety and stability of the space domain and
impede its use. The two governments also will share information
to address emerging threats against space systems and will pursue
opportunities for cooperation in maritime domain awareness and
in space-related equipment and technology that will strengthen
capabilities and resiliency of the space systems, including hosted
payloads.

To accomplish their missions effectively and efficiently, the
Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed Forces will
continue to cooperate and to contribute to whole-of-government
efforts in utilizing space in such areas as: early-warning;
ISR; positioning, navigation, and timing; space situational


-----

awareness; meteorological observation; command, control, and
communications; and ensuring the resiliency of relevant space
systems that are critical for mission assurance. In cases where
their space systems are threatened, the Self-Defense Forces and
the United States Armed Forces will cooperate, as appropriate,
in mitigating risk and preventing damage. If damage occurs,
they will cooperate, as appropriate, in reconstituting relevant
capabilities.
B. Cooperation on Cyberspace
To help ensure the safe and stable use of cyberspace, the two
governments will share information on threats and vulnerabilities
in cyberspace in a timely and routine manner, as appropriate. The
two governments also will share, as appropriate, information on
the development of various capabilities in cyberspace, including
the exchange of best practices on training and education. The two
governments will cooperate to protect critical infrastructure and
the services upon which the Self-Defense Forces and the United
States Armed Forces depend to accomplish their missions,
including through information sharing with the private sector, as
appropriate.

The Self-Defense Forces and the United States Armed Forces
will:

-  maintain a posture to monitor their respective networks and
systems;

-  share expertise and conduct educational exchanges in
cybersecurity;

-  ensure resiliency of their respective networks and systems to
achieve mission assurance;

-  contribute to whole-of-government efforts to improve
cybersecurity; and

-  conduct bilateral exercises to ensure effective cooperation for
cybersecurity in all situations from peacetime to contingencies.

In the event of cyber incidents against Japan, including those
against critical infrastructure and services utilized by the SelfDefense Forces and the United States Armed Forces in Japan,
Japan will have primary responsibility to respond, and based
on close bilateral coordination, the United States will provide
appropriate support to Japan. The two governments also will
share relevant information expeditiously and appropriately. In
the event of serious cyber incidents that affect the security of
Japan, including those that take place when Japan is under an
armed attack, the two governments will consult closely and take
appropriate cooperative actions to respond.
**VII. Bilateral Enterprise**
The two governments will develop and enhance the following areas
as a foundation of security and defense cooperation, in order to
improve further the effectiveness of bilateral cooperation:
A. Defense Equipment and Technology Cooperation
In order to enhance interoperability and to promote efficient
acquisition and maintenance, the two governments will:

-  cooperate in joint research, development, production, and
test and evaluation of equipment and in mutual provision of
components of common equipment and services;

-  strengthen the basis to repair and maintain common equipment
for mutual efficiency and readiness;

-  facilitate reciprocal defense procurement to enhance efficient
acquisition, interoperability, and defense equipment and
technology cooperation; and

-  explore opportunities for cooperation with partners on defense
equipment and technology.
B. Intelligence Cooperation and Information Security
Recognizing that common situational awareness is essential,
the two governments will enhance intelligence cooperation and
information sharing at all levels, including the national strategic
level.

In order to enable robust intelligence cooperation and
information sharing, the two governments will continue to
promote cooperation in strengthening policies, practices, and
procedures related to the protection of classified information.

The two governments also will explore opportunities for
cooperation with partners on information sharing.
C. Educational and Research Exchanges
Recognizing the importance of intellectual cooperation
concerning security and defense, the two governments will deepen
exchanges of members of relevant organizations and strengthen
communication between each side’s research and educational


institutions. Such efforts will serve as the enduring foundation
for security and defense officials to share their knowledge and
reinforce cooperation.
**VIII. Processes for Review**
The SCC, assisted by an appropriate subordinate body, will regularly
evaluate whether the Guidelines remain adequate in light of the
evolving circumstances. The two governments will update the
Guidelines in a timely and appropriate manner when changes in
situations relevant to the Japan-U.S. Alliance relationship occur and
if deemed necessary in view of the circumstances at that time.

**Reference 29** **United States–Japan Roadmap for Realignment**
**Implementation**

 (Washington, DC, May 1, 2006)
**Overview**
On October 29, 2005, the U.S.–Japan Security Consultative Committee
(SCC) members approved recommendations for realignment of U.S.
forces in Japan and related Japan Self-Defense Forces (SDF) in their
document, “U.S.– Japan Alliance: Transformation and Realignment
for the Future.” In that document, the SCC members directed their
respective staffs “to finalize these specific and interrelated initiatives
and develop plans, including concrete implementation schedules no
later than March 2006.” This work has been completed and is reflected
in this document.
**Finalization of Realignment Initiatives**
The individual realignment initiatives form a coherent package. When
implemented, these realignments will ensure a life-of-the-alliance
presence for U.S. forces in Japan.
The construction and other costs for facility development in the
implementation of these initiatives will be borne by the Government
of Japan (GOJ) unless otherwise specified. The U.S. Government
(USG) will bear the operational costs that arise from implementation
of these initiatives. The two Governments will finance their realignment
associated costs consistent with their commitments in the October 29,
2005 SCC document to maintain deterrence and capabilities while
reducing burdens on local communities.
**Key Implementation Details**
1. Realignment on Okinawa
(a) Futenma Replacement Facility (FRF)
 The United States and Japan will locate the FRF in a
configuration that combines the Henoko-saki and adjacent
water areas of Oura and Henoko Bays, including two runways
aligned in a “V”-shape, each runway having a length of 1,600
meters plus two 100-meter overruns. The length of each
runway portion of the facility is 1,800 meters, exclusive of
seawalls (see attached concept plan dated April 28, 2006).
This facility ensures agreed operational capabilities while
addressing issues of safety, noise, and environmental impacts.
 In order to locate the FRF, inclusive of agreed support facilities,
in the Camp Schwab area, necessary adjustments will be
made, such as reconfiguration of Camp Schwab facilities and
adjacent water surface areas.
 Construction of the FRF is targeted for completion by 2014.
 Relocation to the FRF will occur when the facility is fully
operationally capable.
 Facility improvements for contingency use at ASDF bases at
Nyutabaru and Tsuiki related to replacement of Marine Corps
Air Station (MCAS) Futenma capabilities will be made, as
necessary, after conducting site surveys and before MCAS
Futenma is returned.
 Requirements for improved contingency use of civilian
facilities will be examined in the context of bilateral
contingency planning, and appropriate arrangements will be
made in order to realize the return of MCAS Futenma.
 In principle, the construction method for the FRF will be
landfill.
 The USG does not intend to operate fighter aircraft from this
facility.
(b) Force Reductions and Relocation to Guam
 Approximately 8,000 III Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF)
personnel and their approximately 9,000 dependents will
relocate from Okinawa to Guam by 2014, in a manner that
maintains unit integrity. Units to relocate will include: III
MEF Command Element, 3rd Marine Division Headquarters,


-----

3rd Marine Logistics Group (formerly known as Force
Service Support Group) Headquarters, 1st Marine Air Wing
Headquarters, and 12th Marine Regiment Headquarters.
 The affected units will relocate from such facilities as Camp
Courtney, Camp Hansen, MCAS Futenma, Camp Zukeran,
and Makiminato Service Area.
 The U.S. Marine Corps (USMC) forces remaining on Okinawa
will consist of Marine Air-Ground Task Force elements, such
as command, ground, aviation, and combat service support, as
well as a base support capability.
 Of the estimated $10.27 billion cost of the facilities and
infrastructure development costs for the III MEF relocation
to Guam, Japan will provide $6.09 billion (in U.S. FY2008
dollars), including $2.8 billion in direct cash contributions,
to develop facilities and infrastructure on Guam to enable the
III MEF relocation, recognizing the strong desire of Okinawa
residents that such force relocation be realized rapidly. The
United States will fund the remainder of the facilities and
infrastructure development costs for the relocation to Guam
estimated in U.S. FY2008 dollars at $3.18 billion in fiscal
spending plus approximately $1 billion for a road.
(c) Land Returns and Shared Use of Facilities
 Following the relocation to the FRF, the return of MCAS
Futenma, and the transfer of III MEF personnel to Guam, the
remaining facilities and areas on Okinawa will be consolidated,
thereby enabling the return of significant land areas south of
Kadena Air Base.
 Both sides will develop a detailed consolidation plan by March
2007. In this plan, total or partial return of the following six
candidate facilities will be examined:
 Camp Kuwae: Total return.
 Camp Zukeran: Partial return and consolidation of
remaining facilities and infrastructure to the extent possible.
 MCAS Futenma: Total return (see FRF section above).
 Makiminato Service Area: Total return.
 aha Port: Total return (relocated to the new facilities,
including additional staging constructed at Urasoe).
 Army POL Depot Kuwae Tank Farm No. 1: Total return.
 All functions and capabilities that are resident in facilities
designated for return, and that are required by forces
remaining in Okinawa, will be relocated within Okinawa.
These relocations will occur before the return of designated
facilities.
 While emphasizing the importance of steady implementation
of the recommendations of the Special Action Committee on
Okinawa (SACO) Final Report, the SACO relocation and
return initiatives may need to be reevaluated.
 Camp Hansen will be used for GSDF training. Shared use that
requires no facility improvements will be possible from 2006.
 ASDF will use Kadena Air Base for bilateral training with U.S.
forces, taking into account noise impacts on local communities.
(d) Relationships among Initiatives
 Within the overall package, the Okinawa-related realignment
initiatives are interconnected.
 Specifically, consolidation and land returns south of Kadena
depend on completing the relocation of III MEF personnel and
dependents from Okinawa to Guam.
 The III MEF relocation from Okinawa to Guam is dependent
on: (1) tangible progress toward completion of the FRF, and
(2) Japan’s financial contributions to fund development of
required facilities and infrastructure on Guam.
2. Improvement of U.S. Army Command and Control Capability
 U.S. Army command and control structure at Camp Zama will
be transformed by U.S. FY2008. The headquarters of the GSDF
Central Readiness Force subsequently will arrive at Camp Zama
by Japan FY2012; SDF helicopters will have access to Kastner
Heliport on Camp Zama.
 Along with the transformation of Army headquarters in Japan, a
battle command training center and other support facilities will
be constructed within Sagami General Depot (SGD) using U.S.
funding.
 In relation to this transformation, the following measures for
efficient and effective use of Camp Zama and SGD will be
implemented.
 Some portions of land at SGD will be returned for local
redevelopment (approximately 15 hectares (ha)) and for


road and underground rail (approximately 2ha). Affected
housing units will be relocated to Sagamihara Housing Area.
 A specified area of open space in the northwest section of
SGD (approximately 35ha) will be provided for local use
when not required for contingency or training purposes.
 Portions of the Chapel Hill housing area of Camp Zama
(1.1ha) will be returned to the GOJ following relocation
of affected housing units within Camp Zama. Further
discussions on possible additional land returns at Chapel
Hill will occur as appropriate.
3. Yokota Air Base and Airspace
 ASDF Air Defense Command (ADC) and relevant units will
relocate to Yokota Air Base in Japan FY2010. A bilateral master
plan for base use will be developed to accommodate facility and
infrastructure requirements.
 A bilateral, joint operations coordination center (BJOCC),
established at Yokota Air Base, will include a collocated air and
missile defense coordination function. The USG and GOJ will
fund their own required equipment and systems, respectively,
while both sides will coordinate appropriate funding of shared
use equipment and systems.
 The following measures will be pursued to facilitate movement of
civilian aircraft through Yokota airspace while satisfying military
operational requirements.
 Establish a program in Japan FY2006 to inform commercial
aviation entities of existing procedures to transit Yokota
airspace.
 Return portions of Yokota airspace to Japanese control by
September 2008; specific portions will be identified by
October 2006.
 Develop procedures in Japan FY2006 for temporary transfers
of air traffic control responsibility to Japanese authorities for
portions of Yokota airspace, when not required for military
purposes.
 Study the conditions required for the possible return of
the entire Yokota airspace as part of a comprehensive
study of options for related airspace reconfigurations and
changes in air traffic control procedures that would satisfy
future patterns of civilian and military (U.S. and Japanese)
demand for use of Japanese airspace. The study will take
into account both the lessons learned from the Kadena radar
approach control (RAPCON) transfer experience and the
lessons learned from experiences with collocation of U.S.
forces and Japanese controllers in Japan. This study will be
completed in Japan FY2009.
 The USG and GOJ will conduct a study of the specific conditions
and modalities for possible civilian-military dual use of Yokota
Air Base, to be completed within 12 months from commencement.
 The study will be conducted on the shared understanding
that dual-use must not compromise military operations and
safety or the military operational capabilities of Yokota Air
Base.
 Based upon the outcome of this study, the two governments
will consult and then make appropriate decisions on civilianmilitary dual-use.
4. Relocation of Carrier Air Wing from Atsugi Air Facility to Marine
Corps Air Station (MCAS) Iwakuni
 The relocation of Carrier Air Wing Five (CVW-5) squadrons
from Atsugi Air Facility to MCAS Iwakuni, consisting of
F/A-18, EA-6B, E-2C, and C-2 aircraft, will be completed by
2014, subsequent to the following: (1) completion of necessary
facilities, and (2) adjustment of training airspace and the Iwakuni
RAPCON airspace.
 Necessary facilities will be developed at Atsugi Air Facility to
accommodate MSDF E/O/UP-3 squadrons and other aircraft
from Iwakuni, taking into account the continued requirement for
U.S. operations from Atsugi.
 The KC-130 squadron will be based at MCAS Iwakuni with its
headquarters, maintenance support facilities, and family support
facilities. The aircraft will regularly deploy on a rotational basis
for training and operations to MSDF Kanoya Base and Guam. To
support the deployment of KC-l30 aircraft, necessary facilities
will be developed at Kanoya.
 U.S. Marine Corps CH-53D helicopters will be relocated from
MCAS Iwakuni to Guam when the III MEF personnel relocate
from Okinawa to Guam.


-----

 Training airspace and Iwakuni RAPCON airspace will be
adjusted to fulfill safely the training and operational requirements
of U.S. forces, Japan SDF, and commercial aircraft (including
those in neighboring airspace) through coordination by the Joint
Committee.
 A bilateral framework to conduct a study on a permanent
fieldcarrier landing practice facility will be established, with the
goal of selecting a permanent site by July 2009 or the earliest
possible date thereafter.
 Portions of the future civilian air facility will be accommodated
at MCAS Iwakuni.
5. Missile Defense
 As both sides deploy additional capabilities and improve
their respective ballistic missile defense capabilities, close
coordination will continue.
 The optimum site for deployment of a new U.S. X-Band radar
system has been designated as ASDF Shariki Base. Necessary
arrangements and facility modifications, funded by the USG, will
be made before the radar becomes operational in summer 2006.
 The USG will share X-Band radar data with the GOJ.
 U.S. Patriot PAC-3 capabilities will be deployed to Japan within
existing U.S. facilities and areas, becoming operational at the
earliest possible time.
6. Training Relocation
 Both sides will develop annual bilateral training plans beginning
in Japan FY2007. As necessary, a supplemental plan for Japan
FY2006 can be developed.
 Initially, aircraft from three U.S. facilities — Kadena, Misawa,
and Iwakuni — will participate in relocated training conducted
from the following SDF facilities: Chitose, Misawa, Hyakuri,
Komatsu, Tsuiki, and Nyutabaru. Both sides will work toward
expanding use of SDF facilities for bilateral training and exercises
in the future.
 The GOJ will improve infrastructure for training relocation at
SDF facilities as necessary after conducting site surveys.
 Relocated training will not diminish the quality of training that
is currently available to U.S. forces in Japan, taking into account
facilities and training requirements.
 In general, bilateral training will commence with participation of
1–5 aircraft for the duration of 1–7 days, and develop over time
to participation of 6–12 aircraft for 8–14 days at a time.
 At those SDF facilities at which terms of joint use are stipulated
by Joint Committee agreements, limitations on the number of
joint training events will be removed. Limitations on the total
days and period per training event for joint use of each SDF
facility will be maintained.
 The USG and GOJ will share costs for bilateral training as
appropriate, bearing in mind the priority of maintaining readiness.

(Attached conceptual diagram omitted)

**Reference 30 Joint Statement of the Security Consultative**
**Committee**

**** **(April 27, 2012)**
**Joint Statement of the Security Consultative Committee (Outline)**
**Preamble**
(1) The U.S.-Japan Security Consultative Committee decided to adjust
the plans outlined in the May 2006 Realignment Roadmap.
(2) The Ministers decided to delink both the relocation of the Marine
Corps from Okinawa to Guam and resulting land returns south of
Kadena from progress on the Futenma Replacement Facility.
(3) The Ministers affirmed that the new posture of the U.S. Marine
Corps, coupled with the enhancement of Japan’s defense posture
and promotion of bilateral dynamic defense cooperation, would
strengthen the deterrence capabilities of the overall U.S.-Japan
Alliance.
**I. Unit Composition in Guam and Okinawa**
(1) The United States will locate Marine Air-Ground Task Forces
(MAGTF) in Okinawa, Guam, and Hawaii and establish rotational
deployment in Australia.
(2) Approximately 9,000 Marines will be relocated from Okinawa to
locations outside of Japan.
(3) The end-state for the Marine Corps presence in Okinawa will be
consistent with the levels in the Realignment Roadmap.
(4) There will be approximately 5,000 Marines in Guam.


(5) The preliminary cost estimate by the U.S. Government for the
relocation of Marines to Guam is $8.6 billion. Japan’s financial
commitment will be the fiscal spending in the 2009 Guam
International Agreement (up to $2.8 billion in U.S. fiscal year 2008
dollars). Other forms of financial support (investment or loan) will
not be utilized.

Any contributions under the cooperation in 2. (2) below will be a
part of the aforementioned commitment.
**II. New Initiatives to Promote Regional Peace, Stability, and Prosperity**
(1) The Ministers confirmed the importance of promoting peace,
stability, and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region. The government
of Japan will take various measures, including strategic use of ODA
(ex: providing coastal states with patrol boats).
(2) The two governments will consider cooperation for developing
training areas in Guam and the Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands for shared-use by the two countries, and will
identify areas of cooperation by the end of 2012.
**III. Land Returns in Okinawa**
(1) (i) Areas eligible for immediate return upon completion of
procedures:

Portions of Camp Zukeran (West Futenma Housing area and a
portion of the warehouse area of the Facilities and Engineering
Compound), portions of Makiminato Service Area (north
access road, area near Gate 5)

(ii) Areas eligible for return following relocation within Okinawa:

Portions of Makiminato Service Area (including the
preponderance of the storage area), portions of Camp Zukeran
(Industrial Corridor, etc.), Camp Kuwae, Naha Port, Army
Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant Depot Kuwae Tank Farm No.1

(iii) Areas eligible for return following Marine Corps’ relocation to
locations outside of Japan:

Portions of Camp Zukeran, the remainder of Makiminato
Service Area
(2) The two countries will jointly develop a consolidation plan for
facilities and areas remaining in Okinawa by the end of 2012.
**IV. Futenma Replacement Facility (FRF) and MCAS Futenma**
(1) The Ministers reconfirmed that the existing relocation proposal is
the only viable solution.
(2) The two countries will contribute mutually to refurbishment projects
necessary to safely operate MCAS Futenma until the FRF is fully
operational and to protect the environment.
(END)
For the full text of the Joint Statement, see the MOD website.
(http://www.mod.go.jp/j/approach/anpo/kyougi/js20120427.html)


-----

**Reference 31** **Japan-U.S. (Minister-Level) Consultations (Since 2013)**

|Date|Type of Consultation/Place|Participants|Outline and Results|
|---|---|---|---|
|Apr. 29, 2013|Japan-U.S. Defense Ministers Meeting/ Washington, D.C.|Minister of Defense Onodera Secretary of Defense Hagel|• Agreed on the significance of taking the Japan-U.S. cooperative relationship up to the next step • Confirmed from the U.S that Article 5 of the U.S.-Japan security treaty applies to the Senkaku Islands and statement against unilateral actions forcefully trying to change the status quo on it • Welcomed the progress of discussion on perceptions of strategic environment, which were presupposed for reviewing the Guidelines, and agreed to continue intensive discussions • Confirmed the establishment of defense ISR working group and confirmed progress in deliberation on joint warning and surveillance activities from peacetime • Agreed to accelerate the works toward early deployment of TPY-2 radar to Japan • Agreed to steadily make progress on the USFJ realignment|
|Aug. 28, 2013|Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting/ Brunei|Minister of Defense Onodera Secretary of Defense Hagel|• Reaffirmed U.S. position on the Senkaku Islands issue • Confirmed the importance of further promotion of Japan-U.S. defense cooperation in the area of cyber security • Welcomed the progress of bilateral discussions on strategic environment perspective, which serve as a basis for the revision of the Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation, and agreed to vigorously continue their discussion • Agreed to steadily make progress on the realignment of U.S. Forces in Japan • Following the crash accident of an HH-60 helicopter, Japan requested the U.S. to pay due consideration for public safety, take safety measures and investigate the cause of the accident. Secretary Hagel stated that he will ensure utmost safety of local areas • Exchanged views on safe operation of the MV-22 Osprey.|
|Oct. 3, 2013|Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting/ Tokyo|Minister of Defense Onodera Secretary of Defense Hagel|• Reaffirmed U.S. position on the Senkaku Islands issue • Confirmed to develop trilateral cooperation among Japan, the U.S. and Australia as well as among Japan, the U.S. and the ROK • Welcomed the establishment of the “Cyber Defense Policy Working Group (CDPWG)” as a framework between Japanese and U.S. defense officials • Agreed to vigorously continue their discussion on the revision of the Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation • Agreed to accelerate work for the early deployment of a TPY-2 radar system • Agreed to steadily make progress on the realignment of U.S. Forces in Japan • Exchanged views on safe operation of the MV-22 Osprey|
|Oct. 3, 2013|Japan-U.S. Security Consultative Committee (“2+2”)/ Tokyo|Minister of Defense Onodera Minister of Foreign Affairs Kishida Secretary of Defense Hagel Secretary of State Kerry|• Resolve to be full partners in a more balanced and effective Alliance • Welcomed Japanese efforts to prepare to establish its National Security Council (NSC) and issue its National Security Strategy (NSS), to reexamine the legal basis for its security, to expand its defense budget, to review its National Defense Program Guidelines, and to strengthen its capability to defend its sovereign territory • Directed the Subcommittee for Defense Cooperation (SDC) to complete work on the revision of the Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation before the end of 2014 • Agreed to strengthen bilateral cooperation in security and defense, including cyberspace and space • Agreed to strengthen cooperation in the region, including trilateral cooperation among Japan, the U.S. and Australia as well as among Japan, the U.S. and the ROK • Confirmed that the plan to construct the Futenma Replacement Facility (FRF) at Camp Schwab-Henokosaki area is the only solution that avoids the continued use of Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) Futenma • Announced the signing of a Protocol to amend the 2009 Guam International Agreement • Confirmed that deployment of more advanced capabilities in Japan, such as U.S. Navy P-8 maritime patrol aircraft and Global Hawk unmanned aircraft, has strategic significance|
|Apr. 6, 2014|Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting/ Tokyo|Minister of Defense Onodera Secretary of Defense Hagel|• Reaffirmed U.S. position on the Senkaku Islands issue • Agreed to oppose any coercive attempt to alter the status quo in the East China Sea and other areas • Agreed to advance trilateral cooperation, including cooperation among Japan, the U.S. and Australia and among Japan, the U.S. and the ROK, and also to strengthen cooperation with Southeast Asian countries • Agreed to strengthen deterrence and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance by steadily making progress in broad bilateral defense cooperation, including the revision of the Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation • Secretary Hagel stated that he plans to deploy two additional BMD (ballistic missile defense)-equipped Aegis ships to Japan by 2017 • Minister Onodera explained the gist of “Three Principles on Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology,” and secretary welcomed Japan’s effort in this area • Confirmed that Japan and the U.S. would further accelerate specific cooperation in efforts to mitigate the impact on Okinawa • Welcomed the recent progress in the realignment of U.S. Forces in Japan|
|May. 31, 2014|Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting/ Singapore|Minister of Defense Onodera Secretary of Defense Hagel|• Agreed that they would oppose any coercive attempt to alter the status quo in the East China Sea and other areas • Minister Onodera welcomed the temporary deployment of Global Hawk to Misawa Air Base and the additional deployment of a second AN/TPY-2 radar system to Japan • Agreed to continue to strengthen cooperation with Southeast Asian countries • Minister Onodera explained that the Japanese government has begun domestic discussions on Japan’s defense policy. The U.S. welcomed and supported such efforts by Japan • Agreed to strengthen deterrence and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance by steadily making progress in broad bilateral defense cooperation, including the revision of the Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation • Agreed to steadily make progress on the realignment of U.S. Forces in Japan • Agreed to promptly and steadily make progress on the realignment of U.S. Forces in Japan, including construction of the Futenma Replacement Facility • Confirmed that Japan and the U.S. will accelerate specific cooperation in mitigating the impact on Okinawa|
|Jul. 11, 2014|Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting/ Washington, D.C.|Minister of Defense Onodera Secretary of Defense Hagel|• Confirmed U.S. position on the Senkaku Islands • Agreed to oppose any coercive attempt to alter the status quo in the East China Sea and other areas • Agreed in addition to close bilateral cooperation between Japan and the U.S. to advanc trilateral cooperation among Japan, the U.S., and the ROK and Japan, the U.S., and Australia • The Japanese side explained the purport of the Cabinet decision on the development of a new security legislation. The U.S. side welcomed and supported this effort. • Agreed to release an interim report on the work to revise the Guidelines at an appropriate timing • Agreed to further deepen bilateral cooperation on equipment and technology in light of the Three Principles on Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology • Agreed to proceed swiftly and steadily with the realignment of the U.S. Forces in Japan, including the relocation of MCAS Futenma to Camp Schwab • Welcomed the relocation of KC-130 squadron from MCAS Futenma to MCAS Iwakuni • The Japanese side raised the issue of noise caused by the flight of transient aircrafts at MCAS Futenma, among other matters. The U.S. side expressed its commitment to discuss measures to mitigate the impact of the presence of the U.S. Forces in Okinawa.|


-----

|Date|Type of Consultation/Place|Participants|Outline and Results|
|---|---|---|---|
|Apr. 8, 2015|Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting/ Tokyo|Minister of Defense Nakatani Secretary of Defense Carter|• Confirmed U.S. position on the Senkaku Islands • Agreed that they would continue to oppose any coercive attempt that would alter the status quo in any area, including the East China Sea • Confirmed strong intent to further deepen the Japan-U.S. Alliance through the process of the revision of the Guidelines • The Japanese side explained the status of discussions pertaining to the development of the security legislation. The U.S. side welcomed and supported this effort. • Instructed their respective authorities to consider establishing a new framework for cooperation related to space between the two defense authorities, bearing in mind that risks to the stable use of space and cyberspace are common security challenges to the two countries • Welcomed the progress on the efforts to develop a maintenance base shared by the two countries, namely, the U.S. decision to establish a regional depot for the F-35 in Japan, and agreed to further deepen bilateral cooperation on equipment and technology • Reaffirmed that the relocation to Camp Schwab is the only solution that avoids the continued use of MCAS Futenma • The Japanese side requested continued cooperation to mitigrate impact on Okinawa. The U.S. side expressed its commitment to discuss measures to mitigate the impact of the presence of the U.S. Forces in Okinawa.|
|Apr. 27, 2015|Japan-U.S. Security Consultative Committee (“2+2”) Meeting/ New York|Minister of Defense Nakatani Minister for Foreign Affairs Kishida Secretary of Defense Carter Secretary of State Kerry|• Released the new Guidelines, and confirmed that they would further strengthen the deterrence and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance • Reaffirmed U.S. position on the Senkaku Islands (reiterated in the Joint Statement) • Shared recognition on the importance of “rule of law,” including the recent situation in the South China Sea, and agreed that unilateral attempts to alter the status quo cannot be neglected and they would work with the international community to advance various efforts • Reaffirmed that the relocation to Camp Schwab is the only solution that avoids the continued use of MCAS Futenma • The Japanese side requested cooperation to mitigaty the impact on Okinawa. The U.S. side is committed to mitigating impact. • Confirmed intent to continue negotiation on the ancillary documents of a supplementary Agreemet on cooperation in the Field of Environmental Stewardship as quickly as possible|
|Apr. 28, 2015|Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting/ Washington, D.C.|Minister of Defense Nakatani Secretary of Defense Carter|• Exchanged views on the situation in the South China Sea, and agreed to continue to strengthening cooperation with Southeast Asian countries • Agreed to further advance Japan-U.S.-ROK defense cooperation • Confirmed that the new Guidelines will strengthen the deterrence and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance and the importance of swiftly implementing the new Guidelines • The Japanese side explained the development of the security legislation. The U.S. side welcomed and supported Japan’s efforts in this regard. • Welcomed the establishment of the “Space Cooperation Working Group” as a framework for cooperation related to space between the two defense authorities • Reaffirmed that the relocation to Camp Schwab is the only solution that avoids the continued use of MCAS Futenma • The Japanese side explained the importance of mitigating the impact on Okinawa and requested U.S. cooperation. The U.S. side stated that it would continue efforts such as realizing bilateral plans pertaining to U.S. base the consolidation in Okinawa. • Agreed to seek early agreement on a framework for reciprocal defense procurement and to further deepen equipment and technology cooperation.|
|May 30, 2015|Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting/ Singapore|Minister of Defense Nakatani Secretary of Defense Carter|• Agreed that they would oppose any coercive attempt that would alter the status quo in the East China Sea, South China Sea, and other areas • Agreed to further advance trilateral defense cooperation, such as Japan-U.S.-ROK and Japan-U.S.-Australia cooperation • Agreed to continue strengthening cooperation with Southeast Asian countries in terms of contributing to regional peace and stability • The Japanese side explained the recent Cabinet decision on the Peace and Security Legislation and the commencement of Diet deliberations. Confirmed that the legislation would lead to ensuring the effectiveness of the new Guidelines. • Confirmed that they would continue to make steady efforts to ensure the effectiveness of the new Guidelines, such as establishing the new Alliance Coordination Mechanism, developing bilateral plans, and expeditions negotiations on an Acquisition and Cross- Servicing Agreement • Welcomed the fact that the outcome of the discussions in the Cyber Defense Policy Working Group was compiled, and agreed to further strengthen bilateral cooperation on cyberspace • The Japanese side explained that it will continue to make every effort to realize the return of MCAS Futenma and its relocation to Camp Schwab as quickly as possible, and stated that the relocation to Camp Schwab is the only solution that avoids the continued use of MCAS Futenma • The Japanese side explained the importance of mitigating the impact on Okinawa and requested U.S. cooperation. The U.S. side stated that it would continue to cooperate on mitigating the impact on Okinawa. • The Japanese side stated that it is explaining to the Japanese people that the deployment of the CV-22 Osprey to Japan from 2017 would enhance deterrence and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance and contribute to stability in the Asia-Pacific region. However, in light of the accident in Hawaii, the Japanese side requested provision of necessary information focused on ensuring safety, including information on the accident. The U.S. side stated that it would provide necessary information and ensure safe operation of the Osprey, including the MV-22 already deployed to Japan.|
|Nov. 3, 2015|Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting/ Malaysia|Minister of Defense Nakatani Secretary of Defense Carter|• Agreed that they would oppose any attempt to change the status quo by force in the East China Sea and South China Sea and confirmed that they would carry out maritime operations in accordance with international law. • The Japanese side stated that it will support the U.S. Force’s activities in the South China Sea. Confirmed that they will continue to carry out the Japan-U.S. joint exercises, and that they will also continue to strengthen cooperation with Southeast Asian countries. • In light of North Korea’s posture to continue activities for launching extended range ballistic missiles, confirmed that Japan and the United States will continue to closely cooperate on this matter. • Agreed to reinforce trilateral defense cooperation with ROK, Australia, and the Philippines. • The Japanese side explained the recent enactment of the Legislation for Peace and Security, and stated its intention to further strengthen the deterrence and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S. alliance under this legislation. The U.S. side stated that they would support and welcome the enactment of this legislation. • Welcomed the establishment of the new Alliance Coordination Mechanism (ACM) and the Bilateral Planning Mechanism (BPM). Confirmed that they would continue to steadily make progress to the initiatives for ensuring effectiveness of the new Guidelines including the strengthening of cooperation with respect to space and cyber security. • The Japanese side explained that it continues to make its utmost efforts to realize the return of MCAS Futenma and its relocation to Camp Schwab as soon as possible. Reaffirmed that the relocation to Camp Schwab is the only solution to avoid the continued use of MCAS Futenma. • The Japanese side explained the importance of mitigating the impact on Okinawa including the relocation of U.S. Marine Corps personnel in Okinawa to Guam and the implementation of exercises and trainings outside Okinawa Prefecture, and requested U.S. cooperation. The U.S. side stated that it would continue to cooperate on this matter. • The Japanese side requested that the U.S. Force minimize the impact on the local residents in the relevant areas associated with their operation and give maximum consideration to the aspect of safety. The U.S. side expressed its intention to always ensure maximum safety of both the local residents and the U.S. Forces personnel. • Regarding the Host Nation Support (HNS), agreed that they would continue to hold consultations between the two countries, and make efforts to reach an early agreement. • In light of the establishment of the Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Agency, agreed to further deepen bilateral cooperation for equipment and technology. Confirmed that the recent decision of the U.S. Government with respect to the maintenance of the Marine Corp’s Osprey aircraft would lead to the reinforcement of the foundation of repair and maintenance of common equipment listed in the new Guidelines.|


-----

|Date|Type of Consultation/Place|Participants|Outline and Results|
|---|---|---|---|
|Jun. 4, 2016|Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting/ Singapore|Minister of Defense Nakatani Secretary of Defense Carter|• Regarding the arrest of a member of the U.S. civilian component in Okinawa, confirmed their intention to devise a set of effective prevention measures, including the review of the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) implementation practices related to U.S. personnel with SOFA status, including the civilian component. • Agreed to oppose unilateral attempts to change the status quo by force in the East China Sea and the South China Sea. • With regard to North Korea’s provocative actions, confirmed that Japan and the United States would continue to closely cooperate on this matter, including utilizing the Alliance Coordination Mechanism (ACM). • Confirmed their intention to further strengthen the deterrence and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S. alliance under the recently enacted Legislation for Peace and Security, and also confirmed that they would continue efforts to ensure effectiveness of the new Guidelines. • Welcomed the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding on the Reciprocal Defense Procurement (RDP-MOU), and agreed to further deepen bilateral cooperation for equipment and technology. • The Japanese side explained the court-mediated settlement over the Henoko landfill permit, and stated that Japan’s position would remain unwavering that the relocation of MCAS Futenma to Henoko is the only solution. The U.S. side stated that it understands Japan’s position and would maintain close cooperation with Japan. • The Japanese side requested U.S. cooperation for the mitigation of the impact on Okinawa, including training relocation to outside of Okinawa Prefecture. The U.S. side stated that it would continue to cooperate with Japan. • Agreed to address the early return of the facilities and areas south of Kadena Air Base as well as the majority of the Northern Training Area.|


**Reference 32** **Record of Japan-U.S. Bilateral Exercises in FY2015**

|Joint Training|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Training Designation|Date|Location|Japan|United States|Reference|
|Joint Exercise in the U.S. (field training)|Jul. 20–Oct. 20, 2015|Camp Pendleton, California, U.S. Marine Corps San Clemente island training area, as well as surrounding sea and airspace|Ground Staff Office, Western Army, Central Readiness Force, Minesweeper Division, Air Defense Command, etc. Totaling approximately 1,100 personnel|U.S Third Fleet, 1st Marine Expeditionary Unit, etc.|Training on a series of activities pertaining to amphibious operations strategy and army command activities pertaining to amphibious operations strategy|
|Japan-U.S. Joint Exercise (field exercise)|Jan. 12–Feb. 2, 2016|Ichigaya district, U.S. Forces Japan Yokota Air Base, locations of other participating units, etc.|Internal Bureaus, Staff Offcie of each Force, Defense Intelligence Headquarters, regional armies, Central Readiness Force, Signal Brigade, Ground Material Control Command, Self-Defense felet, regional units, Communication Command, MSDF Maritime Materiel Command, Air Defense Command, Air Support Command, Air Communications and System Wing, ASDF Air Material Command, SDF Supervised Units of Communication Systems, etc. Totaling approximately 6,500 personnel|United States Pacific Command (USPACOM), Headquarters of the U.S. Forces in Japan (USFJ), Headquarters of the U.S. Army in Japan, Headquarters of the U.S. Naval Forces in Japan, U.S. Air Force in Japan, U.S. Navy in Japan, etc. Totaling approximately 600 personnel|Exercise and training for Japan-U.S. coordination|

|Ground Self-Defense Force|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Training Designation|Date|Location|Japan|United States|Reference|
|Japan-U.S. joint District Army command post exercise (YS-68)|Jun. 1–13, 2015|Fort Shafter|Middle Army, Ground Staff Office, etc. Totaling approximately 150 personnel|First Army; U.S. Army, Pacific Command, etc. Totaling approximately 100 personnel|Exercise and training for Japan-U.S. coordination|
|Field training with U.S. Marines in Australia|Jul. 7–21, 2015|Bradshaw Field Training Area, Fog Bay, as well as surrounding sea and airspace|Western Army Headquarters, Western Infantry Regiment, etc. Totaling approximately 40 personnel|31st Marine Expeditionary Unit Totaling approximately 2,000 personnel|Exercise and training for Japan-U.S. coordination|
|Field training with U.S. Army in the U.S. Part 2|Jul. 27–Aug. 28, 2015|Joint Base Elmendorf– Richardson, Alaska, surrounding training area, as well as Donnelly training area|1st Airborne Brigade Totaling approximately 50 personnel|Major units of 4-25 Brigade Combat Team Totaling approximately 500 personnel|Exercise and training for Japan-U.S. coordination|
|Field training with U.S. Marines in Japan Part 1|Sep. 6–18, 2015|Aibano exercise area and Nihonbara exercise area|14th Brigade Totaling approximately 350 personnel|Major units of 1st Battalion, 2nd Marine Regiment, 2nd Marine Division Totaling approximately 200 personnel|Exercise and training for Japan-U.S. coordination|
|Field training with U.S. Army in the U.S. Part 1|Sep. 8–25, 2015|Yakima Training Center, Washington|Tenth Brigade Totaling approximately 300 personnel|2-2 Stryker Brigade Combat Team, major units of 4-23 Infantry Battalion Approximately 300 personnel|Exercise and training for Japan-U.S. coordination|
|Field training with U.S. Army in the U.S.|Sep. 10–21, 2015|Ohjojihara exercise area and Camp Yamato|Sixth Division Totaling approximately 1,280 personnel|1-25 Stryker Brigade Combat Team, major units of 5-1 Infantry Battalion Approximately 430 personnel|Exercise and training for Japan-U.S. coordination|
|Japan-U.S. joint District Army command post exercise (YS-69)|Dec. 1–13, 2015|Camp Itami and other locations|Middle Army, etc. Totaling approximately 4,500 personnel|First Army, U.S. Army, Pacifci Command, U.S. Army in Japan, Third Marine Expeditionary Brigade, etc. Totaling approximately 2,000 personnel|Exercise and training for Japan-U.S. coordination|


-----

|Training Designation|Date|Location|Japan|United States|Reference|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Field training with U.S. Marines in the U.S.|Jan. 18–Mar. 7, 2016|Camp Pendleton, California, etc.|Western Army Infantry Regiment, etc. Totaling approximately 270 personnel|1st Marine Expeditionary Force Totaling approximately 500 personnel|Exercise and training for Japan-U.S. coordination|
|Field training with U.S. Marines in the U.S. Part 2|Jan. 26–Feb. 6, 2016|Yausubetsu exercise area, Shikaribetsu exercise area, and Camp Obihiro|Fifth Brigade Totaling approximately 400 personnel|3rd Battalion, 5th Regiment, 1st Marine Division Totaling approximately 300 personnel|Exercise and training for Japan-U.S. coordination|


**Maritime Self-Defense Force**

|Training Designation|Date|Location|Japan|United States|Reference|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Training for escort flotillas in the United States|Mar. 14–Apr. 4, 2015|Guam|4 vessels, 2 aircraft|Several vessels, several aircraft|Offshore training|
|Minesweeping special training|Jul. 16–31, 2015|Mutsu Bay|18 vessels, 9 aircraft|2 vessels, 3 aircraft, eight underwater disposal personnel|Minesweeping training|
|Training in the United States (aircraft)|Aug. 10–24, 2015|Guam|2 aircraft|5 aircraft|Antisubmarine training, etc.|
|Antisubmarine special training|Sep. 21–24, 2015|Sea areas surrounding Okinawa|2 vessels, several aircraft|3 vessels, several aircraft|Antisubmarine training|
|Japan-U.S. Joint Cruise Training|Oct. 19–31, 2015|Between the Bay of Bengal and the South China Sea|1 vessel, 1 aircraft|Several vessels, several aircraft|Joint cruise training|
||Oct. 15–Nov. 15, 2015|Between Yokosuka and the East China Sea|1 vessel|Several vessels, several aircraft||
||Mar. 7–10, 2015|Between off the coast of Okinawa and the East China Sea|2 vessels|Several vessels, several aircraft||
|Antisubmarine special training|Jan. 26–Feb. 2, 2016|Off the coast of the East Sea|12 vessels, several aircraft|1 vessel|Antisubmarine training|
|Japan-U.S. joint command post exercise|Feb. 16–25, 2016|U.S. Naval Academy|Maritime Staff Office, etc. Totaling approximately 35 personnel|U.S. Navy, Japan, Headquarters, etc. Totaling approximately 60 personnel|Training and exercise for Japan-U.S. coordination|

|Air Self-Defense Force|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Training Designation|Date|Location|Japan|United States|Reference|
|Air defense combat training Aerial refueling training Tactical air transport training|Jul. 27–Aug. 28, 2015|Elmendorf Air Force Base and Eielson Air Force Base, Alaska, as well as surrounding airspace, etc.|Aircraft 12|Aircraft Approx. 80|Enhancement of joint response capabilities, enhancement of combat skills|
|Fighter combat training|Aug. 21–Sep. 3, 2015|Airspace off Shikoku and airspace west of Kyushu|Aircraft 12|Aircraft 12|Enhancement of joint response capabilities, enhancement of combat skills|
|Fighter combat training|Sep. 7–18, 2015|Airspace off Hyakuri|Aircraft 4|Aircraft 5|Enhancement of joint response capabilities, enhancement of combat skills|
|Fighter combat training|Dec. 3–16, 2015|Airspace east of Misawa and airspace west of Akita|Aircraft 8|Aircraft 12|Enhancement of joint response capabilities, enhancement of combat skills|
|Japan-U.S.-Australia humanitarian assistance and disaster relief/trilateral disaster relief exercises|Dec. 4–11, 2015|Andersen Air Force Base, Guam, Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of Palau, Northern Mariana Islands, as well as surrounding airspace|Aircraft 1|Aircraft 3|Enhancement of interoperability|
|Fighter combat training|Dec. 8–11, 2015|Airspace off Shikoku and airspace west of Kyushu|Aircraft 4|Aircraft 4|Enhancement of joint response capabilities, enhancement of combat skills|
|Fighter combat training|Jan. 12–22, 2016|Airspace west of Hokkaido and airspace east of Misawa|Aircraft 5|Aircraft 5|Enhancement of joint response capabilities, enhancement of combat skills|
|Fighter combat training|Jan. 26–Mar. 8, 2016|Andersen Air Force Base, Guam, air-to-ground launch site on Tinian Island and Farallon de Medinilla island in the Northern Mariana Islands, as well as surrounding airspace|Aircraft 22|Aircraft 4|Enhancement of joint response capabilities, enhancement of combat skills|
|Fighter combat training|Mar. 7–18, 2016|Airspace off Komatsu|Aircraft 6|Aircraft 6|Enhancement of joint response capabilities, enhancement of combat skills|
|Aerial fueling training|Feb. 22–Mar. 1, 2016|Airspace around Okinawa|Aircraft 2|Aircraft 2|Enhancement of joint response capabilities, enhancement of combat skills|


-----

**Reference 33** **Japan-U.S. Joint Research and Development Projects**

|Item|Summary|Date of conclusion of Intergovernmental agreement to implement joint research and development|Completion date|
|---|---|---|---|
|Ducted Rocket Engine, Advanced Steel Technology, Fighting Vehicle Propulsion Technology Using Ceramic Materials, Eye-Safe Laser Radar, Ejection Seat, Advanced Hybrid Propulsion Technology, Shallow Water Acoustic Technology, Ballistic Missile Defense Technology, Low-Vulnerability Gun Propellant for Field Artillery, Software Radio, Advanced Hull Material/Structural Technology, Sea-Based Radar System, Combat System for Ship, Palm-sized automated chemical agent detector, Human effects of exposure to aircraft fuel and their engine exhaust, Image gyro for airborne applications||Completed||
|SM-3 Block IIA|Development of advanced missile interceptor|June 2006|Ongoing|
|Hybrid electric propulsion|Research on technologies that enable vehicles to be electrically powered using a motor, and technologies that enable both an engine and a battery to function as power sources for the motor|November 2012|Ongoing|
|High-speed multi-hull vessel optimization|Research aiming to design a multi-hull (trimaran, in particular) vessel featuring high-speed, adequate stability and large deck area|March 2014|Ongoing|
|Comparison of operational jet fuel and noise exposures|Research on the combined effects of exposures to both jet fuel and noise on the risk of hearing loss for flight line personnel|November 2015|Ongoing|



**Reference 34** **Outline of Cost Sharing of the Stationing of the USFJ**

|Item|Outline|Grounds|
|---|---|---|
|Costs for Facilities Improvement Program (FIP)1|Barracks, family housing, environmental facilities, etc., have been constructed in the USFJ facilities and areas by the GOJ since FY1979 and provided to the USFJ|Within the Framework of the Status of Forces Agreement|
|Labor costs|Welfare costs, etc., since FY1978 and portion of pay that exceeds the pay conditions of national public employees since FY1979 have been borne by the GOJ (USFJ differential, language allowance, and portion of the retirement allowance which exceeds the pay standard of national public employees were abolished in FY2008, upon the provision of measures to avoid drastic changes in payments)|Within the Framework of the Status of Forces Agreement|
||Eight kinds of allowances such as adjustment allowance have been borne by the GOJ since FY1987|Special Measures Agreement (FY1987)|
||Basic pay, etc., have been borne by the GOJ since FY1991 (by gradually increasing the costs borne by the GOJ, the total amount has been borne within the scope of the upper limit of the number of workers since FY1996)|Special Measures Agreement (FY1991)|
||The upper limit of the number of workers that the GOJ funds is to be reduced in stages from 23,055 to 22,625 during the SMA period|Special Measures Agreement (FY2011)|
||The upper limit of the number of workers that the GOJ funds is to be increased in stages from 22,625 to 23,178 during the SMA period|Special Measures Agreement (FY2016)|
|Utilities costs|Electricity, gas, water supply, sewage and fuel costs (for heating, cooking or hot water supply) have been borne by the GOJ since FY1991 (by gradually increasing the costs borne by the GOJ, the total amount has been borne within the scope of the upper limit of the procured quantity since FY1995)|Special Measures Agreement (FY1991)|
||The upper limit of the procured quantity provided in the Special Measures Agreement (FY1996) has been cut by 10% after subtracting the quantity of the off-base U.S. residential housing since FY2001|Special Measures Agreement (FY2001)|
||The GOJ will bear the costs for fuel, etc., equivalent to 24.9 billion yen, a reduction of 1.5% from the FY2007 budget for FY2009 and 2010|Special Measures Agreement (FY2008)|
||The GOJ will provide the annual utilities costs up to 24.9 billion yen each year. The adjustment borne by the GOJ will be phased in from current 76% (approximate) to 72% over the new SMA period.|Special Measures Agreement (FY2011)|
||The GOJ will provide the annual utilities costs up to approximately 24.9 billion yen each year. The adjustment borne by the GOJ each year will be reduced from 72% to 61%.|Special Measures Agreement (FY2016)|
|Training relocation costs|Additionally required costs incident to the relocation of the training requested by the GOJ have been borne by the GOJ since FY1996|Special Measures Agreement (FY1996)|


Notes: Concerning the costs for FIP, the Government of Japan formulated the “Criteria for adopting FIP projects” to make an effort for efficiency in the implementation of FIP as follows:
1) Concerning facilities contributing to the improvement of foundation for the stationing of USFJ (bachelor housing, family housing, and others), the Government of Japan improves
those facilities steadily considering necessity, urgency, and other factors. 2) Concerning welfare facilities such as recreational facilities and entertainment-oriented facilities, the
Government of Japan especially scrutinizes the necessity and refrains from newly adopting facilities regarded as entertainment-oriented and profit-oriented (shopping malls and
others). In Japan-U.S. agreements including the Special Measures Agreement (FY2016), it was agreed that the amount of FIP funding will not be less than 20.6 billion yen each year.


-----

**Reference 35** **Outline of 23 Issues**


|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|(As of March 31, 2016)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Facility|Scope|Area (ha)|Classification||||Remarks|
||||SCC|Gun-Ten- Kyo|Governor|U.S. Forces||
|<Already returned>||||||||
|Army POL Depots|1. Pipeline between Urasoe and Ginowan City|4|||◎||Returned on December 31, 1990|
|Camp Zukeran|2. Manhole, etc., for underground communication system (Noborikawa)|0.1||◎|||Returned on September 30, 1991|
||20. Awase Meadows Golf Course|47|||◎||Returned on July 31, 2010|
|Northern Training Area|3. Kunigami-son (Mt. Ibu) district, Higashi-son (Takae) district|480||◎|||Returned on March 31, 1993|
||4. A part of southern area of the prefectural highway Nago- Kunigami line|(256)|◎|||||
|Camp Schwab|5. A part of area along National Highway 329 (Henoko)|1|◎||||Returned on March 31, 1993|
|Makiminato Service Area Annex|6. In whole|0.1||||◎|Returned on March 31, 1993|
|Naha Cold Storage|7. In whole|Building|◎||||Returned on March 31, 1993|
|Sunabe Warehouse|8. In whole|0.3||||◎|Returned on June 30, 1993|
|Yaedake Communication Site|9. Southern part (Nago City) and northern part (Motobu-cho)|19|◎||||Returned on November 30, 1994|
|Onna Communication Site|10. In whole|62|||||Returned on September 30, 1995|
||11. Eastern part|(26)|◎|||||
|Kadena Air Base|12. A part of southern area (Tobaru)|2||◎|||Returned on January 31, 1996|
|Chibana Site|13. In whole|0.1||||◎|Returned on December 31, 1996|
|Camp Hansen|14. A part of Kin-cho (Kin)|3||◎|||Returned on December 31, 1996|
||(23. A part of East China Sea side slope (Nago City))|55|○||||Returned on June 30, 1993|
|Kadena Ammunition Storage Area Torii Communication Station|(22. Eastern Side of National Highway 58 (Kino–Hija), Southwestern corner (Yamanaka Area))|74|○||||Returned on March 25, 1999|
||15. Kadena bypass (west side of Route 58)|3|○|◎|||Returned on March 25, 1999|
||(22. Kurahama: site for waste incineration facilities)|9|○||||Returned on March 31, 2005|
||(22. Continuing use area for GSDF)|58|○||||Returned on October 31, 2006|
||16. Kadena bypass|4||◎|||Returned on March 31, 1999|
|Deputy Division Engineer Office|17. In whole|4|◎||||Returned on September 30, 2002|
|Camp Kuwae|(19. Southern side of the eastern part)|2|○|○|||Returned on December 31, 1994|
||18. Northern part (Ihei)|38||◎|||Returned on March 31, 2003|
||(19. Along Route 58)|(5)|○|||||
||16 facilities, 19 issues|866|6|7|3|3||
|<Not yet returned after release agreement was concluded>||||||||
|Camp Kuwae|19. Northern side of eastern part (Kuwae)|0.5|◎||||Change agreed on December 21, 2001|
|MCAS Futenma|21. Lands along eastern side|4||◎|||Release agreed on March 28, 1996|
|Kadena Ammunition Storage Area|22. Old Higashionna Ammunition Storage Area|43|◎||||Release agreed on March 28, 1996|
|Camp Hansen|23. A part of East China Sea side slope (Nago City)|107|◎||||Release agreed on September 5, 2013|
||4 facilities, 4 issues|155|3|1|0|0||
|Total|17 facilities, 23 issues|1,021|9|8|3|3||


Notes: 1. For the “Area” column, the value within parentheses is a portion of the value indicated immediately above.
2. A single circle in the “Classification” column expediently indicates that the scope of the case overlaps that of another issue.
3. The numbers in the “Scope” column were assigned only for the purpose of classifying 23 issues.
4. “SCC” in the “Classification” column indicates issues for which release was not achieved by June 1990 with respect to realignment, consolidation, and reduction plans of facilities and areas in Okinawa which were approved by the 15th and 16th Japan–U.S. Security Consultative Committee meetings. “Gun-Ten-Kyo” indicates issues for which release was requested by the Council for promotion of dezoning and utilization of military land and consultation of problems accompanying bases in Okinawa Prefecture chaired
by Okinawa’s governor. “Governor” indicates issues for which then-Governor Nishime of Okinawa requested the U.S. government to release facilities and areas. “U.S. Forces”
indicates issues in which the U.S. side declared to be returnable with respect to facilities and areas in Okinawa.


-----

**Reference 36 The SACO Final Report**

(December 2, 1996)
The Special Action Committee on Okinawa (SACO) was established in
November 1995 by the Governments of Japan and the United States. The
two Governments launched the SACO process to reduce the burden on
the people of Okinawa and thereby strengthen the Japan–U.S. alliance.
The mandate and guidelines for the SACO process were set forth
by the Governments of Japan and the United States at the outset of
the joint endeavor. Both sides decided that the SACO would develop
recommendations for the Security Consultative Committee (SCC) on
ways to realign, consolidate and reduce U.S. facilities and areas, and
adjust operational procedures of U.S. forces in Okinawa consistent with
their respective obligations under the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation
and Security and other related agreements. The work of the SACO was
scheduled to conclude after one year.
The SCC which was held on April 15, 1996, approved the SACO
Interim Report which included several significant initiatives, and
instructed the SACO to complete and recommend plans with concrete
implementation schedules by November 1996.
The SACO, together with the Joint Committee, has conducted a
series of intensive and detailed discussions and developed concrete
plans and measures to implement the recommendations set forth in the
Interim Report.
Today, at the SCC, Minister Ikeda, Minister Kyuma, Secretary
Perry and Ambassador Mondale approved this SACO Final Report. The
plans and measures included in this Final Report, when implemented,
will reduce the impact of the activities of U.S. forces on communities
in Okinawa. At the same time, these measures will fully maintain the
capabilities and readiness of U.S. forces in Japan while addressing
security and force protection requirements. Approximately 21 percent
of the total acreage of the U.S. facilities and areas in Okinawa excluding
joint use facilities and areas (approx. 5,002ha/12,361 acres) will be
returned.
Upon approving the Final Report, the members of the SCC
welcomed the successful conclusion of the yearlong SACO process
and underscored their strong resolve to continue joint efforts to ensure
steady and prompt implementation of the plans and measures of the
SACO Final Report. With this understanding, the SCC designated the
Joint Committee as the primary forum for bilateral coordination in the
implementation phase, where specific conditions for the completion of
each item will be addressed. Coordination with local communities will
take place as necessary.
The SCC also reaffirmed the commitment of the two governments
to make every endeavor to deal with various issues related to the
presence and status of U.S. forces, and to enhance mutual understanding
between U.S. forces and local Japanese communities. In this respect,
the SCC agreed that efforts to these ends should continue, primarily
through coordination at the Joint Committee.
The members of the SCC agreed that the SCC itself and the Security
Sub-Committee (SSC) would monitor such coordination at the Joint
Committee described above and provide guidance as appropriate. The
SCC also instructed the SSC to seriously address the Okinawa-related
issues as one of the most important subjects and regularly report back to
the SCC on this subject.
In accordance with the April 1996 Japan–U.S. Joint Declaration
on Security, the SCC emphasized the importance of close consultation
on the international situation, defense policies and military postures,
bilateral policy coordination and efforts towards a more peaceful
and stable security environment in the Asia-Pacific region. The SCC
instructed the SSC to pursue these goals and to address the Okinawa
related issues at the same time.
**Return Land:**
— Futenma Air Station — See attached.
— Northern Training Area
Return major portion of the Northern Training Area (approx.
3,987ha/9,852 acres) and release U.S. joint use of certain reservoirs
(approx. 159ha/393 acres) with the intention to finish the process by
the end of March 2003 under the following conditions:

-  Provide land area (approx. 38ha/93 acres) and water area (approx.
121ha/298 acres) with the intention to finish the process by the
end of March 1998 in order to ensure access from the remaining
Northern Training Area to the ocean.

-  Relocate helicopter landing zones from the areas to be returned to
the remaining Northern Training Area.
— Aha Training Area


Release U.S. joint use of Aha Training Area (approx. 480ha/1,185
acres) and release U.S. joint use of the water area (approx.
7,895ha/19,509 acres) with the intention to finish the process by
the end of March 1998 after land and water access areas from the
Northern Training Area to the ocean are provided.
— Gimbaru Training Area
Return Gimbaru Training Area (approx. 60ha/149 acres) with the
intention to finish the process by the end of March 1998 after the
helicopter landing zone is relocated to Kin Blue Beach Training
Area, and the other facilities are relocated to Camp Hansen.
— Sobe Communication Site
Return Sobe Communication Site (approx. 53ha/132 acres) with the
intention to finish the process by the end of March 2001 after the
antenna facilities and associated support facilities are relocated to
Camp Hansen.
— Yomitan Auxiliary Airfield
Return Yomitan Auxiliary Airfield (approx. 191ha/471 acres) with
the intention to finish the process by the end of March 2001 after the
parachute drop training is relocated to Ie Jima Auxiliary Airfield and
Sobe Communication Site is relocated.
— Camp Kuwae
Return most of Camp Kuwae (approx. 99ha/245 acres) with the
intention to finish the process by the end of March 2008 after the
Naval Hospital is relocated to Camp Zukeran and remaining facilities
there are relocated to Camp Zukeran or other U.S. facilities and areas
in Okinawa.
— Senaha Communication Station
Return Senaha Communication Station (approx. 61ha/151 acres)
with the intention to finish the process by the end of March 2001
after the antenna facilities and associated support facilities are
relocated to Torii Communication Station. However, the microwave
tower portion (approx. 0.1ha/0.3 acres) will be retained.
— Makiminato Service Area
Return land adjacent to Route 58 (approx. 3ha/8 acres) in order to
widen the Route, after the facilities which will be affected by the
return are relocated within the remaining Makiminato Service Area.
— Naha Port
Jointly continue best efforts to accelerate the return of Naha Port
(approx. 57ha/140 acres) in connection to its relocation to the Urasoe
Pier area (approx. 35ha /87 acres).
— Housing consolidation (Camp Kuwae and Camp Zukeran)
Consolidate U.S. housing areas in Camp Kuwae and Camp Zukeran
and return portions of land in housing areas there with the intention
to finish the process by the end of March 2008 (approx. 83ha/206
acres at Camp Zukeran; in addition, approx. 35ha/85 acres at Camp
Kuwae will be returned through housing consolidation. That land
amount is included in the above entry on Camp Kuwae.).
**Adjust Training and Operational Procedures:**
— Artillery live-fire training over Highway 104
Terminate artillery live-fire training over Highway 104, with the
exception of artillery firing required in the event of a crisis, after
the training is relocated to maneuver areas on the mainland of Japan
within Japanese FY1997.
— Parachute drop training
Relocate parachute drop training to Ie Jima Auxiliary Airfield.
— Conditioning hikes on public roads
Conditioning hikes on public roads have been terminated.
**Implement Noise Reduction Initiatives:**
— Aircraft noise abatement countermeasures at Kadena Air Base and
Futenma Air Station Agreements on aircraft noise abatement
countermeasures at Kadena Air Base and Futenma Air Station
announced by the Joint Committee in March 1996 have been
implemented.
— Transfer of KC-130 Hercules aircraft and AV-8 Harrier aircraft
Transfer 12 KC-130 aircraft currently based at Futenma Air Station
to Iwakuni Air Base after adequate facilities are provided. Transfer
of 14 AV-8 aircraft from Iwakuni Air Base to the United States has
been completed.
— Relocation of Navy aircraft and MC-130 operations at Kadena Air
Base
Relocate Navy aircraft operations and supporting facilities at Kadena
Air Base from the Navy ramp to the other side of the major runways.
The implementation schedules for these measures will be decided
along with the implementation schedules for the development of
additional facilities at Kadena Air Base necessary for the return of


-----

Futenma Air Station. Move the MC-130s at Kadena Air Base from
the Navy ramp to the northwest corner of the major runways by the
end of December 1996.
— Noise reduction baffles at Kadena Air Base
Build new noise reduction baffles at the north side of Kadena Air
Base with the intention to finish the process by the end of March
1998.
— Limitation of night flight training operations at Futenma Air Station
Limit night flight training operations at Futenma Air Station to the
maximum extent possible, consistent with the operational readiness
of U.S. forces.
**Improve Status of Forces Agreement Procedures:**
— Accident reports
Implement new Joint Committee agreement on procedures to provide
investigation reports on U.S. military aircraft accidents announced
on December 2, 1996. In addition, as part of the U.S. forces’ good
neighbor policy, every effort will be made to insure timely notification
of appropriate local officials, as well as the Government of Japan, of
all major accidents involving U.S. forces’ assets or facilities.
— Public exposure of Joint Committee agreements
Seek greater public exposure of Joint Committee agreements.
— Visits to U.S. facilities and areas
Implement the new procedures for authorizing visits to U.S. facilities
and areas announced by the Joint Committee on December 2, 1996.
— Markings on U.S. forces official vehicles
Implement the agreement on measures concerning markings on U.S.
forces official vehicles. Numbered plates will be attached to all nontactical U.S. forces vehicles by January 1997, and to all other U.S.
forces vehicles by October 1997.
— Supplemental automobile insurance
Education programs for automobile insurance have been expanded.
Additionally, on its own initiative, the U.S. has further elected to have
all personnel under the SOFA obtain supplemental auto insurance
beginning in January 1997.
— Payment for claims
Make joint efforts to improve payment procedures concerning claims
under paragraph 6, Article XVIII of the SOFA in the following
manner:

-  Requests for advance payments will be expeditiously processed
and evaluated by both Governments utilizing their respective
procedures. Whenever warranted under U.S. laws and regulatory
guidance, advance payment will be accomplished as rapidly as
possible.

-  A new system will be introduced by the end of March 1998, by
which Japanese authorities will make available to claimants no
interest loans, as appropriate, in advance of the final adjudication of
claims by U.S. authorities.

-  In the past there have been only a very few cases where payment
by the U.S. Government did not satisfy the full amount awarded
by a final court judgment. Should such a case occur in the future,
the Government of Japan will endeavor to make payment to the
claimant, as appropriate, in order to address the difference in
amount.
— Quarantine procedures
Implement the updated agreement on quarantine procedures
announced by the Joint Committee on December 2, 1996.
— Removal of unexploded ordnance in Camp Hansen
Continue to use USMC procedures for removing unexploded
ordnance in Camp Hansen, which are equivalent to those applied to
ranges of the U.S. forces in the United States.
— Continue efforts to improve the SOFA procedures in the Joint
Committee

**The SACO Final Report on Futenma Air Station**
**(an integral part of the SACO Final Report)**
 (Tokyo, Japan, December 2, 1996)
1. Introduction
a. At the Security Consultative Committee (SCC) held on
December 2, 1996, Minister Ikeda, Minister Kyuma, Secretary
Perry, and Ambassador Mondale reaffirmed their commitment
to the Special Action Committee on Okinawa (SACO) Interim
Report of April 15, 1996 and the Status Report of September 19,
1996. Based on the SACO Interim Report, both Governments
have been working to determine a suitable option for the return
of Futenma Air Station and the relocation of its assets to other


facilities and areas in Okinawa, while maintaining the airfield’s
critical military functions and capabilities. The Status Report
called for the Special Working Group on Futenma to examine
three specific alternatives: 1) incorporate the heliport into Kadena
Air Base; 2) construct a heliport at Camp Schwab; and 3) develop
and construct a sea-based facility (SBF).
b. On December 2, 1996, the SCC approved the SACO
recommendation to pursue the SBF option. Compared to the
other two options, the SBF is judged to be the best option in
terms of enhanced safety and quality of life for the Okinawan
people while maintaining operational capabilities of U.S. forces.
In addition, the SBF can function as a fixed facility during its
use as a military base and can also be removed when no longer
necessary.
c. The SCC will establish a bilateral U.S.–Japan working group
under the supervision of the Security Sub-Committee (SSC)
entitled the Futenma Implementation Group (FIG), to be
supported by a team of technical experts. The FIG, working with
the Joint Committee, will develop a plan for implementation no
later than December 1997. Upon SCC approval of this plan, the
FIG, working with the Joint Committee, will oversee design,
construction, testing, and transfer of assets. Throughout this
process, the FIG will periodically report to the SSC on the status
of its work.
2. Decisions of the SCC
a. Pursue construction of an SBF to absorb most of the helicopter
operational functions of Futenma Air Station. This facility will be
approximately 1,500 meters long, and will support the majority of
Futenma Air Station’s flying operations, including an Instrument
Flight Rules (IFR) — capable runway (approximately 1,300
meters long), direct air operations support, and indirect support
infrastructure such as headquarters, maintenance, logistics,
quality-of-life functions, and base operating support. The SBF will
be designed to support basing of helicopter assets, and will also be
able to support short-field aircraft operations.
b. Transfer 12 KC-130 aircraft to Iwakuni Air Base. Construct
facilities at this base to ensure that associated infrastructure is
available to support these aircraft and their missions.
c. Develop additional facilities at Kadena Air Base to support
aircraft, maintenance, and logistics operations which are
currently available at Futenma Air Station but are not relocated to
the SBF or Iwakuni Air Base.
d. Study the emergency and contingency use of alternate facilities,
which may be needed in the event of a crisis. This is necessary
because the transfer of functions from Futenma Air Station to the
SBF will reduce operational flexibility currently available.
e. Return Futenma Air Station within the next five to seven
years, after adequate replacement facilities are completed and
operational.
3. Guiding Principles
a. Futenma Air Station’s critical military functions and capabilities
will be maintained and will continue to operate at current readiness
levels throughout the transfer of personnel and equipment and the
relocation of facilities.
b. To the greatest extent possible, Futenma Air Station’s operations
and activities will be transferred to the SBF. Operational
capabilities and contingency planning flexibility which cannot be
supported by the shorter runway of the SBF (such as strategic
airlift, logistics, emergency alternate divert, and contingency
throughput) must be fully supported elsewhere. Those facilities
unable to be located on the SBF, due to operational cost, or
quality-of-life considerations, will be located on existing U.S.
facilities and areas.
c. The SBF will be located off the east coast of the main island
of Okinawa, and is expected to be connected to land by a pier
or causeway. Selection of the location will take into account
operational requirements, airspace and sea-lane deconfliction,
fishing access, environmental compatibility, economic effects,
noise abatement, survivability, security, and convenient,
acceptable personnel access to other U.S. military facilities and
housing.
d. The design of the SBF will incorporate adequate measures to
ensure platform, aircraft, equipment, and personnel survivability
against severe weather and ocean conditions; corrosion control
treatment and prevention for the SBF and all equipment located
on the SBF; safety; and platform security. Support will include


-----

reliable and secure fuel supply, electrical power, fresh water, and
other utilities and consumables. Additionally, the facility will be
fully self-supporting for short-period contingency/emergency
operations.
e. The Government of Japan will provide the SBF and other
relocation facilities for the use of U.S. forces, in accordance
with the U.S.–Japan Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security
and the Status of Forces Agreement. The two Governments
will further consider all aspects of life-cycle costs as part of the
design/acquisition decision.
f. The Government of Japan will continue to keep the people of
Okinawa informed of the progress of this plan, including concept,
location, and schedules of implementation.
4. Possible Sea-Based Facility Construction Methods
Studies have been conducted by a “Technical Support Group”
comprised of Government engineers under the guidance of a
“Technical Advisory Group” comprised of university professors
and other experts outside the Government. These studies suggested
that all three construction methods mentioned below are technically
feasible.
a. Pile Supported Pier Type (using floating modules) — supported
by a number of steel columns fixed to the sea bed.

**Reference 37 State of Progress of the SACO Final Report**


b. Pontoon Type — platform consisting of steel pontoon type units,
installed in a calm sea protected by a breakwater.
c. Semi-Submersible Type — platform at a wave free height,
supported by buoyancy of the lower structure submerged under
the sea.
5. The Next Steps
a. The FIG will recommend a candidate SBF area to the SCC as
soon as possible and formulate a detailed implementation plan
no later than December 1997. This plan will include completion
of the following items: concept development and definitions of
operational requirements, technology performance specifications
and construction method, site survey, environmental analysis,
and final concept and site selection.
b. The FIG will establish phases and schedules to achieve
operational capabilities at each location, including facility design,
construction, installation of required components, validation tests
and suitability demonstrations, and transfer of operations to the
new facility.
c. The FIG will conduct periodic reviews and make decisions at
significant milestones concerning SBF program feasibility.

|Name of Facility (Project)|State of Progress|
|---|---|
|Aha Training Area (Return of total area)|• December 1998: Total return completed (release of joint use)|
|Gimbaru Training Area (Return of total area)|• January 2008: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on land return after the helicopter landing zone (HLZ) is relocated to Kin Blue Beach Training Area and the other facilities are relocated to Camp Hansen • July 2011: Total return completed (approximately 60 ha)|
|Sobe Communication Site (Return of total area)|• April 1999: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on land return after communication systems including communication facilities such as antennas and others are relocated to Camp Hansen • June 2006: Land to which the Special Measure Law for USFJ Land was applied (approx. 236 m2) was returned • December 2006: Remaining portion (approximately 53 ha) returned (total return of Sobe Communication Site [approximately 53 ha])|
|Yomitan Auxiliary Airfield (Return of total area)|• October 2002: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on land return after the Sobe Communication Site is relocated • July 2006: Partially returned (approximately 138 ha) • December 2006: Remaining portion (approximately 53 ha) returned (total return of Yomitan Auxiliary Airfield [approximately 191 ha])|
|Senaha Communication Station (Return of most areas)|• March 2002: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on return of most land after communication systems including the antenna facilities and others are relocated to Torii Communication Station • September 2006: Partially returned (approximately 61 ha excluding the microwave tower portion) • October 2006: The microwave tower portion consolidated into Torii Communication Station|
|Northern Training Area (Return of major portion)|• April 1999: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on land return after seven HLZs are relocated, etc. • December 1998–March 2000: Environmental survey (past year survey) • November 2002–March 2004: Environmental survey (continuous environmental survey) • February 2006: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on changes to the agreement of April 1999 (HLZs: from 7 HLZs to 6 HLZs, reduction of the scale of the site preparation from 75 m to 45 m in diameter) • February–March 2007: Environmental impact assessment document was released and examined • March 2007: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the construction of the HLZs (three out of six) • January 2008: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the construction of the HLZs (the remaining three) • February 2015: HLZs (two sites) were furnished|
|MCAS Futenma (Return of total area → Return of total area)*|* May 2006: Described as total return in the United States–Japan Roadmap for Realignment Implementation|


-----

|Name of Facility (Project)|State of Progress|
|---|---|
|Camp Kuwae (Return of most areas → Return of total area)*|• July 2002: Youth center was furnished • March 2003: Northern side returned (approximately 38 ha) • January 2005: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the relocation and construction of the Naval Hospital and other related facilities • December 2006: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the construction of the Naval Hospital • February 2008: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the construction of support facilities (HLZ, etc.) of the Naval Hospital • December 2008: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the construction of support facilities (Utility) of the Naval Hospital • May 2009: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the construction of related facilities of the Naval Hospital (BEQ, etc.) • October 2009: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the construction of related facilities of the Naval Hospital (First water tank facility) • October 2010: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the construction of related facilities of the Naval Hospital (Second water tank facility) • September 2011: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the construction of related facilities of the Naval Hospital (BOQ and blood storage facility, etc.) • February 2013: 13 buildings including the Naval Hospital were furnished • March 2013: The Naval Hospital opened • December 2013: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the construction of related facilities of the Naval Hospital (preventive medical center and alcohol rehabilitation center, etc.) • December 2015: Related facilities of the Naval Hospital (BOQ and blood storage facility, etc.) were furnished * May 2006: Described as total return in the United States–Japan Roadmap for Realignment Implementation|
|Makiminato Service Area (Return of partial area → Return of total area)*|* May 2006: Described as total return in the United States–Japan Roadmap for Realignment Implementation|
|Naha Port Facility (Return of total area → Return of total area)*|* May 2006: Described as total return in the United States–Japan Roadmap for Realignment Implementation|
|Housing Consolidation Camp Zukeran (Return of partial area → Return of partial area)*|(Phase I: Golf Range Area) • April 1999: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the relocation and construction of housing and others • July 2002: Two high rises were furnished • July 2006: An underpass was furnished (Phase II: Sada Area) • February 2002: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the relocation and construction of housing and others • September 2005: Two high rises, 38 townhouses, and others were furnished (Phase III: Eastern Chatan Area) • March 2004: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the relocation and construction of housing and others • June 2008: 35 townhouses and others were furnished|
|Housing Consolidation Camp Zukeran (Return of partial area → Return of partial area)*|(Phase IV: Futenma and Upper Plaza Area) • March 2005: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the relocation and construction of housing and others • February 2010: 24 townhouses constructed in Futenma and Upper Plaza Area were furnished * May 2006: Camp Zukeran was described as partial return in the United States–Japan Roadmap for Realignment Implementation|
|Relocation of Artillery Live-fire Training over Highway 104|• Relocated to five maneuver areas on the mainland of Japan in FY1997|
|Parachute Drop Training|• Relocation training conducted at Iejima Auxiliary Airfield since July 2000|
|Installation of Noise Reduction Baffles at Kadena Air Base|• July 2000: Furnished|
|Relocation of the U.S. Navy Ramp at Kadena Air Base|• September 2008: Rinse Facility was furnished • February 2009: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on the relocation of Navy Ramp • October 2010: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on site preparation, implementation of construction of parking apron and taxiway • April 2011: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on implementation of construction of parking and utilities • February 2013: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on implementation of construction of maintenance hangar type II • July 2013: Parking space, etc. were furnished • July 2014: The Japan–U.S. Joint Committee came to an agreement on implementation of construction of hangars, etc.|
|Transfer of KC-130 aircraft to Iwakuni Air Base*|* May 2006: United States–Japan Roadmap for Realignment Implementation stated that the KC-130 squadron would be based at MCAS Iwakuni with its headquarters, maintenance support facilities, and family support facilities, and that the aircraft would regularly deploy on a rotational basis for training and operations to MSDF Kanoya Base and Guam. * August 2014: Relocation of all 15 aircraft from MCAS Futenma to Iwakuni Air Base was completed|


-----

**Reference 38 Background of the Futenma Replacement Facility**

|Month & Year|Background|
|---|---|
|April 1996|Then Prime Minister Hashimoto and then U.S. Ambassador Mondale held a meeting, and the full return of Marine Corps Air Station Futenma (MCAS Futenma) was announced. SACO Interim Report. → The airfield will be returned within five to seven years, following the completion of an adequate replacement facility.|
|December 1996|SACO Final Report → A maritime facility will be constructed off the east coast of the main island of Okinawa (one that can be dismantled).|
|November 1999|Then Governor of Okinawa Inamine stated that he had chosen the Henoko coast region of Nago City as a candidate for the facility relocation on condition that it would be for joint military-civilian use|
|December 1999|Then Mayor of Nago City Kishimoto expressed that the city would accept the FRF “Government Policy on Relocation of MCAS Futenma” (Cabinet decision) → Construction in the Nago City Henoko coastal region in the water area of Camp Schwab|
|July 2002|“Basic Agreement Regarding the Use of Replacement Facilities” concluded between the Director General of Defense Agency and the Governor of Okinawa. “Basic Plan for Replacement Facilities for MCAS Futenma” was prepared. → Scale, construction methods, and specific construction site decided.|
|November 2003|Then Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld visited Okinawa.|
|April 2004|The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) procedure started (abolished in 2007).|
|August 2004|A U.S. Forces helicopter crashed into a university campus in Ginowan City, Okinawa.|
|October 2005|“2+2” Joint Statement → Agreement on a new plan (an L shape plan connecting the coastal area of Camp Schwab with the adjacent water area of Oura bay)|
|April 2006|“Basic Agreement Regarding the Construction of the Futenma Replacement Facility” concluded between the Director General of the Defense Agency, the Mayor of Nago, and the village mayor of Ginoza. → Agreement was reached by creating flight paths avoiding overflight of the surrounding region (the V shape plan).|
|May 2006|• “2+2” Joint Statement → Final adjustments made for the “U.S.-Japan Roadmap for Realignment Implementation,” V shape plan approved “Basic Confirmation Regarding the Realignment of U.S. Military Forces in Okinawa” concluded between the Director General of the Defense Agency and the Governor of Okinawa. • “GOJ Efforts for USFJ Force Structure Realignment and Others” (Cabinet decision) → The cabinet decision of December 1999 was abolished.|
|August 2006|Establishment of “the Council on Measures for Relocation of MCAS Futenma”|
|August 2007|The EIA scoping document was sent to the governor, municipal mayors etc. of Okinawa.|
|April 2009|Draft Environment Impact Statement was sent to the governor and municipal mayors of Okinawa.|
|September 2009|Conclusion of a three-party coalition government agreement between the Democratic Party of Japan, the Social Democratic Party, and the People’s New Party. → Agreement on reviewing the status of the U.S. Forces realignment and U.S. Forces bases in Japan.|
|November 2009|Establishment of the Ministerial-Level Working Group on the Replacement Facility for Futenma Air Station. Japan-U.S. summit meeting → Agreement on resolving the relocation of Futenma Air Station expeditiously through the working group.|
|December 2009|Ministerial Committee on Basic Policies convened, Exploratory Committee for the Okinawa Bases Issue was established.|
|May 2010|“2+2” Joint Statement → Confirmed the intention to locate the Futenma Replacement Facility at the Camp Schwab Henokosaki and adjacent water areas Cabinet approval of “immediate actions by the Government of Japan on items decided by the Japan-United States Security Consultative Committee on May 28th, 2010”|
|August 2010|Futenma Replacement Facility Bilateral Experts Study Group Report|
|June 2011|“2+2” Joint Statement → Confirming the commitment that a replacement plan should be completed as early as possible after 2014, while deciding that the shape of the runway in the replaced facility should be V-shaped.|
|December 2011– January 2012|The Environmental Impact Statement report was sent to the governor of Okinawa.|
|February 2012|The Japan-U.S. Joint Statement was announced on the realignment of the U.S. forces stationed in Japan. → Official discussion was initiated to delink two issues—the movement of Marines to Guam and resulting land returns south of Kadena—from progress on the FRF.|
|April 2012|“2+2” Joint Statement → The current plan to relocate the air base from Futenma to Henoko was reconfirmed to be the only viable solution. Agreement reached to delink two issues—the movement of Marines to Guam and resulting land returns south of Kadena—from progress on the FRF.|
|December 2012|Revised Environment Impact Statement was sent to the governor and municipal mayors of Okinawa.|
|March 2013|Application for approval of public water body reclamation was submitted to the governor of Okinawa.|
|April 2013|Release of “the consolidation plan of USFJ facilities and areas in Okinawa” → Return of facilities and areas to be completed in or after Fiscal Year 2022|
|October 2013|“2+2” Joint Statement → Recognition was reaffirmed that the plan to construct the Futenma Replacement Facility in Henoko is the only solution that avoids continued use of MCAS Futenma|
|December 2013|Governor of Okinawa approved reclamation of the public water body related to the Futenma Replacement Facility construction project|
|July 2014|Started the construction of replacement facilities|
|October 2014|Joint press release by Japan and the United States → Reaffirmed that the plan to construct the Futenma Replacement Facility in Henoko is the only solution to avoid the continued use of MCAS Futenma|
|April 2015|“2+2” Joint Statement → Reconfirmed that the plan to construct the Futenma Replacement Facility at the Camp Schwab-Henokosaki area and adjacent waters is the only solution that addresses operational, political, financial, and strategic concerns and avoids the continued use of MCAS Futenma|


-----

|Month & Year|Background|
|---|---|
|October 2015|• Governor of Okinawa revoked the landfill permit for the Futenma Replacement Facility project • The Okinawa Defense Bureau requested the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism to review the governor of Okinawa’s revocation of the landfill permit for the Futenma Replacement Facility project, and requested the suspension of its execution • The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism recognized the request of the Okinawa Defense Bureau and decided to suspend execution of the revocation of the landfill permit|
|November 2015|• Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting → Reconfirmed that constructing the Futenma Replacement Facility in Henoko is the only solution that avoids the continued use of MCAS Futenma • The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism filed a lawsuit with the Fukuoka High Court’s Naha Branch, seeking a judgment that orders the correction (retraction of the revocation) of the violation of the law by the governor of Okinawa • Japan-U.S. Summit Meeting → Reconfirmed that constructing the Futenma Replacement Facility in Henoko is the only solution that avoids the continued use of MCAS Futenma|
|December 2015|• Implementation of Bilateral Plans for Consolidating Facilities and Areas in Okinawa: Japan-U.S. Joint Press Release → Reconfirmed that the plan to construct the Futenma Replacement Facility at the Camp Schwab-Henokosaki area and adjacent waters is the only solution that addresses operational, political, financial, and strategic concerns and avoids the continued use of MCAS Futenma|
|March 2016|• The government announced it would accept the court’s settlement recommendation • Landfill work was suspended • The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism issued a correction instruction to Okinawa Prefecture over its revocation of the landfill permit • Okinawa Prefecture applied for a review by the Central and Local Government Dispute Management Council of the correction instruction issued by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism|


**Reference 39 Estimated Timelines for the Return of Facilities and Areas South of Kadena**

|List of Estimated Timelines for the Return of Facilities and Areas|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Areas Eligible for Immediate Return Upon Completion of Necessary Procedures West Futenma Housing area of Camp Zukeran (Camp Foster) Returned The north access road of Makiminato Service Area (Camp Kinser) Returned Area near Gate 5 on Makiminato Service Area (Camp Kinser) JFY2014 or later A portion of the warehouse area of the Facilities and Engineering Compound in Camp Zukeran (Camp Foster) JFY2019 or later 1|||
||West Futenma Housing area of Camp Zukeran (Camp Foster)|Returned|
||The north access road of Makiminato Service Area (Camp Kinser)|Returned|
||Area near Gate 5 on Makiminato Service Area (Camp Kinser)|JFY2014 or later|
||A portion of the warehouse area of the Facilities and Engineering Compound in Camp Zukeran (Camp Foster)|JFY2019 or later 1|
|Areas Eligible for Return Once the Replacement of Facilities in Okinawa are Provided Camp Kuwae (Camp Lester) JFY2025 or later Lower Plaza Housing area, Comp Zukeran (Camp Foster) JFY2024 or later A part of Kishaba Houising area, Camp Zukeran (Camp Foster) JFY2024 or later The Industrial Corridor, Camp Zukeran (Camp Foster) JFY2024 or later 2,3 Elements of Makiminato Service Area (Camp Kinser), including the preponderance of the storage area JFY2025 or later Naha Port JFY2028 or later Army Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant Depot Kuwae Tank Farm No.1 JFY2022 or later Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) Futenma JFY2022 or later|||
||Camp Kuwae (Camp Lester)|JFY2025 or later|
||Lower Plaza Housing area, Comp Zukeran (Camp Foster)|JFY2024 or later|
||A part of Kishaba Houising area, Camp Zukeran (Camp Foster)|JFY2024 or later|
||The Industrial Corridor, Camp Zukeran (Camp Foster)|JFY2024 or later 2,3|
||Elements of Makiminato Service Area (Camp Kinser), including the preponderance of the storage area|JFY2025 or later|
||Naha Port|JFY2028 or later|
||Army Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricant Depot Kuwae Tank Farm No.1|JFY2022 or later|
||Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) Futenma|JFY2022 or later|
|Areas Eligible for Return as USMC Forces Relocate from Okinawa to Locations Outside of Japan Additional elements of Camp Zukeran (Camp Foster) － The remainder of Makiminato Service Area (Camp Kinser) JFY2024 or later 4|||
||Additional elements of Camp Zukeran (Camp Foster)|－|
||The remainder of Makiminato Service Area (Camp Kinser)|JFY2024 or later 4|


Note:
1: Shirahi River area can be returned at the same timing.
2: Part of the logistics support units in this area are scheduled to be relocated to locations outside of Japan. Efforts will be made to minimize the impact of the relocation on the

approximate timing for return. However, the relocation sequence is subject to change depending on the progress of relocation.
3: Area south of the Industrial Corridor (Camp Foster) can be returned at the same timing.
4: Plans for USMC relocation to locations outside of Japan have not yet been determined. The relocation sequence is subject to change depending on the progress of relocation.


**Reference 40 Agreement between the Government of Japan and**
**the Government of the United States of America**
**Concerning the Implementation of the Relocation of**
**III Marine Expeditionary Force Personnel and Their**
**Dependents from Okinawa to Guam**

 (Signed on February 17, 2009)
The Government of Japan and the Government of the United States of
America,
Affirming that Japan–the United States security arrangements,
based on the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between Japan
and the United States of America signed at Washington on January 19,
1960, are the cornerstone for achieving common security objectives,
Recalling that, at the meeting of Japan–the United States Security
Consultative Committee on May 1, 2006, the Ministers recognized
that the implementation of the realignment initiatives described in the


Security Consultative Committee Document, “United States – Japan
Roadmap for Realignment Implementation” (hereinafter referred to as
“the Roadmap”) will lead to a new phase in alliance cooperation, and
reduce the burden on local communities, including those on Okinawa,
thereby providing the basis for enhanced public support for the security
alliance,
Emphasizing their recognition of the importance of Guam for
forward presence of United States Marine Corps forces, which provides
assurance of the United States’ commitment to security and strengthens
deterrent capabilities in the Asia-Pacific region,
Reaffirming that the Roadmap emphasizes the importance of
force reductions and relocation to Guam in relation to the realignment
on Okinawa and stipulates that approximately 8,000 III Marine
Expeditionary Force (hereinafter referred to as “III MEF”) personnel
and their approximately 9,000 dependents will relocate from Okinawa


-----

to Guam by 2014, in a manner that maintains unit integrity, and
recognizing that such relocation will realize consolidation and land
returns south of Kadena,
Recalling that the Roadmap stipulates that United States Marine
Corps CH-53D helicopters will be relocated from Marine Corps Air
Station Iwakuni to Guam when the III MEF personnel relocate from
Okinawa to Guam, the KC-130 squadron will be based at Marine
Corps Air Station Iwakuni with its headquarters, maintenance support
facilities, and family support facilities, and the aircraft will regularly
deploy on a rotational basis for training and operations to Maritime
Self- Defense Forces Kanoya Base and Guam,
Reaffirming that the Roadmap stipulates that, of the estimated
ten billion, two hundred seventy million United States dollar
($10,270,000,000) cost of the facilities and infrastructure development
costs for the III MEF relocation to Guam, Japan will provide six billion,
ninety million United States dollars ($6,090,000,000) (in U.S. Fiscal
Year 2008 dollars), including two billion, eight hundred million United
States dollars ($2,800,000,000) in direct cash contributions, to develop
facilities and infrastructure on Guam to enable the III MEF relocation,
recognizing the strong desire of Okinawa residents that such force
relocation be realized rapidly,
Reaffirming further that the Roadmap stipulates that the United
States will fund the remainder of the facilities and infrastructure
development costs for the relocation to Guam-estimated in U.S. Fiscal
Year 2008 dollars at three billion, one hundred eighty million United
States dollars ($3,180,000,000) in fiscal spending plus approximately
one billion United States dollars ($1,000,000,000) for a road,
Recalling that the Roadmap stipulates that, within the overall
package, the Okinawa-related realignment initiatives are interconnected,
specifically, consolidation and land returns south of Kadena depend
on completing the relocation of III MEF personnel and dependents
from Okinawa to Guam, and the III MEF relocation from Okinawa to
Guam is dependent on: (1) tangible progress toward completion of the
Futenma Replacement Facility, and (2) Japan’s financial contributions
to fund development of required facilities and infrastructure on Guam,
Have agreed as follows:

Article 1
1. The Government of Japan shall make cash contributions up to
the amount of two billion, eight hundred million United States
dollars ($2,800,000,000) (in U.S. Fiscal Year 2008 dollars)
to the Government of the United States of America as a part
of expenditures for the relocation of approximately 8,000 III
MEF personnel and their approximately 9,000 dependents from
Okinawa to Guam (hereinafter referred to as “the Relocation”)
subject to paragraph 1. of Article 9 of this Agreement.
2. The amount of Japanese cash contributions to be budgeted in
each Japanese fiscal year shall be determined by the Government
of Japan through consultation between the two Governments and
reflected in further arrangements that the two Governments shall
conclude in each Japanese fiscal year (hereinafter referred to as
“the further arrangements”).

Article 2
The Government of the United States of America shall take necessary
measures for the Relocation, including funding for projects of the
Government of the United States of America to develop facilities and
infrastructure on Guam subject to paragraph 2 of Article 9 of this
Agreement.

Article 3
The Relocation shall be dependent on tangible progress made by
the Government of Japan toward the completion of the Futenma
Replacement Facility as stipulated in the Roadmap. The Government
of Japan intends to complete the Futenma Replacement Facility as
stipulated in the Roadmap in close cooperation with the Government
of the United States of America.

Article 4
The Government of the United States of America shall use Japanese
cash contributions and their accrued interest only for projects to
develop facilities and infrastructure on Guam for the Relocation.

Article 5
The Government of the United States of America shall ensure that all
participants in the process of acquisition for projects to be funded by


Japanese cash contributions for the Relocation shall be treated fairly,
impartially and equitably.

Article 6
The Government of Japan shall designate the Ministry of Defense
of Japan as its implementing authority, and the Government of the
United States of America shall designate the Department of Defense
of the United States of America as its implementing authority. The
two Governments shall hold consultations at the technical level
on implementation guidance to be followed by the implementing
authorities, and on the specific projects referred to in paragraph 1.
(a) of Article 7 of this Agreement. Through such consultations, the
Government of the United States of America shall ensure that the
Government of Japan shall be involved, in an appropriate manner, in
the implementation of the said specific projects.

Article 7
1. (a) Specific projects to be funded in each Japanese fiscal year
shall be agreed upon between the two Governments and
reflected in the further arrangements.

(b) The Government of the United States of America shall
maintain a United States Treasury account to which the
Government of Japan shall provide cash contributions. The
Government of the United States of America shall open and
maintain, under the said account, a sub-account for Japanese
cash contributions in each Japanese fiscal year.
2. Japanese cash contributions and their accrued interest that is
contractually committed to pay for specific projects shall be
credited, based on the method of calculation using an index to
be agreed upon between the implementing authorities referred
to in Article 6 of this Agreement, to the total amount of Japanese
cash contributions, which is up to the amount of two billion, eight
hundred million United States dollars ($2,800,000,000) (in U.S.
Fiscal Year 2008 dollars).
3. (a) In case there remains an unused balance of Japanese cash
contributions after the completion of all contracts, as
evidenced by receipt of documents releasing the Government
of the United States of America from any further financial
and contractual liability, for all specific projects funded in
the same Japanese fiscal year, the Government of the United
States of America shall return the said unused balance to the
Government of Japan, except as provided in paragraph 3. (b)
of this Article.

(b) The Government of the United States of America may
use, with the consent of the implementing authority of the
Government of Japan, the unused balance for other specific
projects funded in the same Japanese fiscal year.
4. (a) The Government of the United States of America shall
return interest accrued from Japanese cash contributions to
the Government of Japan, except as provided in paragraph
4. (b) of this Article, after the completion of all contracts, as
evidenced by receipt of documents releasing the Government
of the United States of America from any further financial and
contractual liability, for the last specific projects funded by
Japanese cash contributions.

(b) The Government of the United States of America may use, with
the consent of the implementing authority of the Government
of Japan, interest accrued from Japanese cash contributions
for projects funded by Japanese cash contributions.
5. The Government of the United States of America shall provide
the Government of Japan with a report, every month, on
transactions in the United States Treasury account, including all
the sub-accounts related to Japanese cash contributions.

Article 8
The Government of the United States of America shall consult with
the Government of Japan in the event that the Government of the
United States of America considers changes that may significantly
affect facilities and infrastructure funded by Japanese cash
contributions, and shall take appropriate actions, taking Japanese
concerns into full consideration.

Article 9
1. Japanese cash contributions referred to in paragraph 1. of
Article 1 of this Agreement shall be subject to funding by the
Government of the United States of America of measures referred


-----

to in Article 2 of this Agreement.
2. United States’ measures referred to in Article 2 of this Agreement
shall be subject to: (1) the availability of funds for the Relocation,
(2) tangible progress made by the Government of Japan toward
the completion of the Futenma Replacement Facility as stipulated
in the Roadmap, and (3) Japan’s financial contributions as
stipulated in the Roadmap.

Article 10
The two Governments shall consult with each other regarding the
implementation of this Agreement.

Article 11
This Agreement shall be approved by Japan and the United States
of America in accordance with their respective internal legal
procedures. This Agreement shall enter into force on the date when
diplomatic notes indicating such approval are exchanged.


Recalling that, under the plans outlined in the Roadmap as
adjusted, the Joint Statement, and the Consolidation Plan for
Facilities and Areas in Okinawa published in April, 2013, a part of
the consolidation and land returns south of Kadena depends on the
relocation of III MEF personnel and dependents from Okinawa,
and the III MEF relocation from Okinawa to Guam is dependent
on Japan’s direct cash contributions to fund development of required
facilities and infrastructure as well as necessary measures by the
Government of the United States of America,”

Article 2
The phrase “approximately 8,000 III MEF personnel and their
approximately 9,000 dependents” in paragraph 1. of Article 1 of the
Agreement shall be replaced by the phrase “the III MEF personnel
and their dependents”.

Article 3
The phrase “facilities and infrastructure on Guam” in Article 2
of the Agreement shall be replaced by the phrase “facilities and
infrastructure in Guam and the Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands”.

Article 4
Article 3 of the Agreement shall be deleted.


**Reference 41 Protocol amending the Agreement between the**
**Government of Japan and the Government of**
**the United States of America Concerning the**
**Implementation of the Relocation of III Marine**
**Expeditionary Force Personnel and Their Dependents**
**from Okinawa to Guam**

 (Signed on October 3, 2013)
The Government of Japan and the Government of the United States of
America,
Recalling the Joint Statement of Japan-the United States Security
Consultative Committee, dated April 27, 2012, which announced, inter
alia, that the two governments are to consult regarding further actions
to be taken in light of the Agreement between the Government of Japan
and the Government of the United States of America Concerning the
Implementation of the Relocation of III Marine Expeditionary Force
Personnel and Their Dependents from Okinawa to Guam, signed at
Tokyo on February 17, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as “the Agreement”),
Desiring to amend the Agreement, Have agreed as follows:

Article 1
The fifth to ninth paragraphs of the preamble of the Agreement
shall be deleted, and the following six paragraphs shall be inserted
immediately after the fourth paragraph:
“Recalling that Japan-the United States Security Consultative
Committee decided to adjust the plans outlined in the Roadmap
and, as part of the adjustments, decided to delink both the relocation
of the III Marine Expeditionary Force (hereinafter referred to as
“III MEF”) personnel from Okinawa to Guam and resulting land
returns south of Kadena Air Base from progress on the Futenma
Replacement Facility, in its Joint Statement dated April 27, 2012
(hereinafter referred to as “the Joint Statement”),
Recognizing that the Joint Statement confirmed that a total
of approximately 9,000 personnel of III MEF, along with their
dependents, are to be relocated from Okinawa to locations outside
of Japan,
Reaffirming that the Joint Statement confirmed that, of the
preliminarily estimated eight billion, six hundred million United
States dollars ($8,600,000,000) (in U.S. Fiscal Year 2012 dollars)
cost of the facilities and infrastructure development costs for the III
MEF relocation to Guam, Japan is to provide up to the amount of two
billion, eight hundred million United States dollars ($2,800,000,000)
(in U.S. Fiscal Year 2008 dollars) (equivalent to three billion, one
hundred twenty-one million, eight hundred eighty-seven thousand,
eight hundred fifty-five United States dollars ($3,121,887,855)
in U.S. Fiscal Year 2012 dollars) in direct cash contributions, to
develop facilities and infrastructure in Guam and the Commonwealth
of the Northern Mariana Islands to enable the III MEF relocation,
recognizing the strong desire of Okinawa residents that such force
relocation be completed as soon as possible,
Reaffirming further that the Joint Statement confirmed that the
United States is to fund the remaining costs and any additional costs
for the III MEF relocation to Guam,
Recalling that the Joint Statement announced that the two
Governments are to consider cooperation in developing training
areas in Guam and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands as shared-use facilities by the Japan Self-Defense Forces and
United States forces,


Article 5
The phrase “facilities and infrastructure on Guam” in Article 4
of the Agreement shall be replaced by the phrase “facilities and
infrastructure in Guam and the Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands”, and the following sentence shall be inserted at the
end of Article 4 of the Agreement:
“Such facilities may include training areas in Guam and the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.”

Article 6
Article 4 of the Agreement shall be renumbered as Article 3, and
the following Article shall be inserted immediately after renumbered
Article 3:
“Article 4
The Government of the United States of America, with the intent
to provide reasonable access, shall favorably consider requests
by the Government of Japan to use training areas in Guam and
the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, including
those whose development has been funded with Japanese cash
contributions and their accrued interest.”

Article 7
Paragraph 2. of Article 9 of the Agreement shall be deleted and
replaced by the following:
“2. United States’ measures referred to in Article 2 of this
Agreement shall be subject to the availability of funds for the
Relocation, which may include (1) United States funds and (2)
Japanese cash contributions referred to in paragraph 1. of Article 1
of this Agreement.

Article 8
It is confirmed that the Agreement as amended by this Protocol
applies to cash contributions made either before or after the entry
into force of this Protocol by the Government of Japan in accordance
with paragraph 1. of Article 1 of the Agreement, their accrued
interest, and the projects funded by the cash contributions.

Article 9
This Protocol shall be approved by Japan and the United States
of America in accordance with their respective internal legal
procedures. This Protocol shall enter into force on the date when
diplomatic notes indicating such approval are exchanged and shall
remain in force for the period of the Agreement.


-----

**Reference 42 Chronology of Osprey Deployment by the U.S. Forces**

|June 6, 2011|Provided information to relevant local governments and other organizations on the announcement made by the U.S. Department of Defense to replace the CH-46 deployed at MCAS Futenma with the MV-22 in the latter half of 2012.|
|---|---|
|June 13–26|Provided safety/noise information that GOJ had obtained so far to relevant local governments and other organizations.|
|June 24|Received a letter with 29 questions from the Okinawa Governor and others.|
|September 1|The first written response was handed to the Okinawa Governor and others by Administrative Vice-Minister.|
|September 2–13|Provided an explanation on the first written response to relevant local governments and other organizations.|
|December 20|The second written response was handed to the Okinawa Governor by chief of the Okinawa Defense Bureau.|
|December 20–January 17, 2012|Provided an explanation on the second written response above to relevant local governments and other organizations.|
|April 12|A prompt report on the accident involving an MV-22 in Morocco was provided to relevant local governments and other organizations.|
|June 13–|Provided an explanation on the results of the Environment Review, MV-22 pamphlet, and the content of the third response to the questions to Okinawa Prefecture, relevant local governments and other organizations.|
|June 14|A prompt report on the accident involving a CV-22 in Florida was provided to relevant local governments and other organizations.|
|June 26–|Provided an explanation on the information provided from the U.S. side regarding the accidents in Morocco and Florida to relevant local governments and other organizations.|
|June 29–|Provided an explanation on the content of the Host Nation Notification and the press release to relevant local governments and other organizations.|
|July 20|Provided information from the U.S. side stating that the MV-22 would be offloaded on MCAS Iwakuni on July 23 to relevant local governments and other organizations.|
|August 1–September 18|Received four questionnaires regarding the Environment Review etc., from the Okinawa Governor and others.|
|August 28–|Provided an explanation on the “Analysis and Evaluation Report on the MV-22 Accident in Morocco” to relevant local governments and other organizations.|
|September 11–|Provided an explanation on the “Analysis and Evaluation Report on the CV-22 Accident in Florida” to relevant local governments and other organizations.|
|September 14–|Q&A session on Osprey deployment with members of the Iwakuni City Council full member committee.|
|September 19–|Provided an explanation on the report “MV-22 Osprey deployment in Okinawa” to relevant local governments and other organizations.|
|September 21|Provided Yamaguchi Prefecture and Iwakuni City with the information that function check flights, etc. were commenced at MCAS Iwakuni.|
|September 27-28|Provided information on the contents of the responses to the questionnaires from Okinawa Prefecture and others received from August 1 to September 18 to Okinawa Prefecture, other relevant local governments and other organizations.|
|November 2|In the nationwide prefectural governors meeting hosted by the Government, the Minister of Defense explained the initial training plan with the MV- 22 Osprey, and the Prime Minister and the Minister of Defense asked for the governors’ cooperation in relocating the training to outside Okinawa.|
|December 10|The MOD received another letter of questions from the Governor of Okinawa in response to the answers to his initial questions which the MOD submitted to him in September.|
|December 12–14|The MOD provided explanations to Okinawa Prefecture and relevant local governments in Okinawa regarding the content of the second set of answers the MOD prepared, since some of these answers did not satisfactorily address the letter of questions from the Governor of Okinawa Prefecture on environmental review.|
|December 25|Received a letter requesting information on the flight operation of the MV-22 etc. from the Governor of Okinawa Prefecture.|
|January 28, 2013|The Okinawa Citizens’ Council, the Okinawa Prefectural Assembly, and other organizations sent a statement to the Prime Minister.|
|April 30|The MOD provided explanation to the relevant local governments and other organizations regarding the U.S. explanation on the deployment of the MV-22 squadron (unloaded at MCAS Iwakuni in summer 2013).|
|July 1|Announcement of plans to unload the MV-22 squadron to MCAS Iwakuni in the final week of July|
|September 25|Relocation to MCAS Futenma was completed.|
|May 12, 2015|The U.S. Department of Defense provided related municipalities and organizations with information related to the announcement of the deployment of the CV-22 Osprey at Yokota Air Base starting in the latter half of 2017.|



**Reference 43 Direction of the MOD Reform (Outline)**

(August 30, 2013 Ministry of Defense)

The security environment surrounding Japan has become increasingly
severe; there has been awareness of the lessons learned from the
operations of units through the Great East Japan Earthquake and other
incidents; and the political environment has been changing, such as
the move towards establishing the National Security Council (NSC),
and taking comprehensive, exceptional measures relating to the Three
Principles on Arms Exports.
The MOD reform will undertake full-fledged reform based on
these changes in the situation, taking into adequate account the matters
highlighted in previous considerations. The direction of the reform is
as follows:
(1) Remove the barriers between civilian officials and uniformed
personnel

In order to foster a sense of unity among civilian officials and
uniformed personnel, permanent posts for uniformed personnel
will be established in the Internal Bureau while permanent posts for
civilian officials will be established in each of the Staff offices and
major commands.
(2) From partial to total optimization (defense capabilities build-up)
Vertical divisions between the Ground, Maritime and Air SelfDefense Forces will be eliminated, and a procedure will be
established for defense capabilities build-up based on joint


operations. In addition, further efficiency and optimization in
equipment acquisition will be attempted, based on consistent
management across the life-cycle of the equipment, contributing to
the total optimization of defense capabilities.
(3) Make accurate decisions more swiftly (joint operations)
In order to ensure the accuracy of decision-making relating to
the operations of the SDF and make the decision-making process
swifter, a review of the organization will be conducted so that duties
concerning actual operations will be unified into the Joint Staff.
(4) Further enhancement of policy-planning and public relations
capability

The policy-planning capability will be strengthened to cope with
the drastic increase in international affairs-related work and the
founding of the NSC. Together with this, the public relations
capability will be enhanced.

In order to ensure that reforms are truly effective, it is vital to
change the mentality of both the civilian officials and the uniformed
personnel. Furthermore, it is necessary to advance reforms smoothly,
to avoid disruption and stagnation in response to contingencies.
Accordingly, it is important to establish a series of reforms through
steady and phased implementation while the Internal Bureau and
Staff offices concurrently support the Minister of Defense. Reform
is, ultimately, something that is implemented without end. It is
natural that it should be constantly examined, while efforts are made
for further reform and improvement.


-----

**Reference 44 History of Efforts for BMD Development in Japan**

|1995|Commenced a comprehensive study on the posture of the air defense system of Japan and a Japan-U.S. joint study on ballistic missile defense|
|---|---|
|1998|North Korea launched a ballistic missile over Japanese territory|
||The Security Council and the Cabinet meeting approved the commencement of the Japan-U.S. joint cooperative technical research on ballistic missile defense (BMD) for parts of the sea-based upper-tier system|
|1999|Started the Japan-U.S. joint cooperative technical research on four major components for advanced interceptor missiles|
|2002|Decision by the United States on the initial deployment of BMD|
|2003|The Security Council and the Cabinet meeting approved the introduction of BMD system and other measures, and the deployment of BMD in Japan started|
|2005|Amendment of the Self-Defense Forces Act (ballistic missile destruction measures) The Security Council and the Cabinet meeting approved the Japan-U.S. cooperative development of advanced interceptors for BMD|
|2006|North Korea launched seven ballistic missiles toward the Sea of Japan|
|2007|The deployment of Patriot PAC-3 units started SM-3 launch tests by Aegis destroyers started|
|2009|North Korea launched one ballistic missile toward the Pacific Ocean in April and seven toward the Sea of Japan in July. Order for ballistic missile destruction measures was issued for the first time (March).|
|2012|North Korea launched missiles claimed as “Satellites” in April and December April: The missile was in flight for over a minute before disintegrating and landing in the Yellow Sea December: Passed through Okinawa airspace toward the Pacific Order for ballistic missile destruction measures was issued.|
|2014|North Korea launched several ballistic missiles in March, June, and July March 3: Two missiles were launched and landed in the Sea of Japan March 26: Two missiles were launched and flew over 600 km before landing in the Sea of Japan June 29: Several missiles were launched and flew approx. 500 km at most before landing in the Sea of Japan July 9: Several missiles were launched and flew approx. 500 km at most before landing in the Sea of Japan July 13: Two missiles were launched and flew about 500 km before landing in the Sea of Japan July 26: One missile was launched and flew approx. 500 km before landing in the Sea of Japan|
|2015|March 2: Two missiles were launched and flew approx. 500 km before landing in the Sea of Japan|
|2016|North Korea launched a missile claimed as a “Satellite” February 3: Order for ballistic missile destruction measures was issued. February 7: The flying object separated into five pieces. The first piece flew about 500 km before landing in the Yellow Sea about 150 km west of the Korean Peninsula. The second and third pieces flew 800 km before landing in the East China Sea about 250 km west of the Korean Peninsula. The fourth piece flew 2,500 km before landing in the Pacific Ocean about 2,000 km south of Japan. The remaining object appears to have continued flight.|



**Reference 45 Flow of Responce to Ballistic Missiles**

|SDF takes measures on the order of the Minister of Defense|Col2|SDF takes measures on the order|
|---|---|---|
|||of the Minister of Defense|


Not recognized as armed attack

When the possibility that ballistic Although the ballistic missiles are not expected to
missiles may fly toward Japan is fly over Japan, a rapid change in circumstances
acknowledged may create an emergency situation which makes

it difficult to obtain an approval from the Prime
Minister in time

Minister of Defense orders destruction Minister of Defense orders destruction measures
measures upon approval of in advance as provided in the emergency response
the Prime Minister procedure (approved by the Cabinet in 2007)


Article 76 of the SDF Act (Paragraph 1) Article 82-3 of the SDF Act (Paragraph 3)
(Issuance of Defense Operations Orders) (Destruction measures against ballistic missiles)


If armed attack is recognized
(Declared intent to attack,
imminent missile launch)

An armed attack situation is
recognized and a defense operation
order is issued

Take measures in the framework
of defense operation

Article 76 of the SDF Act
(Issuance of Defense Operations Orders)


Concept of ensuring civilian control of the military

❍ Response against ballistic missiles requires the government to assess the possibility of missiles flying toward Japan by comprehensively analyzing and

evaluating the specific situation and international circumstances. In addition to the SDF destroying the missile, interagency actions are required, for
example, measures for civil protection such as alert and evacuation, diplomatic activities, information gathering by related agencies, and enhancement of
readiness for emergencies.
❍ In view of the importance of the matter and the necessity of action by the Japanese government as a whole, the Cabinet and Minister of Defense can

sufficiently fulfill their responsibilities upon the Prime Minister’s approval (Cabinet decision) and orders by the Minister of Defense. Furthermore, the
supervision of the Diet is also defined with a provision in the law stipulating reporting to the Diet.


-----

**Reference 46 Record of Disaster Relief Dispatches (Past Five Years)**

|FY|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|Great East Japan Earthquake (2010 – 2011)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Number of Dispatches|586|520|555|521|541|—|
|Personnel|43,494|12,410|89,049|66,267|30,035|10,664,870|
|Vehicles|12,177|2,068|7,949|9,621|5,170|—|
|Aircraft|968|684|1,255|1,232|888|50,179|
|Vessels|2|1|51|0|2|4,818|



-  FY2011 excludes dispatches for disaster relief operations associated with the Great East Japan Earthquake.


**Reference 47 Implementation and participation record of major drills related to disaster dispatch (FY2015)**

(1) Implementation of integrated disaster prevention exercises by (8) Participation in training for medical responses in case of largethe Self-Defense Forces (training for responding to Tokyo Inland scale earthquakes
Earthquake) (9) Participation in training in collaboration with the Shizuoka
(2) Implementation of operational training by the Ministry of Defense Prefecture comprehensive disaster reduction drills
Disaster Countermeasures Headquarters (10) Participation in training in collaboration with the Nine Cities and
(3) Participation in “Disaster Prevention Day” operational training by Prefectures joint disaster prevention training
the Government Headquarters (11) Participation in training in collaboration with the Tokai Region
(4) Participation in government’s role-playing simulation exercise wide-area collaboration disaster prevention training
(5) Participation in Comprehensive Nuclear Emergency Response Exercise (12) Participation in other general disaster prevention training
(6) Participation in integrated training in preparation for large-scale tsunamis implemented by local government, etc.
(7) Participation in nuclear disaster prevention training

**Reference 48 Record of Major Multinational Security Dialogues (Asia-Pacific Region, Last Five Years)**


||Col2|Col3|(Apr. 1, 2011 – Jun. 30, 2016)|
|---|---|---|---|
||Dialogue||Date|
|Participation in Security Dialogues in the Asia- Paci i fc Region|Intergovernmental|❍ ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM Plus) • Ministerial Meeting • Senior Officials’ Meeting (ADSOM Plus) • Senior Officials’ Meeting Working Group (ADSOM Plus WG) • Experts’ Working Group (EWG) • Maritime Security EWG • Military Medicine EWG • Counter-Terrorism EWG • Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief EWG • Peacekeeping Operations EWG • Humanitarian Mine Action EWG ❍ ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) • Meeting among defense authorities|(Aug. 2013, Nov. 2015) (Apr. 2011, Apr. 2012, Apr. 2013, Apr. 2014, Feb. 2015, Apr. 2016) (Feb. 2012, Feb. 2013, Mar. 2013, Feb. 2014, Jan. 2015, Feb. 2016) (Jul. 2011, Feb. 2012, Sep.2012, Nov. 2012, May 2013, Sep. 2013, Feb. 2014, Jun. 2014, Oct. 2014, Feb. 2015, Sep. 2015, Oct. 2015, Mar. 2016) (Jul. 2011, Jul. 2012, Oct.2013, Jun. 2014, Oct. 2014, May 2015, Sep. 2015) (Sep. 2011, Apr. 2012, Mar. 2013, Oct. 2014, Oct. 2015) (Nov. 2011, Aug. 2012, Jan. 2014, Jul. 2014, Dec. 2014, Aug. 2015, Dec. 2015, May 2016) (Nov. 2011, Jun. 2012, Nov. 2012, Apr. 2013, Feb. 2014, Sep. 2014, Mar. 2015, Sep. 2015) (Jun. 2014, Dec. 2014, Oct.2015) (Apr. 2011, Dec. 2011, May 2012, Nov. 2012, Apr. 2013, May 2013, Dec. 2013, Apr. 2014, Jun. 2014, Dec. 2014, May 2015, Jun. 2015, Apr. 2016, May 2016)|
||Hosted by the private sector|• IISS Asia Security Summit (Shangri-La Dialogue)|(Jun. 2011, Jun. 2012, Jun. 2013, Jun. 2014, May 2015, Jun. 2016)|
|Security Dialogue hosted by the Ministry of Defense|❍ Japan-ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Informal Meeting ❍ Japan-ASEAN Defense Vice-Ministerial Forum ❍ Tokyo Seminar on Common Security Challenges ❍ Forum for Defense Authorities in the Asia-Pacific Region (Tokyo Defense Forum) ❍ International Seminar for Military Science ❍ International Conference of Cadets||(Nov. 2014) (Sep. 2011, Mar. 2013, Feb. 2014, Oct. 2014, Sep. 2015) (Sep. 2011, Mar. 2013) (Mar. 2012, Oct. 2012, Oct. 2013, Mar. 2015, Mar. 2016) (Jul. 2011. Jul. 2012, Jul. 2013, Jul. 2014, Jun. 2015) (Feb. 2012, Feb. 2013, Mar. 2014, Mar. 2015)|


-----

**Reference 49 Exchange Student Acceptance Record (Number of Newly Accepted Students in FY2015)**

|CCoouunnttrryy IInnssttiittuuttiioonn|Thailand|Philippines|Indonesia|Singapore|Malaysia|Vietnam|Cambodia|Timor- Leste|Laos|Myanmar|India|Pakistan|Republic of Korea|Mongolia|Australia|United States|United Kingdom|Germany|France|Sub total|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|National Institute for Defense Studies||||||1|||||1||2||1|2||1||8|
|National Defense Academy|5|2|1|1||9|2|2|2|2|||4|2|1|9|||8|50|
|Ground Self- Defense Force (Staff College, etc.)|1||||||||||1|4|4|1|1|4|1|||17|
|Maritime Self- Defense Force (Staff College, etc.)|1|1||||||1|||||1|||||||4|
|Air Self-Defense Force (Staff College, etc.)|3||||||||||1||2|||||||6|
|Joint Staff College|||||1||||||||||2|||||3|
|Total|10|3|1|1|1|10|2|3|2|2|3|4|13|3|5|15|1|1|8|88|



**Reference 50 Multilateral Security Dialogues Hosted by the Ministry of Defense**


(Number of students)

United
Kingdom [Germany] France Sub total

1 8

8 50

1 17

4

6

3

1 1 8 88

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|(Apr. 1, 2011 – Jun. 30, 2016)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Security Dialogue|||Outline|Recent Situations|
|Hosted by Ministry of Defense|Internal Bureau and others|Japan-ASEAN Defense Vice-Ministerial Forum|Hosted by the Ministry of Defense since 2009. Vice-ministerial level off icials from Defense authorities of ASEAN countries are invited to Japan to hold candid dialogues on regional security issues. The objective is to strengthen multilateral and bilateral relations by building close interpersonal relationships.|The 7th forum was held in Sapporo in September 2015, with the participation of vice-ministerial-level off icials from the defense authorities of ASEAN countries. Candid and constructive opinions were exchanged among participants regarding the topics of “Wider promotion of common rules and laws at sea and in the air in the region,” “Maritime and aerospace security,” and “Improving disaster response capability in the region.”|
|||Tokyo seminar on common security challenges|Hosted by the Ministry of Defense since 2009. It is a seminar open to the general public where experts and defense authorities from Japan and overseas are invited to discuss themes such as common security challenges and policies for promoting regional cooperation thereby making a venue for open discussion toward the promotion of regional cooperation.|With the participation of intellectuals from inside and outside Japan and defense authorities, discussions were held on the topic entitled “Security in the Asia-Pacif ci Region: The Future Role of Japan and ASEAN.” The event contributed to efforts to improve the security environment and promoted regional dialogue and cooperation in March 2013.|
|||Forum for Defense Authorities in the Asia-Pacif ic Region (Tokyo Defense Forum)|Hosted by the Ministry of Defense, this forum has been held annually since 1996 with Director-General-level off icials in charge of defense policy and defense exchanges, all of who are from the Asia-Pacif ic region, participating. The forum is designed to provide defense off icials with opportunities to exchange views on ways to promote conf idence building focusing on the defense f ield.|With the participation of 22 countries in the Asia-Pacif ic region (including Japan), the ASEAN secretariat, the EU, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), as well as the United Nations Off ice for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the 20th Forum was held in March 2016. Opinions were exchanged on “Enhance Capabilities in Non-Traditional Security Areas in the Region: Efforts and Challenges” and “Defense Policies of Participating Countries and Regional Architecture to the Region and Participating Countries.”|
||GSDF|Multinational Cooperation program in the Asia Pacif ic|Hosted by the GSDF, these talks have been held annually since 2014, inviting off icers in charge of actual work of the militaries from major countries in the Asia-Pacif ci region to provide them with opportunities to exchange multinational views on concrete cooperation and initiatives toward issues each country in the region has in common.|In August 2015, with the participation of 21 countries from the Asia- Pacif ic region and other regions, group discussions took place on the theme of “Civil-military coordination for humanitarian assistance and disaster relief (HA/DR).” In addition, training for areas affected by the Great East Japan Earthquake, joint disaster prevention training by nine prefectures and cities, and other activities were held.|
|||Multilateral Logistics Staff Talks (MLST)|Hosted by the GSDF, these talks have been held annually since 1997, inviting off icers in charge of logistics support from major countries in the Asia-Pacif ic region and Europe to provide them with opportunities to exchange views on logistic system.|The 18th MLST meeting was held in November 2014. The participants were working-level off ciers in charge of logistics sent from armies in 14 countries in the Asia-Pacif ci region and the EU. Keynote speech and opinion exchanges were held on topics regarding logistic cooperation on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief in the Asia-Pacif ci region.|
|||Army Command and General Staff College seminar|Hosted by the GSDF, this seminar has been held annually since 2001 with students of army colleges from the Asia-Pacif ic region participating. The seminar is designed to provide them with opportunities to exchange views on training of military units.|With the participation of students from army colleges in 16 countries in Asia-Pacif ic region, the 15th Army Command and General Staff College Seminar was held on August 2015. Opinions were exchanged on the theme of the leadership teamwork in the multinational peace cooperation activities in the multilateral environment.|
||MSDF|Asia Pacif ic Naval College Seminar|Hosted by the MSDF, this seminar has been held annually since 1998 with staffs of naval colleges from the Asia-Pacif ic region as participants. The seminar is designed to provide them with opportunities to exchange views on the roles of naval forces with a view to encouraging school education/research and contributing to the promotion of defense exchange between participating countries and mutual understanding.|The 18th seminar was held in February 2015 with participants, which included Navy military personnel from 14 countries, the Ocean Policy Research Institute, and the Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies (RUSI). Presentations by the participants and active opinion exchanges were conducted on the theme of “Pursuing ‘Open and Stable Seas.’” In addition, unit and cultural training were also held to deepen the culture and history, etc., of the MSDF and Japan.|
||ASDF|International Air Force Education Seminar (Japan Air Self-Defense Force Air Staff College Seminar)|Hosted by the ASDF, this seminar has been held annually since 1996, with participation by off ciials related to air staff colleges mainly from the Asia-Pacif ci region. The seminar is designed to provide them with opportunities to exchange views on off cier’s education.|The 20th International Air Force Education Seminar was held in November 2015, inviting four countries and NATO. Opinions were exchanged on the theme of “Lessons Learned Processes.”|
|||International Air Command and Staff Seminar|Hosted by the ASDF, this seminar has been held annually since 2001 with students of air staff colleges from the Asia-Pacif ci region participating. This program is designed to provide them with opportunities to exchange views on security and roles of nations.|With the participation of students from air staff colleges in 17 countries, the 15th seminar was held in October 2015. Opinions were exchanged on the theme of “Your Nation’s Air Force; Overview of National Defense Policy, Current State of Affairs, Challenges, and Future Direction” and “The Direction of Air Forces in Multilateral Cooperation.”|


-----

|Security Dialogue|Col2|Col3|Outline|Recent Situations|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Hosted by Ministry of Defense|National Defense Academy|International Seminar on Defense Science|Hosted by the National Defense Academy since 1996, this seminar provides opportunities to discuss international affairs and security by inviting instructors of military academies in the Asia-Pacific regions.|The 20th International Seminar on Defense Science was held in July 2015, inviting 16 countries. Opinions were exchanged on the theme of “The Role of the Military Suited to Changes in the Strategic Environment and Challenges.”|
|||International Cadets’ Conference|Hosted by the National Defense Academy, this conference has been held annually since 1998 with the participation of cadets from the Asia-Pacific region. The conference is designed to provide them with opportunities to exchange views on militaries in the 21st century.|In March 2016, 15 countries were invited to the 19th conference, and opinions were exchanged on the theme of “Near future: When we are commanders.”|
||National Institute for Defense Studies|International Symposium on Security Affairs|Hosted by the National Institute for Defense Studies, this symposium has been held annually since 1999 with researchers and experts participating. The symposium is designed to provide opportunities to hold debates and offer reports on security in the public for the purpose of promoting public understanding of current security issues.|In November 2015, notable researchers and practitioners from the United States, France and Japan were invited to this symposium to exchange opinions on the theme of “Outer Space Security: Trends and Challenges.”|
|||International Security Colloquium|Hosted by the National Institute for Defense Studies, this seminar has been held annually since 1999 with offciials at home and abroad knowledgeable about defense being invited. The seminar is designed to provide them with opportunities for advanced and professional reports and discussions on security issues.|In December 2015, researchers and practitioners from the United States and France were invited to this colloquium, and opinions were exchanged among the invited foreign experts together with Japanese experts on the theme of “Outer Space Security: Trends and Challenges.”|
|||International Forum on War History|Hosted by the National Institute for Defense Studies, this forum has been held annually since 2002 with participation by military historians. The forum is designed to deepen the mutual understanding of its participants by making comparative studies of military history.|In September 2015, researchers from the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Singapore and Japan were invited to this forum to exchange opinions on the theme of “Termination of Wars in Historical Perspective.”|
|||Asia-Pacific Security Workshop|Hosted by the National Institute for Defense Studies, this workshop-style group study session has been held annually since 2010 to discuss emerging security issues that the Asia- Pacific region faces in common.|In January 2016, researchers were invited from Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam, Cambodia, Myanmar, Australia, and Mongolia, to exchange opinions on the theme of “Security outlook of the Asia Pacifci countries and its implications for the defense sector.”|


**Reference 51 Other Multilateral Security Dialogues**

|Other Multilateral Security Dialogue|Col2|Col3|Overview|
|---|---|---|---|
|Hosted by the Government|Internal Bureau and others|Asia-Pacific Military Operations Research Symposium (ARMORS)|ARMORS is a forum held by Asia-Pacific countries on a rotational basis to exchange views on defense operations and research technology. Japan has participated on the forum since the second meeting in 1993.|
||Putrajaya Forum||This event, hosted by the Malaysian Institute of Defence and Security and participated in by national defense experts from ADMM Plus countries, provides a place for exchanging opinions regarding regional security. Japan has been a participant since its first event in 2010.|
||Jakarta International Defense Dialogue (JIDD)||This event, hosted by the Ministry of Defence of Indonesia (organized by the Indonesian Defence University) and participated in by the defense ministers and chiefs of the general staff from ADMM Plus countries, provides a place for exchanging opinions regarding regional security. Japan has been a participant since its first event in 2011.|
||Seoul Defense Dialogue (SDD)||This event, hosted by the Ministry of National Defense of the ROK and participated in by the defense vice ministers of Asia- Pacific and Western countries, is a forum for exchanging opinions regarding regional security issues, including the issues of the Korean Peninsula. Japan has been a participant since the first meeting in 2012.|
||Joint Staff|Asia-Pacific Chief of Defense Conference (CHOD)|CHOD is an annual conference hosted either by the United States or jointly with other participating countries on a rotational basis. Senior defense officials and others of Asia-Pacific countries meet to exchange views on security issues. Japan has participated in the conference since the first meeting in 1998.|
|||Pacific Area Senior Officer Logistics Seminar (PASOLS)|PASOLS is a seminar hosted by an Asia-Pacific country on a rotational basis mainly to exchange information on logistic-support activities. Japan’s participation in the seminar as an official member started in 1995 when the 24th session was held. The 36th Seminar will be held in Japan with participation of nearly 30 countries.|
||GSDF|Pacific Armies Chiefs Conference (PACC)|PACC is a conference hosted jointly by the United States and a member country on a rotational basis every other year when PAMS is held. Army chiefs of Asia-Pacific countries and others meet to exchange views. Japan has participated in the conference since the first meeting in 1999. The conference was held in Japan for the first time in 2009.|
|||Pacific Armies Management Seminars (PAMS)|PAMS is a forum held jointly by the U.S. and the participating countries in rotation. It provides opportunities for exchanging information about efficient and economical management techniques so that armies in the Asia-Pacific region can develop their ground troops. The GSDF has been participating in PAMS since the 17th meeting in 1993. The 33rd seminar was held in Japan in 2009 at the same time as PACC.|
|||Land Forces Pacific (LFP)|LANPAC is a symposium hosted by AUSA, the first event of which was held in April 2013. The GSDF Chief of Staff was officially invited to the second symposium held in 2013 as a guest speaker and he gave a speech on the theme of the “Current situation and the future of Japan-U.S. Cooperation on HA/DR,” which gained support from the U.S. Army Pacific Commander and other participants from different countries.|
|||Chief of Army’s Exercise (CAEX)|CAEX is an exercise hosted by the Australian Army every other year. Senior officers of the Australian Army as well as the heads of land forces in the Asia-Pacific region and experts attend and exchange a wide range of views on the issues facing the land forces in the region. The GSDF participated in CAEX for the first time in 2012. In September 2014, the GSDF Chief of Staff attended for the first time and delivered an address.|
|||PACOM Amphibious Leaders Symposium (PALS)|The first PALS was hosted by U.S. Marine Forces, Pacific and held in May 2015.|
|||Annual Meeting of the Association of U.S. Army (AUSA)|Hosted by AUSA, the annual meeting provides opportunities for exchanging opinions among the General-class officers from the U.S. Army, and since 2014 the Chief of the Staff of the GSDF participated in the meeting twice to deliver speeches.|


-----

|Other Multilateral Security Dialogue|Col2|Col3|Overview|
|---|---|---|---|
|Hosted by the Government|MSDF|International Sea Power Symposium (ISS)|ISS is a symposium hosted by the United States every other year. Navy chiefs of member countries and others meet to exchange views on common issues for their navies. Japan has participated in the symposium since the first meeting in 1969.|
|||Western Pacific Naval Symposium (WPNS)|WPNS is a symposium hosted by a member country on a rotational basis every other year when ISS in not held. Senior navy officials and others of Western Pacific countries meet to exchange views. Japan has participated in the symposium since the second meeting in 1990.|
|||International MCM Seminar|This seminar is hosted by a WPNS member country on a rotation basis to exchange views on minesweeping in a year when minesweeping exercises are not conducted in the Western Pacific. Japan has participated in the seminar since the first meeting in 2000. Japan’s MSDF hosted this seminar in Yokosuka in October 2007.|
|||Asia Pacific Submarine Conference|Hosted either by the United States or jointly with other participating countries in the Asia-Pacific region on a rotational basis to exchange views on issues centering around submarine rescue. Japan has participated on the conference since the first meeting in 2001. The MSDF hosted the conference in October 2006.|
|||Indian Ocean Naval Symposium|This symposium is held every two years hosted by a different participating country on a rotational basis. It is a platform for the Navy Chief of Staff from the Indian Ocean coastal countries to exchange their opinions concerning the maritime security of the Indian Ocean. Japan has participated since the third event in 2012.|
||ASDF|Pacific Air Chiefs Conference (PACC)|PACC is a conference hosted jointly by the United States every other year with senior air force officials and others of member countries exchanging views on common issues. Japan has participated in the conference since the first meeting in 1989.|
|||PACRIM Airpower Symposium|This symposium is held every year and hosted by the U.S. and other participating countries on a rotational basis (it was held twice in 1996 and 1997). It is a platform for the Chiefs of Air Operations in the Pacific Rim to exchange their opinions. Japan has participated in this symposium since the first event held in 1995.|
|||Air Power Conference (APC)|APC is a conference hosted by Australia every other year to exchange international views on air power. Japan has participated in this conference six times since 2000.|
|||International Conference on Air & Space Power (ICAP)|These international conferences on air and space are hosted by Turkish Air War College. ICAP, on the theme of the future of the air forces, and ISAW, on the theme of the history of the air forces, are respectively held every other year. Japan has participated since their first conferences in 2013.|
|||International Symposium on the history of Air Warfare (ISAW)||
||Department of Current and Crisis Intelligence|Asia-Pacific Intelligence Chiefs Conference (APICC)|Hosted in turn by the United States Pacific Command and participating countries, the Conference serves as a place for the exchange of opinions among intelligence chiefs and other officials from the defense ministries of countries in the Asia Pacific region and other areas. Alongside exchanges of opinions on issues pertaining to regional security, the Conference is also aimed at contributing to the nurturing of relationships of trust between the respective countries, as well as at the sharing of information. It was hosted for the first time in February 2011 by the Department of Current and Crisis Intelligence, and was attended by 28 countries.|
||National Institute for Defense Studies|ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) Heads of Defence Universities, Colleges and Institutions Meeting|Defense universities and other educational institutions from the ARF member countries take turns and hold a meeting once a year. The host plays the central role in making a decision on the themes with respect to global security issues in the Asia-Pacific region and the role of defense educational and research institutions, and the meeting takes place in the form of presentations and question-and-answer sessions based on certain themes. From Japan, the National Institute for Defense Studies has been attending all of the meetings since the first meeting in 1997, and hosted the fifth meeting in Tokyo in 2001.|
|||NATO Defense College Conference of Commandants (CoC)|CoC is an annual international conference hosted by the NATO Defense College, defense educational institutions from NATO member countries and NATO partner countries taking turns. During the meeting, the heads of participating educational institutions exchange opinions from the perspective of improving advanced defense education, while at the same time the meeting focuses on the promotion of educational exchange among the heads of the educational institutions, NATO member countries, and the dialogue partners in the Central and Eastern Europe as well as the Mediterranean region. From Japan, the National Institute for Defense Studies has been attending most of the conferences since FY2009 (no invitation in FY2013).|
|Hosted by the Private Sector|IISS Asia Security Conference (Shangri-La Dialogue)||Hosted by the International Institute for Strategic Studies in the United Kingdom, this conference has been held since 2002 with defense ministers and others of the Asia-Pacific region and other areas participating to exchange views on issues centering around regional security. Japan has participated in the conference since the first meeting in 2002.|
||Regional Security Summit (Manama Dialogue)||Hosted by the International Institute for Strategic Studies in the United Kingdom, this conference has been held since 2004. Foreign and defense ministers, national security advisors and chiefs of intelligence from the Gulf countries participated to exchange views on issues centering around regional security. Japan participated at the senior official’s level for the first time in the 6th conference in 2009, sending the Senior Vice-Minister of Defense. The Parliamentary Vice-Minister of the Defense participated in the 7th Conference in 2010. The Summit did not take place in 2011.|
||Munich Security Conference||Hosted by the International Institute for Strategic Studies in the United Kingdom, this conference has been held since 2004. Foreign and defense ministers, national security advisors and chiefs of intelligence from the Gulf countries participated to exchange views on issues centering around regional security. Japan participated at the senior official’s level for the first time in the 6th conference in 2009, sending the Senior Vice-Minister of Defense. The Parliamentary Vice-Minister of the Defense participated in the 7th Conference in 2010.|
||Halifax International Security Forum||Hosted by Halifax International Security Forum with the support of the Canadian Department of National Defense, the Forum is attended by many government officials from the United States and Europe (including NATO Ministers and Defense Ministers from each country), who exchange opinions on security at the Forum. Japan has participated since the first Conference in 2009.|
||The Northeast Asia Cooperation Dialogue (NEACD)||Organized mainly by the Institute of Global Conflict and Cooperation (IGCC) of the University of California in San Diego, this dialogue is designed for participants — private-sector researchers and government officials from member countries (China, DPRK, Japan, ROK, Russia and the United States) — to freely exchange their views on security situations and confidence-building measures in the region. Japan has participated in the dialogue since the first meeting in 1993.|


-----

**Reference 52 Status of Capacity Building Assistance**


|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|(June 2015 – June 2016)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Country|Period|Description|Beneficiary|Dispatched personnel|
|Mongolia|October 2012|Seminar on military medicine|Medical officers at the central hospital of the Mongolian Armed Forces, etc.|2 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||June 2013|Human resource development in civil engineering (Field research)|Mongolian Armed Forces Engineer Unit|5 GSDF personnel, 3 Internal Bureau administrative officials|
||July - August 2013|||6 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||June - July 2014|Human resource development in civil engineering|Mongolian Armed Forces Engineering Unit|9 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official, 3 private-sector organization members|
||July 2014|Seminar on military medicine|Mongolian Armed Forces Engineer Unit|3 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||July - September 2015|Human resource development in civil engineering|Mongolian Armed Forces, Mongolian National Defense University instructor|15 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
|Vietnam|October 2012|Seminar on underwater medicine|Medical officers in the Vietnamese Navy, etc.|3 MSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||May 2013|||4 MSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||September 2013|Seminar on aviation safety|Vietnam Air Defence and Air Force|5 ASDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau administrative officials|
||March 2014|Seminar on underwater medicine|Medical officers in the Vietnamese Navy, etc.|3 MSDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau administrative officials|
||November 2014|Seminar on aviation safety|Vietnam Air Defence and Air Force|4 ASDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||February 2015|Seminar on international aviation laws||2 ASDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||March 2015|Seminar on underwater medicine|Medical officers in the Vietnamese Navy, etc.|4 MSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||November 2015|Seminar on flight safety and aviation medicine|Vietnam Air Defence and Air Force|5 ASDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||March 2016|Seminar on underwater medicine|Medical officers in the Vietnamese Navy, etc.|3 MSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
|Timor-Leste|December 2012 - March 2013|Human resource development in vehicle maintenance skills|Timor-Leste Defence Force Headquarters, etc.|2 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official, 4 private-sector organization members|
||October 2013 - March 2014|||8 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official, 6 private-sector organization members|
||September - November 2014|||8 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official, 3 private-sector organization members|
||July 2015|Seminar on vehicle maintenance skills|Logistics support unit, Timor-Leste Defence Force|5 GSDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau administrative officials|
||February 2016|||4 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||October - November 2015|Technical instruction of engineering activities (hosted by the Australian Defence Force)||8 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
|Cambodia|January - March 2013|Human resource development in civil engineering|National Centre for Peacekeeping Forces, Mines and ERW Clearance in Cambodia|4 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official, 6 private-sector organization members|
||December 2013 - March 2014|||4 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official, 6 private-sector organization members|
||October - November 2014||Royal Cambodian Armed Forces Peacekeeping Training School|3 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||November 2015||National Centre for Peacekeeping Forces, Mines and ERW Clearance in Cambodia|3 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
|Indonesia|February 2013|Seminar on oceanography|Indonesian Navy Hydro-Oceanographic Office|3 MSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||July 2013|||1 MSDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau administrative officials, 1 Maritime Safety official|
||February 2015|Seminar on international aviation laws|Indonesian Ministry of Defense|2 ASDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||March 2016|Seminar on oceanography|Indonesian Navy Hydro-Oceanographic Office|2 MSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official, 2 Maritime Safety officials|
|Myanmar|December 2014|Seminar on underwater medicine|Medical officers and divers etc., of the Myanmar Army and Navy|4 MSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||January 2015|Seminar on aviation meteorology|Myanmar Air Force|4 ASDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||March 2015|Seminar on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief|Myanmar Army|2 GSDF personnel|
||December 2015|Seminar on underwater medicine|Medical officers and divers etc. of the Myanmar Army and Navy|4 MSDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau administrative officials|
||March 2016|Seminar on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief|Myanmar Army personnel|3 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
|Papua New Guinea|July 2014|Seminar on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief|Papua New Guinea Defence Force|2 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
|Philippines|June 2015|Seminar on international aviation laws|Philippine Air Force|3 ASDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau administrative officials|
||June 2016|Seminar on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief|Philippine Army personnel|2 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
|Malaysia|June 2015|Seminar on international aviation laws|Royal Malaysian Air Force|3 ASDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau administrative officials|
|ASEAN member states|January 2016|Seminar on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief for ASEAN member states hosted by Japan and the United Kingdom|ASEAN governments, militaries, and civil organizations|2 Internal Bureau administrative officials|
|Laos|February 2016|Seminar on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief|Laos Ministry of National Defence and Lao People’s Army|1 GSDF personnel, 1 Internal Bureau administrative official|
||June 2016|Seminar on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief|Laos Ministry of National Defence and Lao People’s Army|3 GSDF personnel, 2 Internal Bureau administrative officials|


3 GSDF personnel,
Thailand April 2016 Seminar on international aviation laws Royal Thai Armed Forces personnel


-----

**Reference 53 Status of Invitation Program**

|Country|Period|Description|Beneficiary|Dispatched personnel|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Vietnam|March 3-4, 2014|Training in flight safety and other fields|Ministry of National Defence of Vietnam and Air Defence-Air Force of Vietnam|5 personnel|
||March 14-18, 2016|PKO capacity building training at United Nations|Officers from Peacekeeping Center of Ministry of National Defence of Vietnam and Vietnam People’s Army|4 personnel|
||April 4-15, 2016|PKO capacity building training by engineering unit dispatched to South Sudan|Officers from Peacekeeping Center of Ministry of National Defence of Vietnam and Vietnam People’s Army|2 personnel|
|Mongolia|March 10-13, 2014|Engineering training|General Staff, Mongolian Armed Forces|5 personnel|
||March 4-9, 2015|Military Medicine training at GSDF Sapporo Hospital|General Staff, Mongolian Armed Forces and Mongolian Armed Forces and Police Hospital|5 personnel|
||February 23-March 20, 2015|Engineering training at GSDF Engineer School|Mongolian Armed Forces|6 personnel|
||February 11-20, 2016|Basic training on asphalt pavement at GSDF Engineer School|Mongolian Armed Forces|1 personnel|
|Indonesia|February 3-7, 2014|Oceanography and Marine Charting training at related MSDF units, facilities of Japan Coast Guard’s Hydrographic and Oceanographic Department, and private company|Oceanography and Marine Charting Department, Indonesian Navy|5 personnel|
|Timor-Leste|June 10-13, 2014|Training on GSDF logistic support troops|Timor-Leste Defence Force|6 personnel|
|Cambodia|September 21-October 5, 2014|Engineering training at related GSDF units and facilities|Engineering Department Royal Cambodian Armed Forces|5 personnel|
|Philippines|February 17-20, 2015|Airlift training at related GSDF and ASDF units and facilities|Philippine Air Force|4 personnel|
|Papua New Guinea|June 23-August 7, 2015|Training on military band organization and military service operations; methods of conducting, playing musical instruments, marching and playing music; and music theory|Papua New Guinea Defence Force Band|2 personnel|
||March 9-16, 2016|Training on military band organization and military service operations; methods of conducting, playing musical instruments, marching and playing music; and music theory|Papua New Guinea Defence Force Band|3 personnel|
|Myanmar|August 3-7, 2015|Aviation weather training at related ASDF units and facilities|Myanmar Air Force|4 personnel|
||September 7-11, 2015|Underwater medical training at related MSDF units and facilities|Myanmar Navy|4 personnel|
||October 5-9, 2015|HA/DR training at related GSDF units and facilities|Myanmar Army|5 personnel|
|Thailand|May 26, 2016|Training on ASDF flight safety efforts|Royal Thai Air Force|5 personnel|



**Reference 54 Participation in Multilateral Training (Last Three Years)**


(March 2014–June 30, 2016)

Dispatched
personnel

5 personnel

4 personnel

2 personnel

5 personnel

5 personnel

6 personnel

1 personnel

5 personnel

6 personnel

5 personnel

4 personnel

2 personnel

3 personnel

4 personnel

4 personnel

5 personnel
5 personnel

||Col2|Col3|Col4|(Apr. 1, 2013 – Jun. 30, 2016)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Exercise||Period (Venue)|Participating countries|Participating SDF units, etc.|
|Cobra Gold||February 2014 (Thailand)|Japan, U.S., Thailand, Indonesia, ROK, Malaysia, Singapore, China, etc.|Joint Staff Office, Ground Staff Office, Air Support Command, Central Readiness Force, Internal Bureau, etc.|
|||February 2015 (Thailand)|Japan, U.S., Thailand, Indonesia, ROK, Malaysia, Singapore, China, India, etc.|Joint Staff Office, Ground Staff Office, Maritime Staff Office, Self-Defense Fleet, Air Support Command, Central Readiness Force, Internal Bureau, etc.|
|||February 2016 (Thailand)|Japan, U.S., Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia, ROK, Malaysia, China, India, etc.|Joint Staff Offcie, Ground Staff Offcie, Self- Defense Fleet, Air Support Command, Central Readiness Force, Internal Bureau, etc.|
|Pacific Partnership||June – July 2013 (Tonga, Papua New Guinea)|Japan, U.S., Australia, New Zealand, Canada, France, Malaysia, Singapore, etc.|1 vessel, 2 aircraft Approximately 40 personnel|
|||May – July 2014 (Vietnam, Cambodia, Philippines)|Japan, U.S., Australia, Malaysia, Chile, ROK|1 vessel, 1 aircraft (personnel transportation), Approximately 40 personnel|
|||May – July 2014 (Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Philippines)|Japan, U.S., Australia, Canada, ROK, Malaysia, Singapore, etc.|1 vessel Approximately 60 personnel|
|ARF-DiREx||May 2013 (Thailand)|Japan, Thailand, ROK, ARF countries|1 aircraft Approximately 50 participants from Joint Staff Office, Ground Staff Office, Internal Bureau, Central Readiness Force, Middle Army, and Air Support Command, SDF Hanshin Hospital|
|||May 2015 (Malaysia)|Japan, Vietnam, Malaysia, Thailand, Singapore, Philippines, Mongolia, Laos, China, India, Cambodia, U.S., etc.|Approximately 10 personnel from Joint Staff Office, Internal Bureau, Eastern Army, Air Training Command, SDF Yokosuka Hospital, SDF Ominato Hospital|
|Asean Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief Exercises||April – May 2014 (Thailand)|Thailand, Malaysia, Japan, Cambodia, Brunei, Singapore, Indonesia, Philippines, Myanmar, Laos, Vietnam, China, U.S., France, EU, Canada|7 personnel|
|ADMM Plus Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief/ Military Medicine Exercise Military Medicine Meeting||June 2013 (Brunei)|Japan, Brunei, Singapore, China, Vietnam, Australia, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, New Zealand, Philippines, ROK, Thailand, U.S., Cambodia, Russia, Laos|Joint Staff Office, Ground Staff Office, Maritime Staff Office, Air Staff Office, Central Readiness Force, Self-Defense Fleet, Northeastern Army|
||Military Medicine Meeting|October 2013 (Singapore)|Japan, Brunei, Singapore, China, Vietnam, Australia, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, New Zealand, Philippines, ROK, Thailand, U.S., Cambodia, Russia, Laos|Joint Staff Office, Ground Staff Office, Air Staff Office|


-----

|Exercise|Col2|Period (Venue)|Participating countries|Participating SDF units, etc.|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|ADDM Counter Terrorism Exercise||September 2013 (Indonesia)|Australia, Brunei, Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, New Zealand, Vietnam, Thailand, Singapore, Russia, U.S., ROK, Philippines, Myanmar, Japan|3 personnel from Joint Staff Office, Central Readiness Force, Internal Bureau|
|Global Peace Operations Initiative Capstone Exercise|Shanti Prayas-2|March – April 2013 (Nepal)|Japan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Malaysia, Mongolia, Philippines, Sri Lanka, ROK, Thailand, Vietnam, etc.|Approximately 40 personnel from Joint Staff Office, Joint Staff College, Central Readiness Force, Northern Army|
||Garuda Canti Dharma|August – September 2014 (Indonesia)|Japan, U.S., Indonesia, Australia, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Jordan, Malaysia, Mongolia, Nepal, Philippines, ROK, Vietnam, Pakistan, etc.|Approximately 40 personnel from Joint Staff Office, Joint Staff College, Central Readiness Force|
||Keris Aman|August 2015 (Malaysia)|Japan, U.S., Indonesia, Cambodia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, ROK, Nepal, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Philippines, Brunei, Vietnam, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Australia, etc.|5 personnel from Joint Staff Office, Joint Staff College, Central Readiness Force|
|Multilateral Training (Khaan Quest)||August 2013 (Mongolia)|Japan, U.S., Mongolia, ROK, Australia, Canada, Germany, U.K., France, India, Vietnam, Tajikistan, Nepal|Approximately 2 personnel|
|||June – July 2014 (Mongolia)|Japan, U.S., Mongolia, Canada, Germany, U.K., India, Indonesia, ROK, Nepal, Australia, Pakistan, Singapore, Thailand, France, Tajikistan|Approximately 6 personnel|
|||June – July 2015 (Mongolia)|Japan, U.S., Mongolia, Australia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Canada, Cambodia, China, Czech Republic, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Thailand, Turkey, U.K., Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, ROK, Tajikistan|Approximately 40 personnel|
|||May – June 2016 (Mongolia)|Japan, U.S., Mongolia, Australia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Cambodia, Canada, China, Ghana, Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nepal, Philippines, Poland, ROK, U.K.|Approximately 51 personnel including observers|
|Australian Army–Hosted Shooting Convention||May 2013 (Australia)|Japan, Australia, U.S., Brunei, China, Canada, France, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, U.K.|Approximately 40 personnel|
|||May 2014 (Australia)|Japan, Australia, U.S., Brunei, Canada, France, Indonesia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Timor- Leste, Tonga, U.K.|Approximately 30 personnel|
|||April 2015 (Australia)|Japan, Australia, U.S., Brunei, Canada, Indonesia, ROK, Malaysia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Singapore|Approximately 30 personnel|
|||April 2016 (Australia)|Japan, Australia, U.S., China, ROK, UAE, etc. (18 countries)|Approximately 30 personnel|
|Australian Navy-Hosted Multilateral Training (Triton Centenary 2013)||September 8 – November 8 2013 (Australia)|Japan, Brunei, Singapore, Australia, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Thailand, U.S., France, Spain, Tonga, Micronesia, Papua New Guinea, Pakistan|1 vessel|
|ADMM Plus Maritime Security Field Training Exercise (part of the Australian Navy-Hosted Multilateral Training described above)||September 29 – October 1 2013 (Australia)|Japan, Australia, U.S., New Zealand, China, Thailand, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Brunei, Philippines, Singapore|1 vessel|
|ADMM Plus Maritime Security Field Training Exercise (Counterterrorism Exercise)||May 2016 (Brunei, Singapore)|Japan, U.S., Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, Brunei, Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, ROK, Russia, Thailand, Vietnam|1 vessel|
|Western Pacific Submarine Rescue Exercise||September 20 – 28, 2013 (Yokosuka, Sagami Bay)|Japan, U.S., ROK, Australia, Singapore, etc.|3 vessels, etc.|
|KOMODO Multilateral Joint Naval Exercise organized by the Indonesian Navy||March 20 – April 9, 2014 (Indonesia)|Japan, U.S., Russia, China, Singapore, Malaysia, Vietnam, etc.|1 vessel|
|||April 12 – 16, 2016 (Indonesia)|Japan, Indonesia, U.S., etc.|2 vessels 1 aircraft|
|Japan-U.S.-Australia Trilateral Training||June 22 – 26, 2013 (Waters and airspace around Guam)||2 vessels 1 aircraft|
|||August 9-15, 2014 (Waters and airspace around Guam)||2 aircraft|
|||September 20-21, 2014 (Waters and airspace around Hawaii)||1 vessel|
|||December 2015 (Waters around Micronesia)||1 aircraft Approximately 20 personnel|
|||January – February 2016 (Waters around Singapore to India)||1 vessel|
|Japan-U.S.-Korea Trilateral Training||May 15, 2013 (Waters west of Kyushu)||2 vessels|
|||October 10 –11, 2013 (Waters west of Kyushu)||1 vessel|
|||December 11, 2013 (Waters around Arabian Peninsula)||2 vessels|
|||July 21 –22, 2014 (Waters west of Kyushu)||1 vessel|
|U.S. and India-Hosted Maritime Joint Exercise (Exercise Malabar 2015)||September 26 – November 10, 2015 (Waters and airspace east of India)|Japan, U.S., India|1 vessel|
|Multilateral Training (TGEX KOA KAI EAST)||September 20 – December 14, 2014 (Waters around San Diego)|Japan, U.S., Canada|1 vessel|
|Australian Navy-Hosted Multinational Maritime Exercise (Kakadu)||August-September 2014 (Waters around Australia)|Japan, Australia, etc.|1 vessel 2 aircraft|
|U.S.-Hosted International Mine Countermeasures Exercise||May 4 – 29, 2013 (Waters around Arabian Peninsula)|Japan, U.S., etc.|6 personnel|
|||October 27 – November 13, 2014 (Waters around Arabian Peninsula)|Japan, U.S., etc.|2 vessels|
|||February 26 – June 7, 2016 (Waters around Arabian Peninsula)|Japan, U.S., etc.|2 vessels|
|Western Pacific Mine Countermeasures Exercise||August 25 – 31, 2015 (Singapore and waters around Indonesia)|Japan, Singapore, Indonesia, etc.|3 vessels|


-----

|Exercise|Period (Venue)|Participating countries|Participating SDF units, etc.|
|---|---|---|---|
|Japan-U.S.-Australia Trilateral Training (Cope North Guam)|February 2014 (U.S. Guam Island and surrounding airspace)||20 aircraft Approximately 430 personnel|
||February 2015 (U.S. Guam Island and surrounding airspace)||20 aircraft Approximately 460 personnel|
||February 2016 (U.S. Guam Island and surrounding airspace)||20 aircraft Approximately 460 personnel|
|Field Training with U.S. and Australian Forces in Australia (Exercise Southern Jackaroo)|May 2013, May 2014, May 2015, May 2016 (Australia)|Japan, U.S., Australia|Approximately 50 personnel|
|Japan-U.S.-Australia Joint Training (Exercise Talisman Saber)|July 2015 (Australia)||Approximately 40 personnel|
|Japan-U.S.-Australia Joint Training (Michinoku Alert)|November 2014 (Tohoku)|Japan, U.S., Australia|Northeastern Army Headquarters Approximately 12,500 personnel, approximately 1,700 vehicles|
|Japan-U.S.-Australia Joint Training (Northern Rescue 2015)|August 2015 (Hokkaido)|Japan, U.S., Australia|Northern Army Headquarters Approximately 3,300 personnel, approximately 300 vehicles|
|RIMPAC (Rim of the Pacific Joint Exercise)|June-August 2014 (Waters and airspace around Hawaii, and waters around U.S. West Coast)|Japan, U.S., Australia, Canada, France, China, ROK, U.K., etc.|2 vessels, 3 aircraft Western Army, etc.|
|Japan-Australia-New Zealand Joint Training|August 30, 2014 (Surrounding airspace of Darwin)|Japan, Australia, New Zealand|2 aircraft|
|Multilateral training hosted by French Forces in New Caledonia (Exercise Croix du Sud)|August 25-September 5, 2014 (New Caledonia)|Japan, France, U.S., Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Tonga, U.K., Vanuatu|4 personnel|
|Multilateral training hosted by French Forces in New Caledonia (Exercise Équateur 2015)|September 28-October 7, 2015 (New Caledonia)|Japan, France, Singapore, Australia, Tonga, New Zealand, Vanuatu, Papua New Guinea, Fiji, U.S., Canada, Chile, U.K.|7 personnel|
|Japan-U.S.-France Joint Training|May 2015 (Waters west of Kyushu)|Japan, U.S., France|1 vessel, 2 aircraft|


**Reference 55 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with Australia (Past Three Years)**


|Col1|Col2|(Apr. 1, 2013 – Jun. 30, 2016)|
|---|---|---|
|High-level talks between heads of state and defense|Jun. 2013 Jul. 2013 Apr. 2014 Apr. 2014 May 2014 Jun. 2014 Jun. 2014 Jul. 2014 Oct. 2014 May 2015 Jun. 2015 Nov. 2015 Nov. 2015 Dec. 2015|Japan-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (12th Shangri-La Dialogue)) ✰ Agreement reached to advance Japan-Australia defense cooperation Japan-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Confirmed the regional situations and the progress of Japan-Australia defense cooperation, and exchanged views regarding the future Japan-Australia defense cooperation as well as Japan-U.S.-Australia trilateral cooperation Japan-Australia Summit Meeting (Tokyo) and attendance of Prime Minister of Australia at a special meeting of the National Security Council (Four Ministers’ Meeting) ✰ Agreement was reached on 1) Strengthening of defense cooperation in a real term, 2) Commencement of negotiation towards the agreement of a framework regarding defense equipment and technical cooperation Japan-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Perth) ✰ Exchanged opinions concerning Japan-Australia defense cooperation including the areas of equipment and technologies Japan-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (13th Shangri-La Dialogue)) ✰ Exchanged opinions concerning Japan-Australia defense cooperation 5th Japan-Australia “2+2” Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ 1) Agreement reached to strongly oppose the use or force of power to change the status quo unilaterally, 2) Confirmed a substantive agreement on the Agreement negotiation regarding the transfer of the defense equipment and technology Japan-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Agreement reached to promote the strengthening of Japan-Australia and Japan-U.S.-Australia defense cooperation such as an expansion of Japan-Australia and Japan-U.S.-Australia joint training Japan-Australia Summit Meeting (Canberra) ✰ Issued Joint Statement (signed defense equipment transfer agreement, approved proposals to enhance bilateral defense cooperation, and decided to commence negotiations to create an agreement for facilitating Japan-Australia joint activities and training, etc.) Japan-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Examined possibility of potential cooperation on F-35, examined possibility of submarine cooperation, technical exchanges (e.g., marine hydrodynamics), etc. Japan-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (14th Shangri-La Dialogue)) ✰ Exchanged opinions concerning Japan-Australia defense cooperation Japan-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Exchanged opinions concerning Japan-Australia defense cooperation Japan-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Malaysia (3rd ADMM Plus)) ✰ Confirmed the importance of joint exercises and further deepening defense equipment and technology cooperation 6th Japan-Australia “2+2” Meeting (Sydney) ✰ 1) Shared grave concern over large-scale land reclamation activities in the South China Sea, and agreed to comply with freedom of navigation and of overflight, 2) Agreed to further enhance joint exercises and promote cooperation in the fields of capacity building assistance, cyber, and outer space Japan-Australia Summit Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Issued Joint Statement (Next steps of the Special Strategic Partnership: Asia, Pacific and Beyond)|
||Visit to Australia by GSDF Chief of Staff (Sep 2014, Jun.2015), Visit to Australia by MSDF Chief of Staff (Nov 2014), Visit to Australia by ASDF Chief of Staff (Mar 2014, Feb 2015), Visit to Australia by Chief of Joint Staff (Aug 2014)||
||Visit to Japan by Chief of Australian Army(Jun 2013), Visit to Japan by Australian Chief of Navy (Mar 2015), Visit to Japan by Australian Chief of Air Force (Oct 2014), Visit to Japan by Chief of Australian Army(Apr.2016)||
|Regular discussions between defense ministry representatives|Japan-Australia Military-Military Consultations (MM) (Sep. 2015)||


-----

|Unit-level exchange, etc.|Implementation of Japan-Australia joint exercises (MSDF) (Jun. 2013, Sep. 2013, Aug. 2014, Oct. 2015, Apr.2016), Dispatching ASDF aerial refueling/ transport aircraft (KC-767) to Australia (Feb. 2015), Shooting competition organized by the Australian Army (May 2013, May 2014, Apr. 2015)|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||Sep. 2013 Aug. 2014 Aug. – Sep. 2014 Jan. – Feb. 2016|Participation of an Australian Navy fleet in the Western Pacific Submarine Rescue Training hosted by Japan Japan participated in the International Fleet Review to commemorate the centenary of the Royal Australian Navy’s fleet into Sydney, Australian Navy-hosted Multilateral Training (Triton Centenary 2013) and ADMM Plus Visit to Hamamatsu and Chitose Air Bases by Royal Australian Air Force aircraft (E-7A) Participation in the Royal Australian Navy hosted multinational joint maritime exercise “Kakadu 14” Participation in Japan-U.S.-Australia joint cruising exercise|
|Japan – U.S.– Australia trilateral cooperation|Jun. 2013 May 2014 May 2015 Feb. 2016|Japan-U.S.-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (12th Shangri-La Dialogue)) ✰ Japan-U.S.-Australia Joint Statement issued and promotion of dynamic and versatile trilateral defense cooperation confirmed Japan-U.S.-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (13th Shangri-La Dialogue)) ✰ Japan-U.S.-Australia Joint Statement issued Japan-U.S.-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (14th Shangri-La Dialogue)) ✰ Joint Statement issued and agreement reached to further deepen the trilateral defense cooperation Japan-U.S.-Australia Security and Defense Cooperation Forum (SDCF)|
||Japan-U.S.-Australia trilateral exercises (GSDF) (May 2013, May 2014, May 2015, Jul. 2015), Japan-U.S.-Australia trilateral exercises (MSDF) (Jun. 2013, Aug. 2014, Sep. 2014, Feb. 2016), Japan-U.S.-Australia trilateral exercises (ASDF) (Feb. 2014, Feb. 2015, Feb. 2016)||
||Jul. 2013 Mar. 2014 Jul. 2014 Feb. 2015 Jun. 2015|1st Japan-U.S.-Australia Senior-level Seminar (Hawaii) (GSDF Chief of Staff) Japan-U.S.-Australia High-level Trilateral Discussions (Canberra) (ASDF Chief of Staff, Commander, U.S. Pacific Air Forces, Australian Chief of Air Force) 2nd Japan-U.S.-Australia Senior-level Seminar (Hawaii) (GSDF Chief of Staff, MSDF Chief of Staff) Japan-U.S.-Australia High-level Trilateral Discussions (Melbourne) (ASDF Chief of Staff, Commander, U.S. Pacific Air Forces, Australian Chief of Air Force) 3rd Japan-U.S.-Australia Senior-level Seminar (Townsville) (GSDF Chief of Staff)|


**Reference 56 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with the ROK (Past Three Years)**


|Col1|Col2|(April 1, 2013–Jun. 30, 2016)|
|---|---|---|
|High-level talks between heads of state and defense|Nov. 2013 Mar. 2014 Oct. 2014 Nov. 2014 May 2015 Sep. 2015 Oct. 2015 Jan. 2016 Feb. 2016 Jun. 2016|Japan-ROK Defense Vice Ministerial Meeting (Seoul) Japan-ROK Defense Vice Ministerial Meeting (Jakarta) Japan-ROK Defense Vice Ministerial-Level Meeting (Seoul) Japan-ROK Defense Vice Ministerial-Level Meeting (Halifax) Japan-ROK Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (14th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Japan-ROK Defense Vice Ministerial Meeting (Seoul) Japan-ROK Defense Ministerial Meeting (Seoul) ✰ The first joint press release was issued. With regard to the outstanding security issues between the two countries, the two ministers shared the view that Japan-ROK and Japan-U.S.-ROK cooperation were important. Japan-ROK Defense Ministerial Teleconference Japan-ROK Defense Ministerial Teleconference Japan-ROK Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (15th Shangri-La Dialogue)) ✰ The two ministers agreed to strengthen the system for emergency communication between the MOD and the ROK Ministry of National Defense.|
||Oct. 2015 Mar. 2016 Apr.2016|Visit to the ROK by the ASDF Chief of Staff Visit to the ROK by the MSDF Chief of Staff Visit to Japan by the ROK Army Chief of Staff|
|Regular discussions between defense ministry representatives|Sep. 2014 Apr. 2015 Aug. 2015 Jan. 2016|5th Japan-ROK Working-level Defense Dialogue Working Group Meeting (Director-level talks) (Seoul) 10th Japan-ROK Security Dialogue (Seoul) 21st Japan-ROK Working-level Defense Dialogue (Seoul) Japan-ROK Working-level Defense Dialogue Working Group Meeting (Director-level talks) (Tokyo)|
|Unit-level exchange, etc.|Apr. 2013 Sep. 2013 Oct. 2013 Oct. 2013 Dec. 2013 Mar. 2014 Sep. 2014 Oct. 2014 Dec. 2014 Mar. 2015 Mar. – Apr. 2015 Oct. 2015 Oct. 2015 Nov. 2015 Nov. 2015 Dec. 2015 Apr. 2016 May 2016 May 2016 Jun. 2016|Japan-ROK mid-level officer exchange (ROK) (ASDF) Participation of Korean Navel vessel in a submarine rescue training in the western Pacific Ocean hosted by Japan Japan-ROK commander’s course student exchange (ROK) (ASDF) Japan-ROK commander’s course student exchange (ROK) (MSDF) Japan-ROK lower enlisted exchange (Japan) (GSDF) Japan-ROK bilateral search and rescue exercise (MSDF) Japan-ROK mid-level officer exchange (Japan) (ASDF) Japan-ROK mid-level officer exchange (ROK) (ASDF) Japan-ROK commander’s course student exchange (ROK) (ASDF) Japan-ROK commander’s course student exchange (ROK) (MSDF) Japan-ROK mid-level officer exchange (Japan) (ASDF) Japan-ROK lower enlisted exchange (ROK) (GSDF) Japan-ROK mid-level officer exchange (ROK) (ASDF) Japan-ROK commander’s course student exchange (ROK) (MSDF) Japan-ROK joint search and rescue exercise (MSDF), participation of ROK naval vessels in Fleet Review Participation of the ROK Navy Band in Japan Self-Defense Force Marching Festival Japan-ROK lower enlisted exchange (Japan) (GSDF) Japan-ROK mid-level officer exchange (Japan) (ASDF) Japan-ROK mid-level officer exchange (ROK) (ASDF) Participation of MSDF vessels in Pacific Reach (MSDF) hosted by the ROK Visit to the ROK by the Western Army Commanding General (GSDF) Visit to the ROK by the Sasebo District Commandant (MSDF)|


-----

|Japan – U.S.– ROK trilateral Cooperation|Jun. 2013 Apr. 2014 May 2014 Jul. 2014 Apr. 2015 May 2015 Jan. 2016 Feb. 2016 Jun. 2016|Japan-U.S.-ROK Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (12th Shangri-La Dialogue)) ✰ A joint statement of the Japan-U.S.-ROK Defense Ministerial Meeting was issued. The three ministers shared a recognition on the regional security situation, while agreeing to expand the Japan-U.S.-ROK trilateral defense cooperation. Japan-U.S.-ROK Defense Trilateral Talks (Washington, D.C.) Japan-U.S.-ROK Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (13th Shangri-La Dialogue)) ✰ A joint statement of the Japan-U.S.-ROK Defense Ministerial Meeting was issued. The Ministers shared a recognition on the regional security situation including North Korea, while agreeing to continue the close Japan-U.S.-ROK trilateral cooperation. Japan-U.S.-ROK Chief of Staff level Meeting Japan-U.S.-ROK Defense Trilateral Talks (Washington, D.C.) Japan-U.S.-ROK Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (14th Shangri-La Dialogue)) ✰ The three ministers once again emphasized their resolute position that they do not accept North Korea’s continued possession and development of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery. They agreed to continue to hold consultations on the security issues facing the three countries and to coordinate among the three countries. Japan-U.S.-ROK Defense Trilateral Talks Video-Teleconference Japan-U.S.-ROK Defense Trilateral Talks Video-Teleconference Japan-U.S.-ROK Chief of Staff Video-Teleconference Japan-U.S.-ROK Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (15th Shangri-La Dialogue)) ✰ The three ministers instructed their working-level officials to study ways of promoting communication and coordination among the trilateral defense authorities. They agreed to conduct the first Japan-U.S.-ROK missile warning exercise Pacific Dragon 2016 (exercise held in June 2016).|
|---|---|---|
||Japan-U.S.-ROK Trilateral Exercise (MSDF) (May 2013, Oct. 2013, Dec. 2013, Jul. 2014) Japan-U.S.-ROK Basic Level Officer Exchange (GSDF) (Apr. 2013 (ROK), Dec. 2013 (Japan), Apr. 2014 (ROK), Dec. 2014 (Japan), Apr. 2015 (ROK), Dec. 2015 (Japan), Apr. 2016 (ROK))||


**Reference 57 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with India (Past Three Years)**


|Col1|Col2|(April 1, 2013–June 30, 2016)|
|---|---|---|
|High-level talks between heads of state and defense|May 2013 Jan. 2014 Sep. 2014 Mar. 2015 Nov. 2015 Dec. 2015 Jun. 2016|Japan-India Summit Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Japan-India Joint Statement issued, and establishment of working group to facilitate bilateral cooperation concerning regular exercises between MSDF and Indian Navy as well as US-2 decided. Japan-India Defense Ministerial Meeting (Delhi) ✰ Opinions exchanged widely and frankly regarding defense policies of both countries, bilateral defense cooperation and exchange, as well as regional and global security issues, etc. Japan-India Summit Meeting (Delhi) Japan-India Summit Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Japan-India Joint Statement issued, and both sides reaffirmed the importance of their bilateral defense relationship and agreed to launch working-level consultations on defense equipment cooperation. Memorandum on Japan-India defense cooperation and exchanges was signed. Japan-India Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Opinions exchanged widely and frankly regarding defense policies of both countries which have shared interests in the maritime security domain, as well as defense cooperation and exchange, etc. Japan-India Defense Ministerial Meeting (Kuala Lumpur) ✰ The Japanese side requested cooperation on advancing US-2 cooperation. Both sides confirmed importance of promoting defense cooperation and exchanges. Japan-India Summit Meeting (Delhi) ✰ Agreement concerning the Transfer of Defence Equipment and Technology and Agreement concerning Security Measures for the Protection of Classified Military Information were signed. Japan-India Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (15th Shangri-La Dialogue)) ✰ Agreement reached to strengthen Japan-India and Japan-U.S.-India cooperation, including regular participation in Exercise Malabar as well as defense equipment and technology cooperation.|
||May 2013 Oct. 2014 Nov. 2015 Feb. 2016|Visit to India by the GSDF Chief of Staff Visit to Japan by the Chief of the Air Staff, Indian Air Force Visit to Japan by the Chief of the Army Staff, Indian Army Visit to India by the MSDF Chief of Staff|
|Regular discussions between defense ministry representatives|Dec. 2013 Apr. 2014 Aug. 2014 Mar. 2015 Apr. 2015|First meeting of the US-2 Joint Working Group Second meeting of the US-2 Joint Working Group Third meeting of the US-2 Joint Working Group Joint Working Group on Defense Equipment and Technology Cooperation Third Vice-Minister/Secretary level “2+2” dialogue, Fourth Defence Policy Dialogue|
|Unit-level exchange, etc.|Dec. 2013 Jul. 2014 Oct. 2015 Oct. 2015 Feb. 2016 Jun. 2016|Second Japan-India bilateral exercise (MSDF) Exercise Malabar (in waters around Japan) Exercise Malabar (in waters east of India) Participation of Indian naval vessels in Japan Self-Defense Forces Fleet Review MSDF Participation in International Fleet Review hosted by the Indian Navy (in waters east of India) Exercise Malabar (Sasebo and in waters east of Okinawa)|


-----

**Reference 58 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with China (Past Three Years)**

|Col1|Col2|(April 1, 2013–June 30, 2016)|
|---|---|---|
|High-level talks between heads of state and defense|Apr. 2014 Mar. 2015 May 2015 Nov. 2015 Jun.2016|Visit to China by MSDF Chief of Staff (Western Pacific Naval Symposium (Qingdao)) 13th Japan-China Security Dialogue (Discussions by foreign affairs/defense deputy ministers) (Tokyo) Japan-China defense vice-ministerial meeting (Singapore (14th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Japan-China defense ministerial meeting (Kuala Lumpur) ✰ The two sides confirmed that they would swiftly begin operations of the Maritime and Air Communication Mechanism and on the importance of deepening bilateral defense exchanges Japan-China defense vice-ministerial meeting (Singapore (15th Shangri-La Dialogue))|
|Regular discussions between defense ministry representatives|Apr. 2013 Jan. 2015 May 2015 Jun. 2015|1st Japan-China senior working-level defense consultations (Beijing) 4th Joint Working Group meeting on the Maritime and Air Communication Mechanism between Japan and China’s defense authorities (Tokyo) 2nd Japan-China defense director-general-level consultations (Tokyo) 5th Joint Working Group meeting on the Maritime and Air Communication Mechanism between Japan and China’s defense authorities (Beijing)|
|Unit-level exchange, etc.|||



**Reference 59 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with Russia (Past Three Years)**


(April 1, 2013–June 30, 2016)

|Col1|Col2|(April 1, 2013–June 30, 2016)|
|---|---|---|
|High-level talks between heads of state and defense|Apr. 2013 Nov. 2013 Nov. 2013 Feb. 2014 May 2015|Japan-Russia Summit Meeting (Moscow) ✰ Agreement reached to hold Foreign and Defense Ministerial Dialogue (2+2) Agreement reached to expand exchanges between defense officials and forces of the two countries as well as to seek new areas of cooperation including counter-terrorism and counter-piracy measures Japan-Russia Defense Ministerial Meeting ✰ Exchanged opinions regarding future Japan-Russia defense cooperation and exchange as well as defense policies of both countries Japan-Russia Foreign and Defense Ministerial Meeting (2+2) ✰ Exchanged opinions regarding security and defense policies of both countries based on the security situation in Asia-Pacific region, cooperation within the region based on a multilateral framework, and deployment of a missile defense system in the region, etc. Japan-Russia Summit Meeting (Sochi) Japan-Russia vice-ministerial meeting (Singapore (14th Shangri-La Dialogue))|
||Visit to Russia by the MSDF Chief of Staff (Aug. 2013), Visit to Russia by the GSDF Chief of Staff (Feb. 2014)||
|Regular discussions between defense ministry representatives|||
|Unit-level exchange, etc.|Jul. 2013 Mar. 2014 Dec. 2014|Visit to Japan by the delegation of the Russian Ground Forces, Eastern Military District Visit to the Eastern Military District by Commanding General of the GSDF Northern Army Visit to the Eastern Military District by Commander of the ASDF Northern Air Defense Force|
||14th bilateral Japan-Russia search and rescue exercises (Dec. 2013), 15th bilateral Japan-Russia search and rescue exercises (Oct. 2014)||


**Reference 60 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with ASEAN Countries (Past Three Years)**


|Col1|Col2|Col3|(Apr. 1, 2013 – Jun. 30, 2016)|
|---|---|---|---|
|High-level talks between heads of state and defense|Cambodia|Aug. 2013 Oct. 2014 May 2015 Jun. 2015 Sep. 2015 Feb. 2016|Japan-Cambodia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Brunei (Second ADMM Plus)) Visit to Japan by the Cambodian Secretary of State, Ministry of National Defense (Vice Minister) Japan-Cambodia Vice-Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (14th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to Cambodia by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Visit to Japan by the Cambodian Secretary of State, Ministry of National Defense (Vice Minister) Visit to Cambodia by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs|
||Indonesia|Jun. 2013 Nov. 2013 Dec. 2013 Mar. 2014 Apr. 2014 Jun. 2014 Oct. 2014 Feb. 2015 Mar. 2015 May 2015 Aug. 2015 Sep. 2015 Sep. 2015 Dec. 2015 Dec. 2015 Apr. 2016 Apr. 2016 Apr. 2016|Japan-Indonesia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (12th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to Japan by the Indonesian Deputy Minister of Defense Visit to Indonesia by the MSDF Chief of Staff Visit to Indonesia by the Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to Indonesia by the Parliamentary Senior Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to Indonesia by the ASDF Chief of Staff Visit to Japan by the Indonesian Air Force Chief of Staff Visit to Indonesia by the MSDF Chief of Staff Japan-Indonesia Summit Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Signed memorandum on defense cooperation and exchange Visit to Indonesia by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Visit to Indonesia by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Visit to Indonesia by the GSDF Chief of Staff Visit to Japan by the Secretary-General of the Ministry of Defense of Indonesia First Japan-Indonesia Foreign and Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Agreement reached to initiate negotiations for an agreement on the transfer of defense equipment and technology, and on MSDF’s participation in multilateral exercise KOMODO 2016 Visit to Japan by the Indonesian Navy Chief of Staff Visit to Japan by the Indonesian Army Chief of Staff Visit to Indonesia by the MSDF Chief of Staff Visit to Japan by the Indonesian Army Chief of the General Staff|


-----

|High-level talks between heads of state and defense|Laos|Aug. 2013 Jan. 2014 Feb. 2014 Oct. 2014 Feb. 2015 Sep. 2015 Nov. 2015 Feb. 2016 Apr. 2016|Japan-Laos Defense Ministerial Meeting (Brunei (Second ADMM Plus)) Visit to Laos by the Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to Japan by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of National Defence of Laos Visit to Japan by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of National Defence of Laos Visit to Laos by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Visit to Japan by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of National Defence of Laos Japan-Laos Defense Ministerial Meeting (Malaysia (Third ADMM Plus)) ✰ Concurred that the two countries would continue to coordinate and cooperate with each other through the humanitarian assistance and disaster relief EWG Visit to Laos by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Visit to Laos by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs|
|---|---|---|---|
||Malaysia|Apr. 2014 Jun. 2014 May 2015 Nov. 2015 Nov. 2015|Japan-Malaysia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Kuala Lumpur) Visit to Malaysia by the MSDF Chief of Staff Visit to Malaysia by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Japan-Malaysia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (14th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to Japan by the Chief of Defence Force, Malaysian Armed Forces Japan-Malaysia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Malaysia (Third ADMM Plus)) Visit to Malaysia by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs|
||Myanmar|Feb. 2014 Apr. 2014 May 2014 Jul. 2014 Sep. 2014 Oct. 2014 Nov. 2014 Nov. 2014 Jul. 2015 Aug. 2015 Sep. 2015 Apr. 2016 Jun. 2016|Visit to Japan by the Myanmese Deputy Minister of Defence Visit to Myanmar by the Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to Myanmar by the Chief of Joint Staff Visit to Myanmar by the Parliamentary Senior Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to Japan by the Commander-in-Chief of Defence Services of Myanmar Visit to Japan by the Myanmese Deputy Minister of Defence Visit to Myanmar by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Visit to Myanmar by the Minister of Defense (Japan-ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Roundtable) Visit to Japan by the Commander-in-Chief of the Myanmar Air Force Visit to Japan by the Deputy Commander-in-chief of Defence Services of Myanmar and the Commander-in-Chief of the Myanmar Army Visit to Japan by the Myanmese Deputy Minister of Defence Visit to Myanmar by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Visit to Myanmar by the Minister of Defense|
||Philippines|May 2013 Jun. 2013 Dec. 2013 Jan. 2014 Feb. 2014 Sep. 2014 Oct. 2014 Jan. 2015 Feb. 2015 Mar. 2015 May 2015 Jun. 2015 Jun. 2015 Aug. 2015 Sep. 2015 Sep. 2015 Nov. 2015 May 2016|Visit to the Philippines by the ASDF Chief of Staff Japan-Philippines Defense Ministerial Meeting (Manila) Visit to Japan by the Flag Officer in Command of the Philippine Navy Visit to the Philippines by the Minister of Defense (Visit to international disaster relief operations) Visit to the Philippines by the Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to Japan by the Philippine Undersecretary of National Defense Visit to the Philippines by the GSDF Chief of Staff Visit to Japan by the Philippine Undersecretary of National Defense Japan-Philippines Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Signed memorandum on defense cooperation and exchanges Visit to the Philippines by the MSDF Chief of Staff Visit to the Philippines by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Visit to Japan by the Commanding General of the Philippine Air Force Visit to the Philippines by the ASDF Chief of Staff Japan-Philippines Vice-Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (14th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to Japan by the Commanding General of the Philippine Army Visit to Japan by the Philippine Secretary of National Defense (accompanied President’s visit to Japan) Visit to the Philippines by the Chief of Joint Staff Visit to Japan by the Philippine Undersecretary of National Defense Visit to the Philippines by the GSDF Chief of Staff Japan-Philippines Defense Ministerial Meeting (Malaysia (Third ADMM Plus)) ✰ Concurred that the two countries would enhance capacity building assistance and deepen defense equipment and technology cooperation Japan-Philippines Defense Ministerial Teleconference|
||Singapore|May 2013 Jun. 2013 Aug. 2013 Sep. 2013 Dec. 2013 Feb. 2014 May 2014 Oct. 2014 May 2015 Jul. 2015 Feb. 2016 Jun. 2016|Visit to Singapore by the Chief of Joint Staff Japan-Singapore Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (12th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Japan-Singapore Defense Ministerial Meeting (Brunei (Second ADMM Plus)) Visit to Japan by the Chief of Navy of the Republic of Singapore Navy Visit to Singapore by the Parliamentary Senior Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to Singapore by the ASDF Chief of Staff Visit to Singapore by the Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense Japan-Singapore Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (13th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to Japan by the Chief of Air Force of the Republic of Singapore Air Force Japan-Singapore Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (14th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Japan-Singapore Vice-Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (14th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to Singapore by the Chief of Joint Staff (14th Shangri-La Dialogue) Visit to the Singapore by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Visit to Singapore by the ASDF Chief of Staff Japan-Singapore Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (15th Shangri-La Dialogue))|


-----

|High-level talks between heads of state and defense|Thailand|Sep. 2013 Oct. 2013 Feb. 2014 Nov. 2014 Jul. 2015 Feb. 2016 Mar. 2016 May 2016 Jun. 2016|Japan-Thailand Defense Ministerial Meeting (Bangkok) ✰ Exchanged opinions regarding the regional situation as well as Japan-Thailand defense cooperation and exchange Visit to Japan by the Royal Thai Air Force Commander Visit to Thailand by the Chief of Joint Staff Visit to Japan by the Thai Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defence Visit to Japan by the Thai Chief of Defence Forces Visit to Thailand by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Visit to Thailand by the Chief of Joint Staff Visit to Thailand by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Visit to Japan by the Royal Thai Army Commander Japan-Thailand Defense Ministerial Meeting (Bangkok)|
|---|---|---|---|
||Vietnam|Apr. 2013 May 2013 Aug. 2013 Sep. 2013 Feb. 2014 Jun. 2014 Jul. 2014 Oct. 2014 Feb. 2015 May 2015 Sep. 2015 Oct. 2015 Nov. 2015|Visit to Japan by the Chief of the General Staff of the Vietnam People’s Army Visit to Vietnam by the MSDF Chief of Staff Visit to Vietnam by the ASDF Chief of Staff Visit to Vietnam by the GSDF Chief of Staff Visit to Japan by the Vietnamese Vice-Minister of National Defence Japan-Vietnam Defense Ministerial Meeting (Brunei (Second ADMM Plus)) Japan-Vietnam Defense Ministerial Meeting (Hanoi) ✰ Exchanged opinions regarding the regional situation as well as Japan-Vietnam defense cooperation and exchanges Visit to Japan by the Vietnamese Vice-Minister of National Defence Japan-Vietnam Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (13th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to Japan by the Vietnamese Vice-Minister of National Defence Visit to Japan by the Vietnam Commander of Air Defense and Air Force Visit to Vietnam by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Visit to Japan by the Commander-in-Chief of the Vietnam People’s Navy Visit to Vietnam by the ASDF Chief of Staff Visit to Japan by the Vietnamese Vice-Minister of National Defence Visit to Japan by the Deputy Chief of the General Staff of the Vietnam People’s Army Japan-Vietnam Defense Ministerial Meeting|
||Brunei|Jun. 2013 Aug. 2013 Feb. 2014 Nov. 2014 Sep. 2015 Feb. 2016|Visit to Brunei by the Chief of Joint Staff Japan-Brunei Vice-Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (12th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to Brunei by the Minister of Defense (Second ADMM Plus) Visit to Japan by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Defense of Brunei Visit to Brunei by the Chief of Joint Staff Visit to Japan by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Defense of Brunei Visit to Brunei by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs|
|Regular discussions between defense ministry High-level talks between heads of state and defense representatives|Cambodia|May 2013 Sep. 2014|2nd Japan-Cambodia Politico-Military Consultation (PM), 3rd Japan-Cambodia Politico-Military Consultation (PM) (Brisbane) 3rd Japan-Cambodia Politico-Military Consultation (PM), 4th Japan-Cambodia Politico-Military Consultation (PM) (Tokyo)|
||Indonesia|Jul. 2013 Nov. 2014|2nd Japan-Indonesia Politico-Military Consultation (PM), 5th Japan-Indonesia Military-Military Consultation (MM) (Jakarta) 6th Japan-Indonesia Military-Military Consultation (MM) (Tokyo)|
||Philippines|May 2013 Apr. 2014 Mar. 2015|6th Japan-Philippines Politico-Military Consultation (PM), 6th Japan-Philippines Military-Military Consultation (MM) (Tokyo) 7th Japan-Philippines Politico-Military Consultation (PM) (Manila) Vice-Defense Ministerial Consultation (Manila)|
||Singapore|Jul. 2013 Dec. 2014|13th Japan-Singapore Military-Military Consultation (MM) (Tokyo) 14th Japan-Singapore Military-Military Consultation (MM) (Singapore)|
||Thailand|Mar. 2015|12th Japan-Thailand Politico-Military Consultation (PM), 12th Japan-Thailand Military-Military Consultation (MM) (Tokyo)|
||Vietnam|Nov. 2013 Oct. 2014 Jan. 2015 Dec. 2015|4th Japan-Vietnam Strategic Partnership Dialogue (Tokyo) 5th Japan-Vietnam Strategic Partnership Dialogue (Hanoi) Vice-Defense Ministerial Consultation (Hanoi) Japan-Vietnam Strategic Partnership Dialogue (Tokyo)|
||Malaysia|Oct. 2013|5th Japan-Malaysia Military-Military Consultation (MM) (Tokyo)|
||Myanmar|Nov. 2013|1st Japan-Myanmar-Military Consultation (MM) (Naypyidaw)|
|Unit-level exchange, etc.|Southeast Asian Member States and Multilateral Exchanges etc.|May 2013 Jun. 2013 Feb. 2014 Mar. 2014 Aug. 2014 Feb. 2015 May 2015 May 2015 Jun. 2015 Aug. 2015 Jan. – Feb. 2016 Feb. 2016 Apr. 2016 May 2016|ARF Disaster Relief Exercise (ARF-DiREX2013) ADMM Plus Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief and Military Medicine Exercise (Brunei) Participation in Cobra Gold 14 hosted by the United States and Thailand (Thailand) Multilateral joint exercise Komodo hosted by the Indonesian Navy (Indonesia) GPOI Capstone exercise (Indonesia) Participation in Cobra Gold 15 hosted by the United States and Thailand (Thailand) Participation in 4th ARF Disaster Relief Exercise (ARF-DiREx2015) hosted by Malaysia and China (Malaysia) Participation in Japan-Philippines joint exercise (coast of Manila) Participation in Japan-Philippines joint exercise (coast of Palawan) Participation in Pacific Partnership 2015 (Philippines) GPOI Capstone exercise (Malaysia) Western Pacific Mine Countermeasures Exercise (Singapore, Indonesia) Participation in Cobra Gold 16 hosted by the United States and Thailand (Thailand) Participation in Japan-Vietnam goodwill exercise (Vietnam) (MSDF) Multilateral joint exercise Komodo hosted by the Indonesian Navy (Indonesia) ADMM Plus Maritime Security Exercise (Brunei, etc.)|


-----

**Reference 61 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with Other Asia-Pacific Countries (Past Three Years)**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|(Apr. 1, 2013 – Jun. 30, 2016)|
|---|---|---|---|
|High-level talks between heads of state and defense|Timor-Leste|Mar. 2015 Jun. 2016|Japan-Timor-Leste Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) Japan-Timor-Leste Defense Ministerial Meeting (Timor-Leste)|
||Mongolia|Aug. 2013 Nov. 2013 Apr. 2014 Jun. 2014 Mar. 2015 May 2015 Jul. 2015 Oct. 2015|Visit to Mongolia by the Chief of Joint Staff Japan-Mongolia Vice-Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) Japan-Mongolia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) Visit to Mongolia by the GSDF Chief of Staff Visit to Japan by the Vice Minister of Defense of Mongolia (19th Tokyo Defense Forum) Japan-Mongolia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (14th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to Mongolia by the Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to Japan by the Chief of the General Staff, Mongolian Armed Forces Visit to Mongolia by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs|
||New Zealand|May 2013 Jul. 2013 Aug. 2013 Sep. 2013 Jun. 2014 Aug. 2014 Apr. 2015 May 2015 Jul.2015 Sep. 2015 Sep. 2015 Nov. 2015 Jun. 2016|Visit to Japan by the New Zealand Air Force Commander Visit to Japan by the New Zealand Chief of Defence Force Japan-New Zealand Defense Ministerial Meeting (Brunei (Second ADMM Plus)) Visit to New Zealand by the GSDF Chief of Staff Japan-New Zealand Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (13th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to New Zealand by the Chief of Joint Staff Visit to Japan by the Chief of Army of the New Zealand Defence Force Visit to New Zealand by the Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense Japan-New Zealand Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (14th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to New Zealand by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Visit to Japan by the New Zealand Secretary of Defence Visit to Japan by the New Zealand Air Force Commander Japan-New Zealand Defense Ministerial Meeting (Malaysia (Third ADMM Plus)) Japan-New Zealand Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (15th Shangri-La Dialogue))|
||Sri Lanka|Jun. 2014|Visit to Sri Lanka by the MSDF Chief of Staff|
|Regular discussions between defense ministry representatives|New Zealand|Oct. 2013 Sep. 2014 Sep. 2015|7th Japan- New Zealand Bilateral Defence Talks (Tokyo) 8th Japan- New Zealand Bilateral Defence Talks (Auckland) 9th Japan- New Zealand Bilateral Defence Talks (Tokyo)|
||Pakistan|Nov. 2014|7th Japan-Pakistan Consultation between defense authorities (Tokyo)|
||Mongolia|Dec. 2014 Jan. 2016|2nd Consultation between foreign affairs, defense, and security authorities, 2nd Japan-Mongolia Consultation between defense authorities (Ulan Bator) 3rd Consultation between foreign affairs, defense, and security authorities, 3rd Japan-Mongolia Consultation between defense and security authorities (Tokyo)|
|Unit-level exchange, etc.|New Zealand|Aug.2014 Nov. 2015|Japan-Australia-New Zealand joint exercise PSI Exercise|
||Pakistan|Mar.2015 Feb. 2016|Japan-Pakistan bilateral exercise Japan-Pakistan bilateral exercise|
||Sri Lanka|Apr. 2015 Nov. 2015 Mar. 2016 May 2016|Japan-Sri Lanka goodwill exercise Japan-Sri Lanka goodwill exercise Japan-Sri Lanka goodwill exercise Japan-Sri Lanka goodwill exercise|
||Maldives|Aug. 2014 Apr. 2015|Japan-Maldives goodwill exercise Japan-Maldives goodwill exercise|



**Reference 62 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with European Countries (Past Three Years)**


(Apr. 1, 2013 – Jun. 30, 2016)

(Apr. 1, 2013 – Jun. 30, 2016)

|High-level talks between heads of state and defense|United Kingdom|Jun. 2013 Jul. 2013 Sep. 2013 Dec. 2013 Mar. 2014 Apr. 2014 May 2014 May 2014 Jul. 2014 Jul. 2014 Oct. 2014 Jan. 2015 Jan. 2015 Sep. 2015 Jan. 2016 Jun. 2016|Japan-U.K. Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (12th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to Japan by the U.K. Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Defence Equipment, Support and Technology Visit to the U.K. by the Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to Japan by the First Sea Lord and U.K. Chief of Naval Staff Visit to Japan by the U.K. Chief of the General Staff Visit to Japan by the Chief of the Defence Staff, British Army Visit to the U.K. by the Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense Japan-U.K. Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (13th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to the U.K. by the Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to the U.K. by the ASDF Chief of Staff Visit to Japan by the U.K. Chief of the Air Staff Visit to the U.K. by the State Minister of Defense 1st Japan-U.K. Foreign and Defence Ministerial Meeting, Japan-U.K. Defense Ministerial Meeting (London) ✰ Confirmed the progress of defense equipment and technology cooperation, and exchanged opinions regarding strengthening cooperation on global security issues, regional situations, etc. Visit to the U.K. by the MSDF Chief of Staff 2nd Japan-U.K. Foreign and Defence Ministerial Meeting, Japan-U.K. Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Confirmed the two countries would strengthen cooperation on defense equipment and technology, joint exercises, capacity building assistance for Southeast Asia, ACSA, etc. Japan-U.K. Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (15th Shangri-La Dialogue))|
|---|---|---|---|


-----

|High-level talks between heads of state and defense|France|Jun. 2013 Aug. 2013 Jan. 2014 Mar. 2014 Jun. 2014 Jun. 2014 Jul. 2014 Jul. 2014 Mar. 2015 Jan. 2016 Jun. 2016 Jun. 2016|Japan-France Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (12th Shangri-La Dialogue)) ✰ Exchanged opinions regarding the situation of Japan-France defense cooperation exchange and regional situations Visit to France by the MSDF Chief of Staff Japan-France foreign and defense ministers’ meeting, Japan-France Defense Ministerial Meeting (Paris) ✰ Exchanged opinions regarding the regional situations and Japan-France security and defense cooperation Visit to France by the Chief of Joint Staff Japan-France Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (13th Shangri-La Dialogue)) ✰ Exchanged opinions regarding regional situations and security policies Visit to France by the State Minister of Defense Visit to the France by the Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense Japan-France Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) Japan-France foreign and defense ministers’ meeting, Japan-France Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Signed defense equipment and technology transfer agreement, and exchanged opinions regarding Japan-France security and defense cooperation, security policies, regional situations, etc. Visit to France by the Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense Japan-France Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (15th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to France by the State Minister of Defense|
|---|---|---|---|
||Germany|Apr. 2013 Mar. 2014 May 2015 Sep. 2015 Feb. 2016|Visit to Japan by the Chief of Staff of German Army Visit to Japan by the Chief of Staff of German Navy Japan-Germany Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (14th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to Germany by the Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs Visit to Germany by the State Minister of Defense|
||Italy|May 2013 Mar. 2014 May 2014 Feb. 2015 Jun. 2016 Jun. 2016|Visit to Italy by the State Minister of Defense Visit to Italy by the Chief of Joint Staff Visit to Italy by the Minister of Defense Visit to Italy by the Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense Japan-Italy Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (15th Shangri-La Dialogue)) Visit to Italy by the State Minister of Defense|
||Spain|Aug. 2014 Nov. 2014|Visit to Spain by the State Minister of Defense Japan-Spain Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo)|
||Belgium|Mar. 2014 Feb. 2015|Visit to Belgium by the Chief of Joint Staff Visit to Belgium by the Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense|
||Netherlands|Oct. 2015|Visit to Japan by the Netherlands Chief of Defence|
||Sweden|Mar. 2015|Visit to Japan by the Supreme Commander of the Swedish Armed Forces|
||Finland|Jul. 2013 Sep. 2013 Oct. 2014 Feb. 2015 Mar. 2015|Visit to Finland by the Minister of Defense Visit to Japan by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Defence of Finland Japan-Finland Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) Visit to Finland by the Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to Japan by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Defence of Finland|
||Estonia|May 2015|Visit to Estonia by the State Minister of Defense|
||Lithuania|Feb. 2014|Japan-Lithuania Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo)|
||Bulgaria|May 2015|Visit to Bulgaria by the State Minister of Defense|
||Latvia|May 2015|Visit to Japan by the State Secretary of Defence of Latvia|
||Poland|Jun. 2015|Visit to Japan by the Under-Secretary of State for Defence of Poland|
||Georgia|Nov. 2015|Japan-Georgia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Exchanged opinions regarding regional situations and bilateral defense cooperation and exchanges, and signed a memorandum on defense exchanges|
||Czech Republic|Dec. 2015|Japan-Czech Republic Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) ✰ Exchanged opinions regarding regional situations and bilateral defense cooperation and exchanges|
|Regular discussions between defense ministry representatives|United Kingdom|Dec. 2013 Sep. 2015|13th Japan-U.K. Consultation between foreign affairs and defense authorities, 9th Japan-U.K. Consultation between defense authorities (London) 14th Japan-U.K. Consultation between foreign affairs and defense authorities, 10th Japan-U.K. Consultation between defense authorities (Tokyo)|
||France|Nov. 2014 Sep. 2015|17th Japan-France Consultation between foreign affairs and defense authorities,16th Japan-France Consultation between defense authorities (Tokyo) 18th Japan-France Consultation between foreign affairs and defense authorities (Tokyo)|
||Germany|Oct. 2014|14th Japan-Germany Consultation between foreign affairs and defense authorities, 12th Japan-Germany Consultation between defense authorities (Tokyo)|
||Italy|Jun. 2013 Dec. 2015|2nd Japan-Italy Consultation between defense authorities (Tokyo) 3rd Japan-Italy Consultation between defense authorities (Tokyo)|
||Poland|Sep. 2014|1st Japan-Poland Consultation between defense authorities (Tokyo)|
||NATO|Feb. 2014 Feb. 2016|13th Japan-NATO Senior Officials Meeting (Tokyo) 14th Japan-NATO Senior Officials Meeting (Tokyo)|
||Norway|Nov. 2014|2nd Japan-Norway Consultation between defense authorities (Tokyo)|
|Unit-level exchange, etc.|NATO|Sep. 2014 Nov. 2014|Japan-NATO bilateral exercise Japan-NATO bilateral exercise|
||EU|Oct. 2014 Nov. 2014 Mar. 2015 Jan. 2016|Japan-EU bilateral exercise Japan-EU bilateral exercise (twice) Japan-EU bilateral exercise Japan-EU bilateral exercise|
||United Kingdom|Apr. 2016|Japan-U.K. goodwill exercise|


-----

**Reference 63 Recent Defense Cooperation and Exchanges with Other Countries (Past Three Years)**


|Col1|Col2|Col3|(Apr. 1, 2013 – Jun. 30, 2016)|
|---|---|---|---|
|High-level talks between heads of defense and others|Turkey|Nov. 2014 May 2015 May 2016 May 2016|Visit to Turkey by the Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to Japan by the Commander of the Turkish Naval Forces Visit to Turkey by the GSDF Chief of Staff Visit to Turkey by the MSDF Chief of Staff|
||Kazakhstan|Jul. 2012|Visit to Kazakhstan by the Administrative Vice-Minister of Defense|
||Azerbaijan|Aug. 2013|Visit to Azerbaijan by the Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense|
||Canada|Mar. 2014 Nov. 2014 Oct. 2015 Jun. 2016 Jun. 2016|2nd Japan-Canada 2+2 deputy ministerial dialogue (Ottawa) Japan-Canada vice-ministerial meeting (Halifax) Visit to Japan by the Commander of the Royal Canadian Air Force Japan-Canada Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore (15th Shangri-La Dialogue)) 3rd Japan-Canada 2+2 deputy ministerial dialogue (Tokyo)|
||Brazil|Aug. 2014 Feb. 2016|Visit to Brazil by the Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to Brazil by the GSDF Chief of Staff|
||Colombia|Mar. 2015|Japan-Colombia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo)|
||Middle East/ Africa|Apr. 2013 Feb. 2014 May 2014 Aug. 2014 Sep. 2014 Nov. 2014 Jan. 2015 May 2015|Visit to South Sudan and Djibouti by the Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to UAE, Saudi Arabia, and Oman by the MSDF Chief of Staff Visit to South Sudan and Djibouti by the Minister of Defense Visit to South Africa by the Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense Visit to South Sudan and Djibouti by the GSDF Chief of Staff Visit to Japan by the Chief of Djibouti Navy Visit to Djibouti and South Sudan by the Minister of Defense Visit to Uganda, Djibouti, South Sudan, and Bahrain by the Parliamentary Vice-Minister of Defense|
|Regular discussions between defense ministry representatives|Canada|Apr. 2012 Jun. 2014|7th Japan-Canada Consultation between foreign affairs and defense authorities, 8th Japan-Canada Consultation between defense authorities (Tokyo) 8th Japan-Canada Consultation between foreign affairs and defense authorities, 9th Japan-Canada Consultation between defense authorities (Tokyo)|
||Turkey|Jan. 2015|2nd Japan-Turkey Consultation between defense authorities (Tokyo)|
||Jordan|Apr. 2015|1st Japan-Jordan Consultation between defense authorities (Tokyo)|
||Saudi Arabia|Jun. 2015|1st Japan-Saudi Arabia Consultation between defense authorities (Tokyo)|
||Egypt|Oct. 2015|1st Japan-Egypt Consultation between foreign affairs and defense authorities, Japan-Egypt Consultation between defense authorities|
||Kuwait|Mar. 2016|1st Japan-Kuwait Security Dialogue (Tokyo)|
||UAE|Dec. 2015|1st Japan-UAE Security Dialogue (Abu Dhabi)|
||Bahrain|Dec. 2015|2nd Japan-Bahrain Security Dialogue (Manama)|
|Unit-level exchange, etc.|Turkey|Nov. 2014 Jun. 2015 Dec. 2015|Japan-Turkey bilateral exercise Japan-Turkey goodwill exercise Japan-Turkey bilateral exercise|


than 3 years
**4. Response by the Japan Coast Guard to Acts of Piracy**
(1) The Japan Coast Guard carries out necessary measures to respond
to acts of piracy.
(2) Maritime safety officials may use weapons in accordance with
the provisions of Article 7 of the Act concerning Execution of
Official Police Duties. In addition, while they are in action to
prevent 2 (5) (ii), as is currently conducted, if the pirates do
not obey the preventive action and continue to attempt the act
of 2 (5) (ii), and there is probable cause to believe there are no
other means, maritime safety officials may use weapons to the
extent that is found reasonably necessary in accordance with the
situation.
**5. Response by the Self-Defense Forces to Acts of Piracy**
(1) When there is a special need to respond to acts of piracy, the
Minister of Defense may order action against such acts upon
approval by the Prime Minister. In order to obtain approval, the
Minister of Defense shall create a response guideline and submit
it to the Prime Minister (just notifying the outline of the action
suffices when the situation demands expediency).
(2) The response guideline shall include the need and area of the
action against pirates, size of the unit, period, and other important
matters.
(3) The Prime Minister shall report to the Diet when he/she gave
approval and when the action against pirates was concluded.
(4) Necessary provisions of the Japan Coast Guard Law, those of
Article 7 of the Act concerning Execution of Official Police
Duties and 4 (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis to SDF regular
personnel.


**Reference 64 Outline of a Bill Concerning Punishment of and**
**Response to Acts of Piracy**

**1. Purpose of the Legislation**
To establish matters necessary for the punishment of and proper and
effective response to acts of piracy in order to maintain public safety
and order at sea, in light of the importance of ensuring the safety of
maritime navigation for the economy of Japan and the people’s lives.
**2. Definition of Acts of Piracy**
Acts of Piracy: the following acts conducted by those who are crew
members of or are aboard a vessel (excluding a
war vessel, etc.) for private purposes on high seas
(including exclusive economic zones) or Japan’s
territorial waters, etc.:
(1) robbery of vessel/operation control, (2) robbery of the property,
etc., on a vessel, (3) kidnapping of a person(s) on board, (4) taking
of a hostage(s), or (5) for the purpose of (1) to (4); (i) invasion/
destruction of a vessel, (ii) excessive access, etc., to another vessel,
(iii) unlawful navigation with dangerous weapons
**3. Punishment Concerning Acts of Piracy**
A person who has conducted an act of piracy shall be punished as
follows:
(1) 2 (1) – (4): imprisonment, with work, for life or for a definite term
of not less than 5 years; imprisonment, with work, for a definite
term of not less than 6 years when the person concerned causes
injury; death penalty or life imprisonment, with work, when the
person concerned causes death.
(2) 2 (5) (i) and (ii): imprisonment, with work, for a definite term of
not less than 5 years
(3) 2 (5) (iii): imprisonment, with work, for a definite term of not less


-----

**Reference 65 Summary Comparison of Laws Concerning International Peace Cooperation Activities**

|Item|International Peace Support Act|International Peace Cooperation Act|Law Concerning Special Measures on Humanitarian and Reconstruction Assistance in Iraq (Expired on July 31, 2009)|Replenishment Support Special Measures Law (Expired on January 15, 2010)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Purpose|❍ Contribution to ensuring peace and security of the international community|❍ Proactive contribution to U.N.-centered efforts towards international peace|❍ Proactive contribution to the efforts by the international community to support and encourage the self- reliant efforts by the Iraqi people towards the prompt reconstruction of the State of Iraq ❍ Contribution to ensuring peace and security of the international community including Japan through the reconstruction of Iraq|❍ Proactive contribution to the international community to prevent and eradicate international terrorism ❍ Contribution to ensuring peace and security of the international community including Japan|
|Provisions in the SDF Law|❍ Provision under Article 84-5 (Chapter 6) of the SDF Law|❍ Provision under Article 84-5 (Chapter 6) of the SDF Law|❍ Supplementary provisions of the SDF Law|❍ Supplementary provisions of the SDF Law|
|Major Activities|❍ Cooperation and support activities1 ❍ Search and rescue activities1 ❍ Ship inspection operations3|❍ International peacekeeping activities ❍ Internationally coordinated operations for peace and security ❍ International humanitarian assistance ❍ International election monitoring activities ❍ Supplies cooperation for the abovementioned activities|❍ Humanitarian and reconstruction assistance activities ❍ Support activities for ensuring security|❍ Replenishment support activities|
|Areas of Operation|❍ Territories of Japan ❍ Territories of foreign countries (consent of the agency in charge of administration (in such countries) is required. ❍ High seas and the airspace above|❍ Areas excluding Japan (including the high seas) (A ceasefire agreement between the parties of the dispute and an agreement by the receiving country are required)|❍ Territories of Japan ❍ Territories of foreign countries (consent of the agency in charge of administration is required in such countries and in Iraq)2 ❍ High seas and the airspace above2|❍ Territories of Japan ❍ Territories of foreign countries (limited to the Indian Ocean States) (consent of such countries is required)2 ❍ High seas (limited to the Indian Ocean, etc.) and the airspace above2|
|Diet Approval|❍ Prior approval required without exception|❍ To be discussed in advance in the Diet in principle, only for cases where SDF units, etc. conduct so-called ceasefire monitoring and safety-ensuring operations4|❍ To be discussed in the Diet within 20 days from the day since the SDF initiates such measures4|(Note 5)|
|Diet Report|❍ Report on the details of operation plan is required without delay|❍ Report about the details of operation plan is required without delay|❍ Report on the details of operation plan is required without delay|❍ Report about the details of operation plan is required without delay|



Notes: 1. Limited to sites where combat is not taking place.
2. Limited to areas where combat is not taking place or not expected to take place while Japan’s activities are being implemented.
3. Operations shall be conducted in waters where the activities can be clearly distinguished from ship inspection operations carried out by foreign countries.
4. In cases where the Diet is in recess, etc., an approval shall be promptly requested in the Diet at the earliest session.
5. As prescribed by Law, (1) the category and nature of operations shall be limited to supply. (2) As the area of operations is prescribed, including foreign territories, it is not

considered necessary to re-obtain the approval of the Diet. Therefore there are no provisions relating to Diet approval.


**Reference 66 The SDF Record in International Peace Cooperation Activities**

**(1) Activities based on the Special Measures Law for Humanitarian and Reconstruction Assistance in Iraq** (As of June 30, 2016)

|Col1|Place of Dispatch|Period of Dispatch|Number of Personnel|Description of Principal Tasks|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|GSDF|Southeast Iraq, etc.|Jan. 2004 – Jul. 2006|Approx. 600|• Medical treatment, water supply, reconstruction and maintenance of public facilities, etc.|
||Kuwait, etc.|Jun.– Sep. 2006|Approx. 100|• Operations required for evacuation of vehicles, equipment and others|
|MSDF|Persian Gulf, etc.|Feb. 20 – Apr. 8, 2004|Approx. 330|• Maritime transport of vehicles and other equipment required for the GSDF’s activities|
|ASDF|Kuwait, etc.|Dec. 2003 – Feb. 2009|Approx. 210|• Transportation of materials for humanitarian and reconstruction assistance|



**(2) Cooperative activities based on the Anti-Terrorism Special Measures Law**

|Col1|Place of Dispatch|Period of Dispatch|Number of Personnel|Description of Principal Tasks|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|MSDF|Indian Ocean|Nov. 2001– Nov. 2007|Approx. 320|• Materials supplies for foreign vessels|
|ASDF|U.S. Forces in Japan, etc.||−|• Transportation of materials|


**(3) Replenishment activities based on the Replenishment Support Special Measures Law**

|Col1|Place of Dispatch|Period of Dispatch|Number of Personnel|Description of Principal Tasks|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|MSDF|Indian Ocean|Jan. 2008 – Feb. 2010|Approx. 330|• Materials supplies for foreign vessels|


-----

**(4) Anti-Piracy Operations (including dispatches as Maritime Security Operations)**

|Col1|Place of Dispatch|Period of Dispatch|Number of Personnel|Description of Principal Tasks|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|MSDF (Maritime Force)|Off the coast of Somalia / Gulf of Aden|Mar. 2009 –|Approx. 400|Escort of vessels, zone defense, etc.|
|MSDF (Air Unit)|Off the coast of Somalia / Gulf of Aden Djibouti|May 2009 – Jul. 2014|Approx. 120 (*)|Surveillance activities in the Gulf of Aden and tasks related to general affairs, accounting, public relations, health, etc.|
||Off the coast of Somalia / Gulf of Aden Djibouti|Jul. 2014 – Jul. 2015|Approx. 70|Surveillance activities in the Gulf of Aden, etc.|
||Off the coast of Somalia / Gulf of Aden Djibouti|Jul. 2015 –|Approx. 60|Surveillance activities in the Gulf of Aden, etc.|
|MSDF (Support Unit)|Djibouti|Jul. 2014 –|Approx. 30|Communication and coordination with the relevant authorities of the Republic of Djibouti and other authorities and supports necessary for Air Unit to conduct anti-piracy operation, etc.|
|MSDF (Combined Task Force 151 Command Unit)|Bahrain, etc.|Aug. 2014 –|Under 20|Communication and coordination with units of various countries participating in CTF151|
|MSDF (Local Coordination Center)|Djibouti|Jul. 2012 – Jul. 2014|3|Communication and coordination with the relevant authorities of the Republic of Djibouti and other authorities necessary for Maritime Force and Air Unit to conduct anti-piracy operation|
|GSDF (Air Unit)|Djibouti|May. 2009 – Jul. 2014|Approx. 70 (*)|Security of activity base and P-3C|
|GSDF (Support Unit)|Djibouti|Jul. 2014 –|Approx. 80|Communication and coordination with the relevant authorities of the Republic of Djibouti and other authorities and supports necessary for Air Unit to conduct anti-piracy operation, etc.|



**(5) International Peace Cooperation Activities**


*Number of personnel as of July 2014

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Period of Dispatch|Number of Personnel|Total Number of Personnel|Description of Principal Tasks|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|PKO|United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC)|Ceasefire monitors|Sep. 1992 – Sep. 1993|8|16|• Monitor custody of weapons collected and observance of ceasefire • Monitor observance of ceasefire at the border|
|||Engineer unit|Sep. 1992 – Sep. 1993|600|1200|• Repair roads, bridges and other infrastructure • Supply fuel and water to UNTAC components and other groups • Supply food and accommodation, provide facilities|
|PKO|United Nations operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ)|Headquarters staff|May 1993 – Jan. 1995|5|10|• Draft mid-and long-term plans, plan and coordinate transport operations at UNUMOZ Headquarters|
|||Transport coordination unit|May 1993 – Jan. 1995|48|144|• Support customs clearance work and provide other transport related technical coordination in the allocation of transport|
|Humanitarian aid|Humanitarian Relief Operation for Rwandan Refugees|Rwandan refugee relief unit|Sep.– Dec. 1994|260||• Medical care, prevention of epidemics, water supplies|
|||Air transport unit|Sep.– Dec. 1994|188||• Air transport of Rwandan refugee relief unit personnel and supplies between Nairobi (in Kenya) and Goma (in former Zaire and current Republic of the Congo) • Make use of spare capacity to airlift personnel and supplies of humanitarian international organizations engaged in refugee relief operations|
|PKO|United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) (Golan Heights)|Headquarters staff|Feb. 1996 – Feb. 2009|1st-3th personnel:  2|38|• Create PR and budgets for UNDOF operations, plan and coordinate transport, maintenance and other operations at UNDOF Headquarters|
||||Feb. 2009 – Jan. 2013|14th-17th personnel:  3|||
|||Transport unit|Feb. 1996 – Aug. 2012|1st-33rd personnel:  43|1463|• Transport food and other supplies • Store goods at supply warehouses, repair roads and other infrastructure, maintain heavy machinery, conduct firefighting and snow clearance|
||||Aug. 2012 – Jan. 2013|34th personnel:  44|||
|Humanitarian aid|Humanitarian Relief Operations in Timor-Leste|Air transport unit|Nov. 1999 – Feb. 2000|113||• Air transport of aid materials for UNHCR • Make use of spare capacity for the air transportation of UNHCR related personnel|
|Humanitarian aid|Humanitarian Relief Operations for Afghanistan Refugees|Air transport unit|Oct. 2001|138||• Air transport of relief supplies for UNHCR|
|PKO|United Nations Transitional Administration in Timor- Leste (UNTAET) (United Nations Mission in Timor- Leste (UNMISET) from May 20, 2002)|Headquarters staff|Feb. 2002 – Jun. 2004|1st personnel: 10 2nd personnel: 7|17|• Plan and coordinate engineering and logistics operations at military headquarters|
|||Engineer unit|Mar. 2002 – Jun. 2004|1st and 2nd personnel: 680 3rd personnel:  522 4th personnel:  405|2287|• Maintain and repair roads and bridges that are necessary for PKO unit activities • Maintain reservoirs used by units of other nations and local inhabitants that are in Dili and other locations Civic assistance • Public welfare support operations|
|Humanitarian aid|Humanitarian Relief Operations for Iraqi Refugees|Air transport unit|Mar. – Apr. 2003|50||• Air transport of relief supplies for UNHCR|
|Humanitarian aid|Humanitarian Relief Operations for Iraqi Victims|Air transport unit|Jul. – Aug. 2003|98||• Air transport of materials for the relief of Iraqi victims|
|PKO|United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN)|Arms monitors|Mar. 2007– Jan. 2011|6|24|• Monitor management of weapons of Maoist soldiers and those of the Nepalese government force|
|PKO|United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS)|Headquarters staff|Oct. 2008– Sep. 2011|2|12|• Coordination in UNMIS concerning overall logistics of the military sector • Database management|


-----

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Period of Dispatch|Number of Personnel|Total Number of Personnel|Description of Principal Tasks|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|PKO|United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)|Headquarters staff|Feb. 2010 – Jan. 2013|2|12|• MINUSTAH headquarters carries out coordination of overall military logistics, which includes the prioritization of engineering activities such as coordinating facility- related duties, and procurement and transport of military items|
|||Engineer unit|Feb. 2010 – Jan. 2013|1st personnel:  203 2nd personnel:  346 3rd and 4th personnel: 330 5th and 6th personnel: 317 7th personnel:  297 Removal support personnel:  44|2184|• Remove rubble, repair roads, construct simple facilities, etc.|
|PKO|United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)|Military liaison officer|Sep. 2010 – Sep. 2012|2|8|• Intelligence gathering on the security situation across Timor-Leste|
|PKO|United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS)|Headquarters staff|Nov. 2011 –|4|25|• Coordination within the UNMISS units regarding the demand of overall military logistics • Management of database • Planning and coordination of engineering duties|
|||Engineer Unit|Jan. 2012 –|1st personnel: approx. 210 2nd – 4th personnel:  approx. 330 5th and 6th personnel:  approx. 400 7th personnel:approx. 350|approx. 3400|• Development of infrastructure such as roads (The following duties were added after 5th personnel) • Consultation and coordination with UNMISS regarding engineer unit activities • Coordination regarding logistics|
|||Joint Coordination Center|Jan. 2012 – Dec. 2013|1st personnel: approx. 30 2nd – 4th personnel:  approx. 20|approx. 90|• Consultation and coordination with UNMISS regarding engineer unit activities • Coordination regarding logistics|


Notes: 1. Other operations have included support activities in the areas of transport and supply carried out by units of the MSDF (in Cambodia and Timor-Leste) and the ASDF (in

Cambodia, Mozambique, the Golan Heights, Timor-Leste, and Afghanistan).
2. An advance unit of 23 people was additionally sent as part of the Rwandan refugee relief effort.

|(6) International Disaster Relief Activities by the SDF|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Period of Dispatch|Number of Personnel|Description of Principal Tasks|
|International disaster relief activities in Indonesia (earthquake disaster)|Medical support unit|Jun. 1 – 22, 2006|149|• Medical treatment and prevention of epidemics|
||Air transport unit||85|• Air transport of GSDF International Disaster Relief Teams|
|International disaster relief activities in Indonesia (earthquake disaster)|Medical support unit|Oct. 5 – 17, 2009|12|• Medical treatment|
||Joint liaison office||21|• Coordination with relevant Indonesian organizations and others|
|International disaster relief activities in Haiti (earthquake disaster)|Medical support unit|Jan. 18 – Feb. 16, 2010|104|• Medical treatment|
||Air transport unit||97|• Air transportation of International Disaster Relief Teams • Air transportation of victims from Haiti to the United States as part of international disaster relief activities on the return trips of said unit|
||Joint liaison office||33|• Coordination with relevant Haitian organizations and others|
|International disaster relief activities in Pakistan (floods)|Air support unit|Aug. 20 – Oct. 10, 2010|184|• Transportation of personnel and relief supplies by air|
||Joint operations coordination center||27|• Coordination with related organizations in Pakistan and other related countries|
||Marine convoy||154|• Transportation of GSDF international disaster relief teams by sea|
||Air transport unit||149|• Transportation of GSDF international disaster relief teams by air|
|Transportation of resources and personnel necessary for the implementation of international disaster relief activities in New Zealand (earthquake disaster)|Air transport unit|Feb. 23 – Mar. 3, 2011|40|• Transportation of international disaster relief teams by air|
|International disaster relief activities in Philippines (typhoon disaster)|Local operations coordination center|Nov. 12 – Dec. 13, 2013|1,086|• Coordination with relevant Philippine organizations and others|
||Medical assistance unit/Air support unit|||• Medical treatment, prevention of epidemics and air transportation of personnel and aid materials|
||Maritime dispatched unit|||• Transportation of personnel and relief supplies, etc.|
||Airlift unit|||• Air transportation of personnel and relief supplies, etc.|
|International disaster relief activities for the missing Malaysian airplane (search)|Local support coordination center|Mar. 11– Apr. 28, 2014|137|• Coordination with relevant Malaysian organizations and relevant countries.|
||MSDF Patrol aircraft unit|||• Rescue operations including searching|
||ASDF Airlift unit|||• Rescue operations including searching|
|International disaster relief activities in response to Ebola virus disease outbreak in West Africa (infectious disease)|Local coordination center|Dec. 5 – 11, 2014|4|• Coordination with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, JICA, UNMEER, and other relevant organizations engaged in international disaster relief activities|
||Air transport unit||10|• Transport activities|
||Epidemiological study support|Apr. 21 – May 29, 2015|1|• Support for WHO’s epidemiological study and other activities in Sierra Leone|
|International disaster relief activities in Indonesia (airplane accident)|Local support coordination center|Jan. 3 – 9, 2015|3|• Information gathering related to rescue operations including search of missing AirAsia Flight 8501, coordination with relevant organizations and countries|
||International disaster relief surface force||Approx. 350|• Rescue operations including search of missing AirAsia Flight 8501|


-----

|Col1|Col2|Period of Dispatch|Number of Personnel|Description of Principal Tasks|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|International disaster relief activities in Nepal (earthquake disaster)|Joint operations coordination center|Apr. 27 – May 22, 2015|4|• Coordination with relevant organizations of the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal and relevant countries|
||Medical support unit||Approx. 110|• Medical treatment for affected people|
||Air transport unit||Approx. 30|• Transport of equipment and supplies needed for medical treatment|


Notes: 1. For international disaster relief activities in Iran, a fixing tram was sent to Singapore separately because of a mechanical problem with transport aircraft on the way to Iran.
2. Eleven officers dispatched by GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF are included in the number of personnel of the liaison office in Indonesia for the international disaster relief activities.

**Reference 67 Dispatch of Ministry of Defense Personnel to International Organizations**


||Col2|(As of June 30, 2016)|
|---|---|---|
|Period of Dispatch|Position in the Dispatched Organization|Dispatched Personnel|
|Jun. 9, 1997 – Jun. 30, 2002, Aug. 1, 2004 – Aug. 1, 2007|Inspectorate Division Director, Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (The Hague, the Netherlands)|1 GSDF personnel (Major General)1|
|Jun. 23, 1997 – Jun. 25, 2000|Inspector, Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (The Hague, the Netherlands)|1 GSDF officer (Captain)|
|Oct. 1, 2002 – Jun. 30, 2007|Head, Operations and Planning Branch, Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (The Hague, the Netherlands)|1 GSDF personnel (Colonel)|
|Jul. 11, 2005 – Jul. 11, 2009|Inspector, Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (The Hague, the Netherlands)|1 GSDF personnel (Major)|
|Jan. 9, 2009 – Jan. 8, 2013|Inspector, Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (The Hague, the Netherlands)|1 GSDF personnel (Major)|
|Aug. 27, 2013 –|Inspector, Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (The Hague, the Netherlands)|1 GSDF officer (Captain)|
|Dec. 2, 2002 – Jun. 1, 2005|Military Planning Service, Offcie of Military Affairs, Department of Peacekeeping Operations (UNDPKO) (New York)|1 GSDF personnel (Lieutenant Colonel)|
|Nov. 28, 2005 – Nov. 27, 2008|Military Planning Service, Offcie of Military Affairs, Department of Peacekeeping Operations (UNDPKO) (New York)|1 GSDF personnel (Lieutenant Colonel)|
|Jan. 16, 2011 – Jan. 15, 2014|Military Planning Service, Offcie of Military Affairs, Department of Peacekeeping Operations (UNDPKO) (New York)|1 GSDF personnel (Lieutenant Colonel)|
|Sep. 18, 2013 –|Force Generation Service, Offcie of Military Affairs, Department of Peacekeeping Operations (UNDPKO) (New York)|1 GSDF personnel (Lieutenant Colonel)|
|Jun. 1, 2015 –|Senior Communications Officer, Senior Africa Division I, Office of Operations, Department of Peacekeeping Operations (UNDPKO) (New York)|1 GSDF personnel (Captain)|


Notes: 1. The OPCW Inspectorate Division Director served in office until July 2009 after his retirement from the SDF on August 1, 2007.


**Reference 68 Three Principles on Transfer of Defense Equipment**
**and Technology**

(Approved by the National Security Council
and the Cabinet on April 1, 2014)
The Government has made it its basic policy to deal with overseas
transfer of defense equipment and technology in a careful manner in
accordance with Prime Minster Eisaku Sato’s remarks at the Diet in
1967 (hereinafter referred to as “the Three Principles on Arms Exports”)
and the collateral policy guideline by the Miki administration in 1976.
These policy guidelines have played a certain role as Japan has been
following the path of a peace-loving nation. On the other hand, these
policy guidelines including the non-permission of arms exports to
communist bloc countries have increasingly proved unsuitable for the
current situation. Also, the Government has repeatedly taken exemption
measures depending on the individual necessity of each case since arms
exports to substantially all areas were not permitted, as a result of not
promoting arms exports regardless of the destinations.
Japan has consistently followed the path of a peace-loving nation
since the end of World War II. Japan has adhered to a basic policy
of maintaining an exclusively national defense-oriented policy, not
becoming a military power that poses a threat to other countries,
and observing the Three Non-Nuclear Principles. At the same time,
surrounded by an increasingly severe security environment and
confronted by complex and grave national security challenges, it has
become essential for Japan to make more proactive efforts in line with
the principle of international cooperation. Japan cannot secure its own
peace and security by itself, and the international community expects
Japan to play a more proactive role for peace and stability in the world
commensurate with its national capabilities. Against this backdrop,
under the evolving security environment, Japan will continue to adhere
to the course that it has taken to date as a peace-loving nation, and as
a major player in world politics and the world economy, contribute
even more proactively in securing peace, stability and prosperity of the
international community, while achieving its own security as well as
peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region, as a “Proactive Contributor
to Peace” based on the principle of international cooperation.


From the view point of achieving the fundamental principle of
national security by implementing concrete policies, the Government,
in accordance with the National Security Strategy adopted on December
17, 2013, decided to review the Government’s existing policy guidelines
on overseas transfer of defense equipment and technology, and set out
clear principles which fit the new security environment while giving due
consideration to the roles that the existing policy guidelines have played
so far and by consolidating the policy guidelines comprehensively with
consideration on the past exemption measures.
An appropriate overseas transfer of defense equipment and
technology contributes to further active promotion of the maintenance
of international peace and security through timely and effective
implementation of contribution to peace and international cooperation
such as international peace cooperation, international disaster relief,
humanitarian assistance, responses to international terrorism and piracy,
and capacity building of developing countries (hereinafter referred to
as “peace contribution and international cooperation”). Such transfer
also contributes to strengthening security and defense cooperation with
Japan’s ally, the United States as well as other countries. Furthermore,
it contributes to maintaining and enhancing Japan’s defense production
and technological bases, thereby contributing to Japan’s enhancement
of defense capability, given that international joint development and
production projects have become the international mainstream in order
to improve the performance of defense equipment and to deal with their
rising costs.
On the other hand, since the distribution of defense equipment and
technology has significant security, social, economic and humanitarian
impact on the international community, the need for each government to
control the transfer of defense equipment and technology in a responsible
manner while taking various factors into account is recognized.
In light of the above, while maintaining its basic philosophy as a
peace-loving nation that conforms to the Charter of the United Nations
and the course it has taken as a peace-loving nation, Japan will control
the overseas transfer of defense equipment and technology based on
the following three principles. The overseas transfer of facilities related
to arms production will continue to be treated in the same manner as
defense equipment and technology.


-----

**1. Clarification of cases where transfers are prohibited**
Overseas transfer of defense equipment and technology will not be
permitted when:
1) the transfer violates obligations under treaties and other
international agreements that Japan has concluded,
2) the transfer violates obligations under United Nations Security
Council resolutions, or
3) the defense equipment and technology is destined for a country
party to a conflict (a country against which the United Nations
Security Council is taking measures to maintain or restore
international peace and security in the event of an armed attack).
**2. Limitation to cases where transfers may be permitted as well as**
**strict examination and information disclosure**
In cases not within 1. above, cases where transfers may be permitted
will be limited to the following cases. Those cases will be examined
strictly while ensuring transparency. More specifically, overseas
transfer of defense equipment and technology may be permitted
in such cases as the transfer contributes to active promotion of
peace contribution and international cooperation, or to Japan’s
security from the viewpoint of—implementing international joint
development and production projects with countries cooperating with
Japan in security area including its ally, the U.S. (hereinafter referred
to as “the ally and partners”), —enhancing security and defense
cooperation with the ally and partners, as well as—supporting the
activities of the Self-Defense Forces including the maintenance of
its equipment and ensuring the safety of Japanese nationals. The
Government will conduct strict examination on the appropriateness
of the destination and end user, and the extent the overseas transfer
of such equipment and technology will raise concern for Japan’s
security. Then the Government will make a comprehensive judgment
in light of the existing guidelines of the international export control
regime and based on the information available at the time of export
examinations.
Significant cases that require especially careful consideration
from the viewpoint of Japan’s security will be examined at the
National Security Council (NSC). As for the cases that were

**Reference 69 Activities in Civic Life**


deliberated at the NSC, the Government will disclose their
information in accordance with the Act on Access to Information
Held by Administrative Organs (Law No. 42 of 1999).
**3. Ensuring appropriate control regarding extra-purpose use or**
**transfer to third parties**
In cases satisfying 2. above, overseas transfer of defense equipment
and technology will be permitted only in cases where appropriate
control is ensured. More concretely, the Government will in principle
oblige the Government of the recipient country to gain its prior
consent regarding extra-purpose use and transfer to third parties.
However, appropriate control may be ensured with the confirmation
of control system at the destination in such cases as those where
the transfer is judged to be appropriate for active promotion of
peace contribution and international cooperation, when the transfer
involves participation in an international system for sharing parts
etc., and when the transfer involves delivery of parts etc. to a licenser.
Implementation guidelines for the policy described above will be
decided by the NSC. The Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry
will implement the Foreign Exchange and Foreign Trade Act (Law
No.228 of 1949) appropriately in accordance with the decision.
For the purpose of this policy, “defense equipment and
technology” refers to “arms and military technologies”; “arms”
refers to items listed in Section 1, Annexed List 1 of the Export Trade
Control Order (Cabinet Order No. 378 of 1949), and are to be used
by military forces and directly employed in combat; and “military
technologies” refers to technologies for the design, production or use
of arms.
The Government will contribute actively to the peace and
stability of the international community as a “Proactive Contributor
to Peace” based on the principle of international cooperation. Under
such policy, it will play a proactive role in the area of controlling
defense equipment and technology as well as sensitive dual-use
goods and technologies to achieve the early entry into force of the
Arms Trade Treaty and further strengthen the international export
control regimes.

|Items|Details of Activities and Their Past Records|
|---|---|
|Disposal of Unexploded Bombs1|❍ The GSDF disposes of such bombs at the request of municipal governments and others. ❍ Disposal operations in FY2015: a total of 1,392 disposal operations (average of approximately 27 operations per week), weighing approximately 43.0 tons in total; in particular, the amount of unexploded bombs that were disposed of in Okinawa Prefecture totaled approximately 20.2 tons, (accounting for about 47% of such bombs removed across the nation). (If unexploded bombs are chemical bombs, their disposal is basically beyond the disposal capability of the SDF. However, the SDF is prepared to extend as much cooperation as possible in regard to disposal of such bombs by identifying them and checking for attached fuses.)|
|Removal of Underwater Mines2|❍ The MSDF undertakes minesweeping operations in waters designated as dangerous areas because underwater mines had been laid there during World War II, as well as removes and disposes of explosives after receiving reports from municipal governments and others. ❍ Minesweeping has been almost completed in the dangerous areas. ❍ Disposal operations in FY2015: a total 1,832 units were disposed of, weighing approximately 3.5 tons in total (0 underwater mines disposed). (If explosive hazardous materials are chemical bombs, their disposal is basically beyond the disposal capability of the SDF. However, the SDF is prepared to extend as much cooperation as possible for disposal of such bombs by identifying them and checking for attached fuses.)|
|Medical Activities3|❍ Medical services are provided to general citizens at the National Defense Medical College in Tokorozawa, Saitama Prefecture, and some hospitals affiliated with the SDF (six out of 16 such hospitals, including the SDF Central Hospital in Setagaya Ward, Tokyo). ❍ The National Defense Medical College runs an emergency medical center, which is in charge of providing emergency medical services to seriously injured patients and patients in critical condition. The center is designated as a medical facility providing tertiary emergency services. ❍ In the wake of a disaster, medical units belonging to major SDF units, acting on a request from municipal governments, provide travelling clinics, quarantines and so forth when a disaster occurs. ❍ The GSDF Medical School (Setagaya Ward, Tokyo), MSDF Underwater Medical Center (Yokosuka City, Kanagawa Prefecture), and ASDF Aviation Medicine Laboratory (Tachikawa City, Tokyo and Sayama City, Saitama Prefecture) undertake study on outdoor sanitation, underwater medicine, and aviation medicine, respectively. ❍ The National Defense Medical College Research Institute (Tokorozawa City, Saitama Prefecture) undertakes study on emergency medicine.|
|Cooperation in Supporting Athletic Meetings4|❍ At the request of concerned organizations, the SDF helps operations of the Olympics and Asian games in Japan as well as national sports meetings in the fields of ceremonies, communications, transportation, music performance, medical services, and emergency medical services. ❍ The SDF provides transportation and communication support to marathon events and ekiden road relays.|
|Exchanges with Local Communities|❍ Sports facilities such as grounds, gyms and swimming pools at many of the SDF garrisons and bases are open to general citizens in response to requests from local communities. ❍ Participation in various events sponsored by general citizens and municipal governments or taking part as sports referees and instructors on an individual basis.|


Notes: 1. Supplementary provisions of the Self-Defense Forces Law.
2. Article 84-2 of the Self-Defense Forces Law.
3. Article 27 of the Self-Defense Forces Law, Article 4-10 of Defense Ministry Establishment Law, and others.
4. Article 100-3 of the Self-Defense Forces Law, etc.


-----

**Reference 70 Activities Contributing to Society**

|Items|Details of Activities and Their Past Records|
|---|---|
|Acceptance of Other Parties for Education and Training1|❍ The SDF, responding to requests from other parties, provides education and training to people other than SDF personnel ❍ Basic ranger training, underwater search and rescue training, and education on chemical disasters response are provided to police officers, Japan Coast Guard Personnel and firefighters. Aircraft-maneuvering training is provided to police officers and Japan Coast Guard personnel. The National Institute for Defense Studies and the graduate school of the National Defense Academy accept employees of private-sector companies and personnel of other government ministries for education.|
|Transportation Work2|❍ GSDF, MSDF and ASDF helicopters and government planes transport state guests and the Prime Minister. ❍ SDF units operate government planes which are used when the Emperor and other members of the Imperial Family make overseas visits or the Prime Minister makes overseas trips to attend international conferences. (Partial revision in July 2005 of ordinances of the Self-Defense Forces Law has enabled the use of an SDF plane for the transport of state ministers if doing so is deemed necessary for the execution of important duties.)|
|Ceremonial Work at National Events3|❍ The SDF provides support for state-sponsored ceremonial events involving the Emperor, other members of the Imperial Family, and state guests, with its personnel serving as an honor guard4 forming a line for guests5 and firing a gun salute for them6 ❍ Honor guards and gun salutes are offered at welcoming ceremonies for state guests.|
|Cooperation in Antarctic Research Expedition7|❍ Since the seventh expedition in 1965, the SDF has extended cooperation such as operating its icebreaker and has contributed significantly to Antarctic research projects, which marked their 50th anniversary in FY2007. The new icebreaker “Shirase” went into service in 2009, and the SDF will continue to provide support for such projects in the future. ❍ In cooperating in the 7th Antarctic Research Expedition since November 2015, the SDF has transported expedition members and approximately 1,040 tons of supplies to Showa Station, and provided cooperation for the hydrographic survey planned by the expedition team.|
|Other Cooperation|❍ Acting on requests from the Japan Metrological Agency, the SDF supports various meteorological observations, such as volcanic observation using aircraft and marine-ice observation in Hokkaido coastal regions. ❍ Acting on requests from a liaison council formulating anti-radiation measures, the SDF collects high-altitude floating dusts and makes radiation analysis of them. The SDF, also acting on requests from the Geographical Survey Institute, supports it in aerial measurement aimed at making maps. ❍ Entrusted by the state and municipal governments and others, the SDF undertakes civil engineering work. (Such support is provided only if doing so is deemed to serve training purposes)8 ❍ Other support activities by the SDF include sea ice observation, support for flights of private chartered aircraft to Iwoto island, and the dispatch SDF of music bands.|



Notes: 1. Article 100-2 of the Self-Defense Forces Law.
2. Article 100-5 of the Self-Defense Forces Law and others.
3. Article 6 of the Self-Defense Forces Law and Article 13 of rules aimed at implementing the Self-Defense Forces Law and others.
4. Honor guard: Officers of the honor guard, salute guests while carrying a gun as a mark of state respect.
5. Formation of line: SDF officers form a line on the road to show respect to guests and salute them.
6. Gun salute: SDF officers fire a blank canon salute to show respect to guests.
7. Article 100-4 of the Self-Defense Forces Law.
8. Article 100 of the Self-Defense Forces Law.


**Reference 71 Outline of Measures to Improve the Living Environment in the Areas Surrounding Defense Facilities**


(Cause of Disturbance)

Activities by SDF
and others


(Cause of Disturbance) (Measures)

Devastation of training areas Subsidy for disturbance prevention

(Noise abatement works): Subsidy for noise-abatement work for schools, hospitals, etc.


Class 1 Area Subsidy for noise-abatement work for housing[1]

Compensation for relocation and others Subsidy for improvements of public facilities at relocation site

noise Class 2 Area

Purchase of land Free use of purchased land

Class 3 Area Maintenance of greenbelts

Loss sustained in running agricultural, fisheries, and forestry businesses Compensation for loss[2]
(Restricted to loss resulting from SDF activities)


Disruption of everyday life or
business activities


Subsidy for improvement of public welfare facilities


Establishment and
operation of defense
facilities


Effect on living
environments and
development projects


Cities, towns, and
villages related to
Specified Defense Facilities


Provision of Specified Defense Facility
Environs Improvement Adjustment Grant


Notes: 1. (1) Class 1 Area, Class 2 Area, Class 3 Area
Areas around bases are classified as follows according to the degree of disturbance caused by aircraft noise:
Class 1 Area: Areas where WECPNL is 75 or higher
Class 2 Area: Section of Class 1 Areas where WECPNL is 90 or higher
Class 3 Area: Section of Class 2 Areas where WECPNL is 95 or higher

-  Criteria used for area classifications until 2012 are: WECPNL at 75 or higher, 90 or higher, and 95 or higher for Class 1 Areas, Class 2 Areas, and Class
3 Areas, respectively.
Criteria used for area classifications in 2013 and beyond are: Lden at 62 or higher, 73 or higher, and 76 or higher for Class 1 Areas, Class 2 Areas, and
Class 3 Areas, respectively.
(2) WECPNL (Weighted Equivalent Continuous Perceived Noise Level) represents the unit by which the impact of aircraft noise on human life is evaluated,
taking into account various factors including intensity, as well as frequency of occurrence and duration, with particular emphasis on nighttime noise levels.

(3) Lden
The equivalent noise level over a day being assessed by weighing noises measured early evening and at night.
Notes: 2. If losses are caused due to acts of the U.S. Forces in Japan, they are compensated according to the Act on Compensation of Special Losses Caused by Act of

United States Forces and Other Forces.


-----

**Reference 72 Partial Amendment of the Law Concerning Adjustment, etc. of the Living Environment in the Environs of Defense Facilities**


**Review of the calculation of the ordinary amount issued under the Financial**
**Equalization Grants for Improvement of Surroundings of Specified Defence**
**Institutions**

(1) Revision of calculation method


**Review of the uses of Financial Equalization Grants for Improvement of**
**Surroundings of Specified Defence Institutions**


Background

Diversification of local needs (demand for allocation to soft business)
Evaluation results of the “business classification” by the Government
Revitalization Unit  “To make the uses more free and improve usability”


 Change in the budget allocation for calculation elements

(budget allocation for “operation” will be increased)


 Establishment of new training points relating to large-scale or specific

training (amount will be increased if joint Japan-US training, large scale
exercises, etc., are held)


Before revision After revision


Special grant Special grant
amount: 30%

5/10 Operation

points

Ordinary grant

amount: 70% 2.5/10 Area points

Population

2.5/10 points

Special grant

5/10 Operation

points

0.5/10 Training points
2.0/10 Area points

Population

2.5/10

points

(2) Consideration for cities, towns and villages with high population density

(population density points will be added)

(3) Consideration for the particularity of US Forces operations

(points will be added to facilities used by stationed forces)

elementary / junior-high school buildings, etc.) (4) Appropriate reflection of the effects of operations (number of flights point

(4) Appropriate reflection of the effects of operations (number of flights point

and exercising personnel points will be subdivided)

**Before revision**

Improvement of public-use facilities

Public-use facilities:
Transportation and communications facilities, sports and recreational facilities,
environmental health facilities, education and cultural facilities, medical
facilities, social welfare facilities, facilities associated with fire-fighting,
facilities that contribute to the stimulation of industry

**After revision**

Improvement of public-use facilities

So-called soft business (Newly added)

Soft businesses such as the following are envisioned:

- Assistance for medical expenses (medical expenses for elementary school
pupils and younger, examination costs for pregnant women, etc.)

- Assistance for the cost of running community buses (operational costs for
welfare buses, etc.)

- Assistance for the cost to conduct a diagnosis of earthquake resistance for
schools and other facilities (cost of diagnosing the earthquake resistance of
elementary / junior-high school buildings, etc.)


Defense facilities and cities, towns and villages newly designated as Specified Defense Facilities and Specified Defense Facility-Related Cities,
Towns and Villages, respectively


|Specif ied Defense Facilities|Specif ied Defense Facility- Related Cities, Towns and Villages|
|---|---|
|Matsushima Air Field|Ishinomaki|
|Iwo Jima Airport|Ogasawara, Tokyo|
|Naval Air Facility Atsugi|Fujisawa|
|Ashiya Air Field|Mizumaki, Onga District, Fukuoka Prefecture|
|Torishima Range|Kumejima, Shimajiri District, Okinawa Prefecture|
|Shimokita Test Center|Higashido¯ri, Shimokita District, Aomori Prefecture|


|Specif ied Defense Facilities|Specif ied Defense Facility- Related Cities, Towns and Villages|
|---|---|
|Sagami General Depot|Sagamihara|
|Tokushima Airf ield|Matsushige, Itano District, Tokushima Prefecture|
|Metabaru Air Field|Yoshinogari, Kanzaki District, Saga Prefecture|
||Kamimine, Miyaki District, Saga Prefecture|
|Camp Gonsalves|Kunigami, Kunigami District, Okinawa Prefecture|
||Higashi, Kunigami District, Okinawa Prefecture|


|Specif ied Defense Facilities|Specif ied Defense Facility- Related Cities, Towns and Villages|
|---|---|
|Kasumigaura Air Field|Tsuchiura|
||Ami, Inashiki District, Ibaraki Prefecture|
|Utsunomiya Air Field|Utsunomiya|
|Soumagahara Airf ield|Shinto¯, Kitagunma District, Gunma Prefecture|
|Kisarazu Air Field|Kisarazu|
|Camp Zama|Sagamihara|
||Zama|


**Reference 73 Record of Information Disclosure by the Ministry of Defense (FY2015)**

|Col1|Col2|Ministry of Defense Headquarters|Regional Defense Bureaus and Branches|Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Agency|Total|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1. Number of disclosure requests||2,074|2,389|95|4,558|
|2. Number of decisions regarding disclosure Requests accepted Requests partially accepted Requests declined||2,117|2,290|71|4,478|
||Requests accepted|1,190|1,228|46|2,464|
||Requests partially accepted|744|1,053|24|1,821|
||Requests declined|183|9|1|193|
|3. Number of administrative protests||947|1|3|951|
|4. Number of lawsuits||1|0|0|1|


-----

**Reference 74 “Public Opinion Survey on the Self Defense Forces and Defense Issues” (excerpt)**
**(Public Relations Office of Cabinet Office)**


Outline of the survey period: January 8–18, 2015

Respondents: Japanese citizens aged 20 years or older in Japan

Valid responses (rate): 1,680 (56.0%)

Survey method: Individual interview by survey personnel

For details, refer to http://survey.gov-online.go.jp/h26/h26-bouei/index.html


1 Interest in the SDF and defense issues

(%)

80

60

40

30

20

10


2 Impression toward the SDF

(%)

60

50

40

0

Good impression (subtotal)[1]

91.7

82.2 84.9 92.2

68.8 69.2 75.4 74.3 [76.7] 76.8 80.5 80.3 80.9

71.3

67.5

58.9

Bad impression (subtotal)[2]

24.3

17.5 19.4

11.7 12.9 14.1

14.1 17.6 13.4 16.7 15.6 13.4 10.5 10.0 4.8

5.3


Notes: 1. Total of “good impression” and “somewhat good impression” (Total of “good

impression” and “do not have bad impression” until the survey of February 2006).

2. Total of “somewhat bad impression” and “bad impression” (Total of “do not have
good impression” and “bad impression” until the survey of February 2006).


Interested (subtotal)[1] 69.8 71.5

67.3 67.4

57.0 57.8 64.7
59.4

50.4 49.6 50.3 54.9 56.8

47.7 48.1 47.8 43.4 40.8 41.6 41.2 38.9

34.4

31.9

30.2 29.2 28.2

Not Interested (subtotal)[2]


Notes: 1. Total of “very interested” and “somewhat interested” (Total of “very
interested” and “slightly interested” until the survey of November 1984).
2. Total of “hardly interested” and “not at all interested.”
3. For gender- and age-specific information, see:
http://survey.gov-online.go.jp/h26/h26-bouei/zh/z01.html.

3 Defense capabilities of the SDF


4 Evaluation of the SDF disaster relief activities

Appreciate (Total) 98.0 Do not appreciate (Total) 1.3

Highly Appreciate to Do not appreciate Do not



(Eligible number
of people)

Total (1,680)


(Eligible number
of people)

|very mu appreciated a certain degree|Col2|uch apprecia|
|---|---|---|
|Don’t know||－|
|64.9|33.2||
||||



6 Efforts in international peace cooperation activities


|Should be decreased|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Should be decreased Should be increased Current strength is sufficient||||
|||||
|29.9|59.2|||
|||||


5 Evaluation of overseas activities by the SDF

Appreciate (Total) 89.8 Do not appreciate (Total) 7.3

Highly Appreciate to Do not appreciate Do not

of people)

6.5


0.7 1.3


－



(Eligible number
of people)

Total (1,680)




1.0

|apprec|very muc ciated a certain degree|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
||Don’t know|||
|39.2||50.6||
|2.9||||

|Should make more efforts Should maintain Should reduce the amount|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|more efforts maintain the amount in engaging current of efforts in proactively engagement engaging from level current level||||
||||3.|
|25.9|65.4|||
|4.6||||


-----

Defense Chronology

|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|1945|Aug.15 Aug.17 Aug.17 Aug.28 Sep.02 Oct.09 Oct.15 Oct.24 Nov.30|World War II ends Higashikuninomiya Cabinet established Republic of Indonesia declares independence Provisional government of People’s Republic of Vietnam established GHQ established Shidehara Cabinet established General Staff Office and Military Command abolished United Nations established Army and Navy Ministries abolished|
|1946|Jan.04 Jan.10 Jan.27 Feb.26 Mar.05 Apr.05 Apr.24 May 03 May 22 Oct.01 Nov.03 Dec.19|GHQ orders purge from public office First session of U.N. General Assembly (London, through February 14) GHQ orders the suspension of Japanese administrative right over Ryukyu and Ogasawara Islands Far East Commission formed Churchill’s “Iron Curtain” speech First meeting of Allied Council on Japan Civil administration of Okinawa established International Military Tribunal for the Far East opened Yoshida Cabinet established International War Crimes Tribunal in Nuremberg renders judgment The Constitution of Japan promulgated First Indochina War starts (through 1954)|
|1947|Mar.12 May.03 Jun.01 Jun.05 Aug.15 Aug.15 Oct.05 Dec.17|Truman Doctrine announced The Constitution of Japan takes effect Katayama Cabinet established Marshall Plan announced India and Pakistan gain independence First India–Pakistan conflict (through 1965) Cominform established Police Law promulgated (National Rural Police and municipal police forces established)|
|1948|Mar.10 Apr.01 Apr.27 May 14 Jun.11 Jun.26 Aug.15 Sep.09 Oct.19 Nov.12|Ashida Cabinet established USSR imposes Berlin blockade (through May 12, 1949) Japan Coast Guard Law promulgated Israel gains independence; First Middle East War starts (through February 24, 1949) U.S. Senate Vandenberg resolution Berlin airlift starts Republic of Korea (ROK) declares independence North Korea established Second Yoshida Cabinet established International Military Tribunal for the Far East renders judgment|
|1949|Jan.25 Feb.16 Apr.04 Apr.21 May 06 Jul.05 Jul.15 Aug.17 Sep.24 Oct.01 Oct.07 Dec.07|Council for Mutual Economic Cooperation (COMECON) established Inauguration of third Yoshida Cabinet North Atlantic Treaty signed by 12 nations (becomes effective August 24) (NATO established) Nationalist-Communist talks break up; Chinese Communist Army launches general offensive Federal Republic of Germany established (West Germany) Shimoyama incident Mitaka incident Matsukawa incident USSR declares possession of atomic bomb People’s Republic of China established German Democratic Republic established (East Germany) Chinese Nationalist Party takes refuge in Taiwan|
|1950|Jan.27 Feb.14 Jun.21 Jun.25 Jun.28 Jul.07 Jul.08 Aug.10 Aug.13 Aug.14 Sep.07 Sep.15 Oct.25 Nov.24 Dec.18|U.S. signs MSA agreement with NATO countries Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Alliance and Mutual Assistance signed John Foster Dulles, adviser to the U.S. Department of State, visits Japan Korean War (ends July 27, 1953) Inauguration of third reshuffled Yoshida Cabinet United Nations Force formed for dispatch to Korea General MacArthur authorizes the establishment of the National Police Reserve, consisting of 75,000 men, and the expansion of the Japan Coast Guard by 8,000 men National Police Reserve Ordinance promulgated and put into effect Ordinary personnel recruitment for the National Police Reserve begins Masuhara appointed first Director-General of the National Police Reserve National Police Reserve headquarters moves from the National Police Agency headquarters to Etchujima U.N. troops land at Inchon Chinese Communist volunteers join Korean War U.S. announces the seven principles for concluding a peace treaty with Japan NATO Defense Commission agrees to establishment of NATO Forces|
|1951|Jan.23 Jan.29 Mar.01 Apr.11 Jul.04 Aug.30 Sep.01 Sep.08 Oct.20 Oct.26 Dec.26|Minister of State Ohashi takes charge of the National Police Reserve First Yoshida-Dulles talks (peace treaty negotiations) Special recruitment of Military and Naval Academy graduates to serve as police officers 1st and 2nd class begins MacArthur was dismissed as Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers Inauguration of third reshuffled Yoshida Cabinet (second term) Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers dismissed U.S.–Philippines Mutual Defense Treaty signed Australia– New Zealand–U.S. sign ANZUS Treaty 49 countries sign Peace Treaty with Japan; Japan–U.S. Security Treaty concluded Ozuki unit dispatched for the first time on a rescue relief operation to Kita Kawachi Village, Yamaguchi Prefecture, in the wake of Typhoon Ruth House of Representatives approves Peace Treaty and Japan–U.S. Security Treaty (House of Councilors approval given November 18) Inauguration of third reshuffeld Yoshida Cabinet (third term)|



1952 Jan.19 ROK proclaims sovereignty over neighboring ocean areas


|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|1952|Feb.28 Apr.26 Apr.28 Apr.28 Apr.28 May 01 May 26 May 27 Jul.21 Jul.26 Jul.31 Aug.01 Oct.15 Oct.30 Oct.31 Nov.01 Nov.12|Japan–U.S. Administrative Agreement signed Maritime Guard established within the Japan Coast Guard Japan–Taiwan Peace Treaty concluded Japan–U.S. Peace Treaty and Japan–U.S. Security Treaty enter into force Far East Commission, Allied Council, and GHQ Abolished May Day riot at Imperial Palace Plaza U.S., U.K., and France sign peace agreement with Germany European Defense Community (EDC) Treaty signed Subversive Activities Prevention Law promulgated and enters into force Japan–U.S. Facilities and Areas Agreement signed National Safety Agency Law promulgated National Safety Agency established; Prime Minister Yoshida concurrently becomes Director-General of the National Safety Agency; Coastal Safety Force inaugurated National Safety Force inaugurated Inauguration of fourth Yoshida Cabinet; Kimura becomes Director-General of the National Safety Agency U.K. carries out its first atomic bomb test U.S. carries out its first hydrogen bomb test Japan–U.S. Ship Leasing Agreement signed|
|1953|Jan.01 Jan.20 Mar.05 Apr.01 May 21 Jul.27 Aug.12 Sep.27 Oct.01 Oct.30 Dec.25|Security Advisory Group in Japan inaugurated Eisenhower becomes U.S. President USSR General Secretary Stalin dies (Malenkov takes over March 6) National Safety Academy (predecessor of National Defense Academy) established Inauguration of fifth Yoshida Cabinet Korean War Armistice Agreement signed USSR carries out its first hydrogen bomb test Yoshida and Shigemitsu talk U.S.–ROK Mutual Defense Treaty signed Ikeda–Robertson talks; joint statement issued on gradual increase in self-defense strength Japanese administrative rule over Amami Islands restored|
|1954|Jan.21 Mar.01 Mar.01 Mar.08 Mar.14 May 14 Jun.02 Jun.09 Jul.01 Jul.21 Sep.03 Sep.08 Dec.02 Dec.10|U.S. launches world’s frist nuclear submarine (USS Nautilus) U.S. carries out hydrogen bomb test at Bikini Atoll Daigo Fukuryu maru (Lucky Dragon V) incident Mutual Defense Assistance (MDA) agreement signed Khrushchev becomes Soviet Union Communist Party General Secretary Japan and U.S. sign Land Lease Agreement on naval vessels House of Councilors passes resolution prohibiting dispatch of troops overseas Promulgation of Defense Agency Establishment Law, Self- Defense Forces Law and Protection of National Secrecy Law pertaining to the MDA Defense Agency established; Ground, Maritime and Air Self-Defense Forces inaugurated Geneva Agreement on armistice in Indochina signed Chinese People’s Liberation Army shells Quemoy and Matsu for the first time South East Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) formed by signing of collective defense pact U.S.–Taiwan Mutual Defense Treaty signed Hatoyama Cabinet established; Omura becomes Minister of State for Defense|
|1955|Mar.19 Apr.18 May 05 May 06 May 08 May 14 Jul.31 Aug.06 Aug.31 Nov.14 Nov.22 Dec.19|Inauguration of second Hatoyama Cabinet; Sugihara becomes Minister of State for Defense Africa–Asia conference held at Bandung West Germany formally admitted to NATO Live shell fire by U.S. forces at Kita Fuji Maneuver Area; opposition to firing intensifies Protests begin at Sunagawa Base Signing of Warsaw Pact (WPO starts) Sunada becomes Minister of State for Defense First World Conference Against Atomic and Hydrogen Bombs held in Hiroshima Shigemitsu-Dulles meeting; joint statement issued on revision of Japan–U.S. Security Treaty Japan–U.S. Atomic Energy Agreement signed Inauguration of third Hatoyama Cabinet; Funada becomes Minister of State for Defense Atomic Energy Basic Law promulgated|
|1956|Feb.09 Feb.14 Mar.23 Apr.17 Apr.26 Jul.02 Jul.26 Sep.20 Oct.19 Oct.23 Oct.29 Dec.18 Dec.23|House of Representatives passes resolution to ban atomic and hydrogen bomb tests (House of Councilors, February 10) Stalin criticized at the 20th Congress of Soviet Communist Party in Moscow; Khrushchev proclaims policy of peaceful co-existence with the West Defense Agency moved to Kasumigaseki USSR announces dissolution of Cominform First Japan-made destroyer Harukaze completed National Defense Council Composition Law promulgated Egyptian President Nasser nationalizes the Suez Canal First domestically-produced F-86F fighter delivered Joint declaration on restoration of Japanese–Soviet relations Hungarian Revolution Second Middle East War (Suez War; through November 6) Japan joins the U.N. Ishibashi Cabinet established; Prime Minister concurrently becomes Minister of State for Defense|


1957 Jan.31 Acting Prime Minister Kishi concurrently becomes, ad
interim, Minister of State for Defense
Feb.02 Kotaki becomes Minister of State for Defense
Feb.25 Kishi Cabinet established
Mar.15 House of Councilors passes resolution to ban atomic and
hydrogen bombs
May 15 U.K. conducts its first hydrogen bomb test
May 20 Basic Guidelines for National Defense adopted by the
National Defense Council and the Cabinet
Jun.14 First Defense Build-up Plan adopted by the National
Defense Council and approved by the Cabinet
Jun.21 Kishi–Eisenhower talks; joint statement on the early
withdrawal of the USFJ issued
Jul.10 Inauguration of reshuffled Kishi Cabinet; Tsushima
becomes Minister of State for Defense
Aug.06 Japan–U.S. Security Council inaugurated
A 26 USSR f l ICBM


|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|1957|Aug.27 Sep.10 Oct.04 Nov.23|Trial startup of reactor at Tokaimura National Defense Council decision to produce P2V-742 aircraft domestically, Cabinet report on September 17 USSR launches the world’s frist artifciial satellite, Sputnik 1 World Congress of Communist Parties issues the Moscow Declaration|
|1958|Jan.01 Jan.01 Jan.14 Jan.31 Feb.17 Apr.18 Jun.12 Aug.23 Sep.11 Oct.04 Oct.23 Dec.17|Japan becomes non-permanent member of the U.N. Security Council European Economic Community (EEC) starts First ocean training exercises (Hawaii, through February 28) U.S. successfully launches an artificial satellite ASDF begins airspace anti-intrusion measures House of Representatives passes resolution to ban atomic and hydrogen bombs Inauguration of second Kishi Cabinet; Sato becomes Minister of State for Defense Chinese People’s Liberation Army attack on Quemoy intensifeis Fujiyama–Dulles talks (Washington, D.C.); agreement on revision of the Japan–U.S. Security Treaty Commencement of Japan–U.S. talks on the revision of the Japan–U.S. Security Treaty Dulles talks with Chiang Kaishek; joint statement issued denying counteroffensive against mainland China U.S. test-launches Atlas ICBM|
|1959|Jan.12 Mar.30 Mar.31 Jun.18 Aug.25 Sep.18 Sep.26 Sep.27 Nov.06 Dec.01 Dec.16|Ino becomes Minister of State for Defense Tokyo District Court rules the stationing of U.S. Forces to be unconstitutional in the Sunagawa case 14th Dalai Lama is exiled to India Inauguration of second reshuffled Kishi Cabinet; Akagi becomes Minister of State for Defense China–India border dispute USSR General Secretary Khrushchev proposes complete military reductions at U.N. Disaster relief teams dispatched after Typhoon Vera U.S.–Soviet summit; joint statement issued at Camp David National Defense Council decision to produce 200 F-104 aircraft domestically, approved by Cabinet on November 10 Antarctica Treaty signed Supreme Court reverses original ruling in the Sunagawa case|
|1960|Jan.11 Jan.19 Feb.13 Apr.27 May 01 May 24 Jul.19 Jul.20 Dec.08 Dec.20|Defense Agency moves to Hinoki-cho New Japan–U.S. Security Treaty is signed (enters into force June 23) France conducts its first nuclear test in the Sahara Rhee resigns as President of ROK U-2 reconnaissance plane belonging to U.S. shot down in Soviet airspace Disaster relief teams dispatched after the earthquake and tsunami in Chile Ikeda Cabinet established; Esaki becomes Minister of State for Defense U.S. conducts successful underwater launch of Polaris SLBM Inauguration of second Ikeda Cabinet; Nishimura becomes Minister of State for Defense Formation of the South Vietnam National Liberation Front|
|1961|Jan.13 Jan.20 Apr.12 May 16 Jul.06 Jul.11 Jul.18 Jul.18 Aug.13|National Defense Council decides to reorganize GSDF units (into 13 divisions); presented to Cabinet January 20 Kennedy becomes U.S. President USSR successfully launches manned spacecraft Military junta seizes power in a coup in ROK Soviet–North Korea Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance signed Sino–North Korean Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance signed Inauguration of second reshuffled Ikeda Cabinet; Fujieda becomes Minister of State for Defense Second Defense Build-up Plan adopted by National Defense Council and Cabinet Construction of Berlin Wall|
|1962|Jul.18 Jul.23 Aug.15 Oct.15 Oct.20 Oct.24 Oct.28 Nov.01 Nov.09|Inauguration of second reshuffled Ikeda Cabinet (second term); Shiga becomes Minister of State for Defense International Agreement on the Neutrality of Laos signed in Geneva International Conference GSDF completes 13 division organization Type 61 tank first introduced China–India border dispute (through November 22) U.S. Navy imposes sea blockade of Cuba (through November 20) Premier of the Soviet Union Khrushchev declares dismantling of missile bases in Cuba Defense Facilities Administration Agency established Shiga visits U.S. for first time as Minister of State for Defense (through November 26)|
|1963|Jun.20 Jul.18 Aug.08 Aug.14 Sep.16 Nov.22 Dec.09 Dec.17|Agreement signed for U.S.–Soviet hotline Inauguration of second reshuffled Ikeda Cabinet (third term); Fukuda becomes Minister of State for Defense Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty signed by U.S.–USSR– U.K. (enters into force on October 10) Japan joins Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Malaysian Federation established U.S. President Kennedy assassinated, Johnson becomes U.S. President Inauguration of third Ikeda Cabinet ROK transits to civilian government, Park Chung-hee becomes President|
|1964|Jun.15 Jul.18 Aug.02 Oct.16 Oct.16 Nov.09 Nov.12|Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty enters into force for Japan Inauguration of third reshuffled Ikeda Cabinet; Koizumi becomes Minister of State for Defense Gulf of Tonkin incident China successfully carries out its first nuclear test Brezhnev becomes USSR General Secretary Sato Cabinet established U.S. nuclear submarine (Sea Dragon) enters a Japanese port (Sasebo) for the first time|


1965 Feb.07 U.S. starts bombing of North Vietnam
Feb.10 Diet debate on Mitsuya study
Jun.03 Inauguration of reshuffled Sato Cabinet; Matsuno
becomes Minister of State for Defense
J 22 J ROK B i T t i d


-----

|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|1965|Sep.01 Nov.10|Second India–Pakistan conflict (to September 22) Icebreaker Fuji leaves on first mission to assist Antarctic observation (through April 8, 1966)|
|1966|May 16 Jul.01 Aug.01 Oct.27 Nov.29 Dec.03|Cultural Revolution starts in China France withdraws from the NATO command (rejoined April 4, 2009) Inauguration of reshuffled Sato Cabinet (second term); Kambayashiyama becomes Minister of State for Defense China successfully carries out its first nuclear missile test Outline of Third Defense Build-up Plan adopted by National Defense Council and Cabinet Inauguration of reshuffled Sato Cabinet; Masuda becomes Minister of State for Defense|
|1967|Jan.27 Feb.17 Mar.14 Mar.29 Jun.05 Jun.17 Jul.01 Aug.08 Nov.25|Outer Space Treaty signed Inauguration of second Sato Cabinet Key matters for inclusion in Third Defense Build-up Plan agreed by National Defense Council; adopted by Cabinet on March 14 Sapporo District Court renders judgment on Eniwa Case Third Middle East War (through June 9) China successfully carries out its first hydrogen bomb test Formation of European Community (EC) Formation of Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Inauguration of second reshuffled Sato Cabinet|
|1968|Jan.16 Jan.19 Jan.23 Feb.26 May 13 Jun.26 Jul.01 Aug.20 Aug.24 Nov.30|Prime Minister Wilson announces withdrawal of U.K. troops east of Suez U.S. nuclear-powered aircraft carrier (Enterprise) enters a Japanese port (Sasebo) for the first time Seizure of U.S. Navy intelligence vessel Pueblo by North Korea New Japan–U.S. nuclear agreement signed First formal Vietnamese peace talks held in Paris Ogasawara Islands revert to Japan Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty signed Soviet and Eastern European troops invade Czechoslovakia France carries out its first hydrogen bomb test in the South Pacific Inauguration of second reshuffled Sato Cabinet (second term); Arita becomes Minister of State for Defense|
|1969|Jan.10 Jan.20 Mar.02 Apr.04 Apr.15 Jun.10 Jul.25 Nov.21|National Defense Council decision to produce 104 F-4E aircraft domestically, approved by Cabinet Nixon becomes U.S. President Armed clashes between Chinese and Soviet forces on Chenpao Island (Damansky Island) Japan–U.S. memorandum signed for Japanese production of F-4EJ North Korea shoots down U.S. EC-121 reconnaissance plane South Vietnam announces establishment of Provisional Revolutionary Government U.S. President Nixon announce Guam Doctrine (later the Nixon Doctrine) Sato–Nixon joint statement (extension of Japan-U.S. Security Treaty, return of Okinawa to Japan by 1972)|
|1970|Jan.14 Jan.24 Feb.03 Feb.11 Mar.05 Mar.31 Apr.16 Apr.24 Jun.23 Aug.12 Oct.20 Nov.25|Inauguration of third Sato Cabinet; Nakasone becomes Minister of State for Defense Formation of integrated WPO (Warsaw Pact) forces (involving seven countries) Japan signs Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty First domestically produced artificial satellite successfully launched Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty comes into force Yodo hijacking U.S. and USSR begin SALT I strategic arms limitation talks China successfully launches its first satellite Automatic extension of Japan–U.S. Security Treaty West Germany–USSR sign non-aggression pact Publication of “The Defense of Japan,” the first white paper on defense Yukio Mishima commits suicide by ritual disembowelment at the GSDF Eastern Army Headquarters in Ichigaya|
|1971|Feb.11 Jun.17 Jun.29 Jul.05 Jul.30 Aug.02 Aug.09 Sep.30 Oct.25 Nov.24 Nov.27 Dec.03 Dec.03 Dec.05|Signing of treaty forbidding the use of the seabed for military purposes Agreement on the Return of Okinawa signed Okinawa Defense Agreement (Kubo-Curtis Agreement) signed Inauguration of third reshuffled Sato Cabinet; Masuhara becomes Minister of State for Defense All Nippon Airways plane collides with SDF aircraft (Shizukuishi) Nishimura becomes Minister of State for Defense India–Soviet Friendship Treaty signed U.S. and USSR sign agreement on measures to reduce the danger of nuclear war U.N. General Assembly adopts resolution to admit China and expel Taiwan House of Representatives resolution on nonnuclear weapons ASEAN declares SEA neutrality Third India–Pakistan conflict Ezaki becomes Minister of State for Defense ASDF frist domestic supersonic aircraft ASDF XT-2 delivered|


1972 Jan.07 Sato–Nixon joint statement on the agreement of the
return of Okinawa and the reduction of bases
Feb.08 National Defense Council adopts Outline of 4th FiveYear Defense Build-up Plan, approved by Cabinet on
February 8
Feb.27 U.S. President Nixon visits China; China–U.S. Joint
Communique
Apr.10 Japan signs Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BWC)
Apr.18 National Defense Council decision on SDF deployment in
Okinawa, presented to Cabinet on April 18
May 15 Return of Okinawa
May 26 SALT I and agreement to limit ABM signed during the visit
of U.S. President Nixon to USSR
Jul.03 India–Pakistan truce signed
Jul.04 ROK and North Korea make a Joint Statement for peaceful
unification
Jul.07 Tanaka Cabinet established; Masuhara becomes Minister
of State for Defense
Sep.29 Prime Minister Tanaka visits China; normalization of
di l ti l ti b t J d Chi



|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|1979|Jan.01 Jan.07 Jan.11 Feb.11 Feb.17 Mar.26 Jun.18 Jul.17 Jul.25 Oct.26 Nov.09 Dec.27|U.S. and China normalize diplomatic relations, U.S. notifies termination of the U.S.–Taiwan Mutual Defense Treaty after one year Fall of Phnom Penh, establishment of Heng Samrin regime announced Introduction of E-2C approved by National Defense Council and Cabinet Islamic Revolution takes place in Iran Sino–Vietnamese War (through March 5) Egypt–Israel peace treaty signed SALT II signed Announcement of Mid-Term Defense Estimate (FY1980– FY1984) Minister of State for Defense Yamashita makes first visit to ROK as an incumbent Minister (through July 26) Assassination of ROK President Park Chung Hee Inauguration of second Ohira Cabinet; Kubota becomes Minister of State for Defense Soviet Union invades Afghanistan|
|1980|Feb.04 Feb.26 Apr.11 May 18 Jul.17 Jul.17 Aug.18 Aug.19 Aug.21 Sep.03 Sep.22|Hosoda becomes Minister of State for Defense Maritime Self-Defense Force takes part in RIMPAC for the first time (through March 18) Sino–Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Alliance and Mutual Assistance lapses China tests an ICBM in the direction of the South Pacific Ocean for the first time House of Councilors establishes special committee for Security Treaty, Okinawa, and Northern Territories issues Suzuki Cabinet established; Omura becomes Minister of State for Defense Interceptors begin to be armed with missiles Arming escorts with live torpedoes announced Soviet nuclear submarine has an accident off the main island of Okinawa First meeting of the Japan–U.S. Systems and Technology Forum (Washington, D.C., through September 4) Iran and Iraq enter into full-fledged war|
|1981|Jan.06 Apr.22 Jul.07 Jul.13 Oct.01 Nov.30 Dec.13|February 7 decided as Northern Territories Day (Cabinet understanding) Defense Agency announces classifciation of the laws and regulations subject to the Studies on Emergency Legislation Tokyo High Court renders judgment in Hyakuri Base suit Hachioji branch of Tokyo District Court renders judgment in 1st and 2nd Yokota Air Base noise suits (GSDF) First Japan–U.S. bilateral exercises (in communications) staged at Higashi Fuji Maneuver Area (through October 3) Inauguration of reshuffled Suzuki Cabinet; Ito becomes Minister of State for Defense Poland declares martial law and establishes the Military Council of National Salvation|
|1982|Feb.15 Apr.02 Apr.25 May 15 Jun.06 Jun.08 Jun.09 Jun.29 Jul.23 Aug.17 Sep.09 Oct.12 Oct.20 Nov.12 Nov.27|(GSDF) First Japan–U.S. bilateral command post exercise (staged at Takigahara, through February 19) Falklands dispute (ends June 14) Israel returns all of Sinai Peninsula Use of some sections of land within facilities and areas located in Okinawa starts under the Special Land Lease Law Israeli forces invade Lebanon BWC enters into force in Japan Convention on Conventional Weapons (CCW), Protocols I, II and III concluded Commencement of Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START-I) U.S.–Soviet Union (Geneva) 1981 Mid-Term Defense Estimate presented to and approved by National Defense Council U.S.–China Joint Statement about U.S. weapons sales to Taiwan Supreme Court renders judgment on Naganuma Nike Missile Base Case China successfully tests SLBM water launch Yokohama District Court renders judgment in 1st Atsugi Air Facility noise suit Andropov becomes Soviet General Secretary Nakasone Cabinet established; Tanigawa becomes Minister of State for Defense|
|1983|Jan.01 Jan.14 Mar.23 Jun.12 Sep.01 Oct.09 Oct.25 Nov.08 Dec.12 Dec.27|U.S. establishes new Unified Combatant Command (Central Command) Government decides to pave the way for the transfer of military technologies to the U.S. (Statement by the Chief Cabinet Secretary) U.S. President Reagan announces Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) Director Tanigawa first Minister of State for Defense to inspect Northern Islands KAL airliner shot down by Soviet fighters near Sakhalin 19 ROK government officials, including cabinet ministers, killed in Burma by North Korean terrorists U.S. and six Caribbean nations send troops to Grenada Signing of negotiation statement for sharing military technology with the U.S. based on the U.S. and Japan Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement (ASDF) First Japan–U.S. bilateral command post exercise (staged at Fuchu, through December 15) Inauguration of second Nakasone Cabinet; Kurihara becomes Minister of State for Defense|
|1984|Jan.01 May 23 Jun.11 Oct.16 Nov.01|Brunei gains independence from the U.K. (joins ASEAN on January 7) Kim Il-sung visits USSR (through May 26) (MSDF) First Japan–U.S. bilateral command post exercise (staged at Yokosuka, through June 15) Defense Agency announces procedures, etc., of future Studies on Emergency Legislation in Studies on Legislation to Deal with Emergencies Inauguration of second reshuffled Nakasone Cabinet; Kato becomes Minister of State for Defense|


1985 Mar.12 U.S.–Soviet Union arms control talks begin
Apr.02 USAF begins to station F-16 fighters at Misawa
Jun.04 China announces the reduction of one million personnel
from the People’s Liberation Army
Aug.12 Disaster relief teams dispatched in response to the JAL
i ft h

|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|1972|Oct.09 Dec.21 Dec.22|Situation Judgment and Defense Concepts in the Fourth Defense Build-up Plan, National Defense Council determines key matters for inclusion in Fourth Defense Build-up Plan and measures to enhance civilian control, adopted by Cabinet East–West Germany Basic Treaty signed Second Tanaka Cabinet established|
|1973|Jan.23 Jan.27 Feb.01 Feb.21 Mar.29 May 29 Jun.22 Jul.01 Sep.07 Sep.21 Oct.06 Oct.08 Oct.17 Nov.07 Nov.25|14th Japan–U.S. Security Consultative Committee meeting agrees on consolidation of U.S. bases in Japan (Kanto Program) Vietnam peace agreement signed (ceasefire takes effect on January 28) Defense Agency publishes Peacetime Defense Strength Laos Peace Treaty signed U.S. forces complete their withdrawal from Vietnam Yamanaka becomes Minister of State for Defense General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev of the Soviet Union visits U.S.; convention on the prevention of nuclear war signed Commencement of SDF air defense mission on Okinawa Sapporo District Court rules SDF unconstitutional (Naganuma Judgment) Japan–North Vietnam establish diplomatic relations Fourth Middle East War (ends October 25) Japan–Soviet summit (Moscow) Ten OPEC countries decide to reduce crude oil supplies Pakistan formally withdraws from SEATO Inauguration of second reshuffled Tanaka Cabinet|
|1974|Jan.05 Jan.18 Apr.20 Apr.25 May 18 Jul.03 Aug.09 Oct.08 Nov.11 Nov.13 Nov.15 Nov.23 Dec.09|Japan–China Trade Agreement signed Israel and Egypt sign Egyptian-Israeli Disengagement Treaties Japan–China Aviation Agreement signed National Defense Medical College opens India carries out its first underground nuclear test U.S. President Nixon visits USSR, Treaty on the Limitation of Underground Nuclear Weapon Tests (Threshold Test Ban Treaty) signed Ford becomes U.S. President Eisaku Sato, former Prime Minister, receives Nobel Prize Inauguration of second reshuffled second Tanaka Cabinet (second term); Uno becomes Minister of State for Defense Japan–China Marine Transport Agreement signed U.N. forces in Korea discovers a North Korean infiltration tunnel U.S. President Ford visits USSR, makes joint statement on SALT II Miki Cabinet established; Sakata becomes Minister of State for Defense|
|1975|Apr.01 Apr.23 Apr.30 Aug.01 Nov.17|Director General instructs to create draft plan for defense forces after FY1977 (second instruction October 29) U.S. President Ford declares end of Vietnam War South Vietnamese Government surrenders unconditionally Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) adopts the Helsinki Declaration (Helsinki) First summit meeting of most industrialized nations (Rambouillet, through November 17), held annually since|
|1976|Apr.05 Jun.04 Jun.08 Jul.02 Jul.08 Aug.05 Aug.18 Sep.06 Sep.09 Sep.15 Oct.06 Oct.29 Nov.05 Dec.24|Demonstrators and police clash in Tiananmen Square in Beijing, China (1st Tiananmen Incident) Publication of second white paper on defense, “The Defense of Japan” (henceforth published annually) Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty comes into force for Japan Socialist Republic of Vietnam (unified Vietnam) proclaimed Sub-Committee for Defense Cooperation (SDC) established Sapporo High Court renders judgment in Naganuma Nike suit U.S. military officers slain at Panmunjom by North Korea MiG-25 forced to land at Hakodate Airport Death of Chairman of Chinese Communist Party Mao Zedong Inauguration of reshuffled Miki Cabinet Group of Four arrested (Cultural Revolution ends) National Defense Council, Cabinet decision on Defense Plan for Defense Build-up beyond FY1977 National Defense Council and Cabinet adopt Immediate- term Defense Build-up, National Defense Council, Cabinet decision on handling major items in preparations for defense forces Fukuda Cabinet established; Mihara becomes Minister of State for Defense|
|1977|Jan.02 Feb.17 Jun.30 Jul.01 Aug.01 Aug.10 Nov.28 Dec.29|Carter becomes U.S. President Mito District Court renders judgment in Hyakuri Base suit South East Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) dissolved (Treaty remains effective) Implementation of two maritime laws, proclaiming a 200- mile fishing zone and 12-mile territorial waters North Korea establishes military demarcation lines in Sea of Japan and Yellow Sea Defense Agency starts Emergency Legislation Study Inaguruation of reshuffled Fukuda Cabinet; Kanemaru becomes Minister of State for Defense National Defense Council decides on introduction of “F-15s and P-3C,” approved by Cabinet on December 29|


1978 Apr.12 Chinese fishing fleet infringes on waters around Senkaku
Islands
Aug.12 Treaty of Peace and Friendship between Japan and the
People’s Republic of China signed in Beijing
Sep.21 Defense Agency announces modality and purpose of
emergency legislation study
Nov.03 Vietnam–Soviet Friendship Agreement signed
Nov.27 (ASDF) First Japan–U.S. bilateral training exercises (east
of Misawa and west of Akita, through December 1)
Nov.27 Japan–U.S. Security Consultative Committee approves
Guidelines for Japan–U.S. Cooperation, presented to and
approved by Cabinet following deliberation by the National
Defense Council on November 28
Dec.05 Afghanistan–Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Good Relations
and Cooperation signed
Dec.07 Ohira Cabinet established; Yamashita becomes Minister
of State for Defense
Dec.25 Vietnamese troops invade Cambodia (withdrawal
l t d S t b 26 1989)


-----

|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|1985|Sep.18 Nov.19 Dec.27 Dec.28|Mid-Term Defense Program approved by National Defense Council and Cabinet, National Defense Council decision to introduce Patriots, Cabinet agreement U.S.–Soviet summit meeting, Joint Statement (Geneva, through November 21) Detailed arrangements for the supply of military technologies to the U.S. concluded Inauguration of second reshuffled Nakasone Cabinet (second term)|
|1986|Feb.24 Apr.09 Apr.26 Jul.01 Jul.22 Aug.10 Aug.15 Sep.05 Sep.22 Oct.15 Oct.27|First Japan–U.S. bilateral joint command post exercise (Hinoki-cho, headquarters of USFJ, etc., through February 28) Tokyo High Court renders judgment in first Atsugi Air Facility noise suit Accident at Chernobyl nuclear power plant in the Soviet Union Security Council Establishment Law enacted Inauguration of third Nakasone Cabinet; Kurihara becomes Minister of State for Defense U.S. announces suspension of its obligations to New Zealand under the ANZUS Treaty in treaty talks (San Francisco, through August 11) Japan, U.S., USSR open hotline operations Government approves the first transfer of military technology to the U.S. Conference on Disarmament in Europe (CDE) adopts final documents (Stockholm) USSR announces partial withdrawal of its troops from Afghanistan First Japan–U.S. bilateral joint field training exercise (eastern and southern part of Honshu island, etc., through October 31)|
|1987|Jan.24 Jan.30 May 27 May 29 Jul.20 Aug.26 Oct.06 Oct.21 Nov.06 Nov.29 Dec.08 Dec.18|Security Council of Japan and Cabinet agree on a program for the future build-up of defense capacity Special Measures Agreement concerning the cost sharing of the stationing of U.S. Forces in Japan signed (effective June 1) Metropolitan Police Department arrests two employees of Toshiba Machine Co., Ltd., in connection with unfair exports that breach the rules of the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Strategic Export Controls (COCOM) to Communist areas Director Kurihara first incumbent Director to visit China (through June 4) U.N. Security Council adopts Iran–Iraq Conflict Cease Fire resolution (Number 598) Law Concerning the Dispatch of Japan Disaster Relief Teams enacted First Japan–U.S. Meeting on COCOM held (Tokyo, through October 7) Follow-on aircraft for F-1 study results decided and announced Takeshita Cabinet established; Kawara becomes Minister of State for Defense KAL airliner blown up by North Korean terrorists over the Bay of Bengal INF Treaty signed Security Council of Japan approves a study on the state of air defense on the high seas|
|1988|Mar.02 Mar.13 Mar.14 Apr.12 May 29 Jun.01 Jul.23 Aug.17 Aug.20 Aug.24 Sep.20 Oct.17 Nov.29 Dec.07 Dec.27|Revised protocol of the Special Measures Agreement concerning the cost sharing of the stationing of U.S. Forces in Japan signed (effective June 1) Aomori–Hakodate Undersea Tunnel opens Armed clashes between China and Vietnam in the waters around the Spratly Islands Signing of official documents for the transfer of military technologies in certain areas of defense from the U.S. to Japan under the Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement between the two countries U.S.–Soviet Union summit talks (Moscow, through June 1, instruments of ratification of INF Treaty exchanged) Supreme Court renders judgment on an appeal against the enshrining of an SDF officer killed in an accident Submarine and civilian fishing boat in collision (off Yokosuka) First joint verification of an underground nuclear test carried out by U.S. and Soviet Union (Nevada) Ceasefire agreement reached in Iran–Iraq War Tazawa becomes Minister of State for Defense First Japan-made T-4 medium trainer introduced U.S. and Philippines sign negotiated agreement on revised Military Bases Agreement Japanese and U.S. Governments sign memorandum and detailed arrangements relating to FS-X joint development General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev delivers speech to the U.N. on the decommissioning of 500,000 Soviet troops Inauguration of reshuffled Takeshita Cabinet|
|1989|Jan.07|Demise of Emperor Showa|


1989 Feb.15 Soviet Union completes the withdrawal of its forces from
Afghanistan
Feb.24 Emperor Showa’s funeral
Mar.09 Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE)
started (Vienna)
Mar.09 Confidence and Security-Building Measures (CSBM)
started (Vienna)
Mar.15 Hachioji branch of the Tokyo District Court renders
judgment in the 3rd Yokota Air Base noise suit
Mar.30 New BADGE system begins operations
Apr.01 Consumption Tax Law enforced
May 10 START-I reopened at U.S.–Soviet foreign ministers
conference, agreement achieved (Moscow, through May 11)
Jun.03 Uno Cabinet established; Yamazaki becomes Minister of
State for Defense
Jun.04 Chinese martial law units fire on demonstrators in
Tiananmen Square in Beijing (2nd Tiananmen incident)
Jun.20 Supreme Court renders judgment in the Hyakuri Base suit
Jun.22 Yokohama District Court renders judgment in the Atsugi
Air Facility suit to vacate the premises
Jun.24 Zhao Ziyang relieved of post as General Secretary of the
Communist Party of China, and replaced by Jiang Zemin
Aug.10 Kaifu Cabinet established; Matsumoto becomes Minister
of State for Defense
S 26 Vi t l t l ithd f C b di


|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|1989|Nov.09 Dec.02|GDR permits free departures to the West (virtual demolition of the Berlin Wall) U.S.–Soviet summit talks (Malta, through December 3)|
|1990|Feb.13 Feb.20 Feb.28 Mar.03 Mar.15 May 29 Jun.19 Jun.21 Aug.02 Aug.02 Oct.03 Oct.16 Oct.24 Nov.10 Nov.12 Nov.23 Dec.20 Dec.29|U.S. and Soviet foreign ministers agree on upper limit of 195,000 U.S. and Soviet troops in Central Europe and 225,000 U.S. troops in Europe Joint Military Technology Commission decides to provide “military technology related to FS-X” to U.S. Inauguration of second reshuffled Kaifu Cabinet; Ishikawa becomes Minister of State for Defense Japan–U.S. summit meeting (Kaifu, G.H.W. Bush, Palm Springs, through March 4) Gorbachev appointed first president of USSR Naha District Court renders judgment in administrative handling suit pertaining to Special Measures Law for USFJ Land Japan–U.S. Joint Committee confirms moves to prepare necessary steps to return U.S. military facilities in Okinawa (23 items) Japan and the U.S. reach agreement in principle on the establishment of a ministerial conference on security Iraq invades Kuwait U.S. President G.H.W. Bush gives speech at Aspen German unification Bill on Cooperation with United Nations Peacekeeping Operations submitted to Diet USSR conducts underground nuclear tests in the Arctic Bill on Cooperation with United Nations Peacekeeping Operations annulled Coronation of Emperor Great Thanksgiving Festival Mid-Term Defense Program (FY1991–FY1995) approved by the National Security Council and the Cabinet Inauguration of second reshuffled Kaifu Cabinet; Ikeda becomes Minister of State for Defense|
|1991|Jan.17 Jan.17 Jan.24 Jan.25 Mar.13 Mar.31 Apr.11 Apr.24 Apr.26 Jun.03 Jul.31 Sep.06 Sep.11 Sep.17 Sep.26 Oct.09 Nov.05 Nov.26 Dec.05 Dec.08 Dec.25|Cabinet approves the establishment of the Gulf Crisis Countermeasures Headquarters Coalition forces launch air attacks against Kuwait and Iraq, Operation Desert Storm Government pledges an additional U.S.$9 billion to efforts to restore peace in the Gulf region Cabinet approves ordinance on interim measures for the airlifting of Gulf Crisis refugees (promulgated and enacted on January 29, annulled April 19) Kanazawa District Court renders judgment on the first and second trials for the lawsuit pertaining to noise generated by the Komatsu Air Base WPO (Warsaw Pact structures) dismantled Gulf War formally ended Security Council and Cabinet decide on “Sending minesweepers to the Persian Gulf” Total of six MSDF vessels, including minesweepers, depart for the Persian Gulf Disaster relief teams dispatched after the eruption of Fugendake on Mt. Unzen U.S. and Soviet leaders sign START-I in Moscow Soviet State Council approves independence of three Baltic states Miyazawa Cabinet established U.N. General Assembly approves 7 member nations, including North and South Korea, and 3 Baltic nations Aegis destroyer launching ceremony SDF personnel join U.N. teams carrying out inspections on Iraq chemical weapons for the first time House of Representatives establishes the Committee on National Security Clark USAF Base formally returned to Philippines Ukrainian independence declared by Supreme Council of Ukrainian Republic CIS agreement signed by leaders of Russia, Belarus and Ukraine at summit (Brest, Belarus) Soviet President Gorbachev resigns|


1992 Feb.07 Twelve EC countries sign the European Union Treaty
(Maastricht Treaty)
Feb.25 China promulgates and enacts Territorial Waters Act,
designating the Senkaku Islands as an integral part of China
Apr.01 Custody of government aircraft (B-747) transferred to the
Defense Agency
Apr.01 First female students enter National Defense Academy
of Japan
Apr.27 Tokyo District Court renders judgment in suits pertaining
to the surrender of land for Atsugi Air Base
May 22 North Korean soldiers invade the South Korean side of the
Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) and fire guns
May 23 START-I Treaty signed between the U.S. and four Soviet
States including Russia
May 25 IAEA officials make the first designated inspection of
North Korea’s nuclear facilities (through June 5)
Jun.19 Announcement of “International Peace Cooperation Law”
(enacted August 10), announcement and enactment of
“Plan to Amend Law Concerning the Dispatch of Japan
Disaster Relief Teams”
Jun.29 Law Revising Part of the Law Concerning the Dispatch of
International Disaster Relief Teams comes into force
Aug.10 International Peace Cooperation Law comes into force
Aug.24 China and the ROK establish diplomatic relations
Sep.17 Departure commences of 1st Cambodia Dispatch
Facilities Battalion (All units returned to Japan by
September 26, 1993)
Sep.19 Departure of Electoral Observer to Cambodia (Narita)
Sep.30 U.S. returns Naval Base Subic Bay (Philippines)
Oct.23 Emperor and Empress visit China (through October 28)
Nov.09 CFE Treaty becomes formally effective
Nov.24 U.S. returns Air Station Cubi Point (Philippines)
(withdrawal from Philippines complete)
Dec.03 U.N. Security Council adopts resolution to allow military
action by multinational forces in Somalia
Dec.11 Inauguration of reshuffled Miyazawa Cabinet; Nakayama
becomes Minister of State for Defense
Dec.16 U.N. Security Council adopts resolution to deploy
k i ti i M bi


|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|1992|Dec.18|Modification of the Mid-Term Defense Program (FY1991–FY1995) adopted by Security Council of Japan and Cabinet|
|1993|Jan.03 Jan.13 Jan.20 Mar.12 Mar.25 Apr.08 May 04 May 04 May 11 May 14 May 29 Jun.01 Jun.09 Jun.11 Jul.12 Aug.04 Aug.09 Sep.01 Sep.13 Sep.23 Oct.12 Nov.01 Dec.02|U.S.–Russia summit (Moscow); START-II signed Japan signs CWC U.S. President Clinton assumes office North Korea announces secession from NPT Aegis ship (Kongo) enters service Death of U.N. Volunteer (UNV) Atsuhito Nakata in Cambodia Multinational forces deployed to Somalia move to United Nations Operation in Somalia II (UNISOM II) Death of Superintendent Haruyuki Takada, a civilian police officer in Cambodia Mozambique Dispatch Transport Coordination Unit begin departing for Mozambique (All units returned home by January 8, 1995) United Nations Operation in Mozambique headquarters staff depart for Mozambique North Korea conducts a ballistic missile test over the central Sea of Japan Along with full operation of the private government plane (B-747), Special Air Transport Squadron newly established Wedding ceremony of His Imperial Highness the Crown Prince North Korea reserves the right to withdraw from the NPT in a joint statement issued during first round of U.S.– North Korea consultations Disaster relief teams dispatched to Hokkaido in response to the earthquake off southwestern Hokkaido (through August 12) Signing of peace treaty in Rwandan civil war Hosokawa Cabinet established; Nakanishi becomes Minister of State for Defense U.S. DoD announces the Bottom Up Review Israel and PLO sign a declaration of the principles of provisional autonomy U.N. Security Council adopts resolution to establish the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) Japan–Russia agreement on prevention of marine accidents signed Maastricht Treaty comes into effect; European Union established Aichi becomes Minister of State for Defense|
|1994|Feb.23 Feb.25 Mar.01 Mar.23 Mar.24 Apr.28 Jun.08 Jun.30 Jul.08 Jul.25 Sep.22 Oct.21 Nov.09 Dec.01 Dec.01 Dec.05 Dec.18 Dec.20|“Advisory Group on Defense Issues” inaugurated under the Prime Minister Defense Agency’s “Defense Posture Review Board” inaugurated First Japan–China security dialogue (Beijing) First female aviation students join MSDF First female aviation students join ASDF Hada Cabinet established; Kanda becomes Minister of State for Defense U.S. DoD submits “Report on Activities and Programs for Countering Proliferation” pertaining to weapons of mass destruction such as nuclear weapons Murayama Cabinet established; Tamazawa becomes Minister of State for Defense North Korean President Kim Il-Sung dies 1st ASEAN Regional Forum (Bangkok) U.S. DoD announces “Nuclear Posture Review” U.S.-North Korea talks, both sides sign “Framework Agreement” relating to support for North Korean light water reactors, and provision of substitute energy First Japan-ROK working-level defense policy dialogue (Seoul) First Asia-Pacific Security Seminar (under the auspices of the National Institute for Defense Studies, through December 17) Commander of U.S.–ROK Combined Forces devolves operational control in peacetime to ROK forces START-I comes into force Russia starts military operations against Chechnya First visit to Japan by the ROK’s naval training vessel (Harumi, through December 23)|


1995 Jan.17 Disaster relief teams dispatched after the Great HanshinAwaji Earthquake (through April 27)
Mar.09 Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization
(KEDO) established
Mar.20 SDF personnel dispatched teams to carry out rescue
operations in the sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway
system (through March 23)
May 11 NPT extended indefinitely
May 19 Enactment of “Act on Special Measures Incidental to
Reversion of Lands in Okinawa Prefecture Offered for Use
by United States Forces in Japan” (effective June 20)
Jun.05 The defense authorities of Japan and the ROK both
issue the “letter concerning the prevention of accidents
between aircraft of the Japan Self-defense Forces and
military aircraft of the Republic of Korea”
Jul.11 NATO, aerial bombing of Serbian forces
Jul.28 Vietnam officially joins ASEAN
Aug.01 1st KEDO Meeting (Japan–U.S.–ROK) held (New York)
Aug.08 Inauguration of reshuffled Murayama Cabinet; Eto
becomes Minister of State for Defense
Sep.04 Japanese schoolgirl assaulted by three U.S. soldiers
based in Okinawa
Sep.15 Ratification of Chemical Weapons Convention
Oct.27 Announcement of “Law Relating to the Treatment of
Defense Agency Personnel Dispatched to International
Organizations” (effective January 1, 1996)
Nov.17 Cabinet approves the establishment of a consultation
forum to discuss issues relating to U.S. bases in Okinawa
Nov.19 Prime Minister Murayama and U.S. Vice President
Gore agree on the establishment of the Special Action
Committee on Facilities and Areas in Okinawa (SACO)
Nov.28 Security Council of Japan and Cabinet adopt National
Defense Program Outline for the period from FY1996
Dec.14 Security Council of Japan adopts the Mid-Term Defense
Program (FY1996–FY2000) (Cabinet Decision of
D b 15)


-----

|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|1995|Dec.14 Dec.14 Dec.15 Dec.20|Security Council of Japan makes decision “Regarding upgrading of Next-Generation Support Fighter” (December 15, Cabinet approval); Model of Next-Generation Support Fighter “F-2” decided Formal signing of the Bosnian Peace Agreement in Paris 10 Southeast Asian nations sign the South East Asia Non- Nuclear Zone Treaty at ASEAN summit meeting IFOR, consisting mainly of NATO troops, replaces UNPROFOR and formally commences operations|
|1996|Jan.11 Jan.26 Jan.31 Mar.08 Mar.23 Apr.12 Apr.15 Apr.16 Apr.17 Jul.12 Jul.20 Jul.26 Jul.29 Aug.28 Sep.10 Sep.18 Sep.26 Sep.27 Oct.03 Oct.29 Nov.07 Nov.18 Dec.02 Dec.13 Dec.24|Hashimoto Cabinet established; Usui becomes Minister of State for Defense START-II ratified by U.S. Senate SDF units dispatched to United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) China carries out three missile firing exercises in total, naval and air force live-fire drills and, ground, naval and air force integrated exercises in the waters close to Taiwan March 8–25 Taiwan holds its first direct presidential elections; Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui re-elected Prime Minister Hashimoto meets U.S. Ambassador Mondale (agreement reached on the total return of Futenma Air Station, Okinawa, within five to seven years after conditions are satisfied) Signing of Japan–U.S. Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement and its procedural arrangements (effective October 22) Cabinet approves the promotion of solutions to issues relating to facilities and areas of U.S. forces in Okinawa Prefecture Japan–U.S. Joint Declaration on Security issued Inaugural meeting of Wassenaar Arrangement (Vienna) U.N. Treaty on the Law of the Seas goes into effect in Japan First visit to Russia by MSDF ships (Vladivostok, through July 30, Russian Navy’s 300th anniversary naval review) China conducts underground nuclear test (its 45th), then announces moratorium on nuclear testing First visit by MSDF ships to ROK (Pusan, through September 6) U.N. General Assembly adopts the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) North Korean minisubmarine runs aground on the east coast of ROK, its crew intruding into ROK territory (clearing operation completed November 7) Hong Kong protest vessels (Baodiao) etc., intrude into Japan’s territorial waters around the Senkaku Islands Taliban gains control of the Afghan capital, Kabul, and declares the establishment of the provisional government Russia-Chechnya ceasefire agreed First Forum for Defense Authorities in the Asia-Pacific Region (Tokyo, through October 31) Inauguration of second Hashimoto Cabinet; Kyuma becomes Minister of State of Defense Basic NATO agreement to keep a multinational stabilization force (SFOR) to succeed IFOR in Bosnia-Herzegovina SACO final report approved by Japan–U.S. Joint Security Council First Consultations Between Japanese and Russian Defense Authorities (Tokyo) Security Council and Cabinet decisions on responses to foreign submarines traveling underwater in Japanese territorial waters|
|1997|Jan.02 Jan.20 Apr.29 May 12 Jun.09 Jul.01 Jul.03 Jul.16 Sep.11 Sep.23 Oct.08 Nov.10 Dec.03 Dec.03 Dec.04 Dec.19|Disaster relief teams dispatched in response to the Russian Nakhodka shipwreck and oil spill disaster (through March 31) Establishment of Defense Intelligence Headquarters CWC enters into force Russia–Chechnya peace treaty signed Self-Defense Official (Director General of the Inspection Bureau) dispatched to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (through June 2002) Hong Kong reverts to China The first artillery live-fire training by U.S. Marines stationed in Okinawa conducted on the mainland of Japan (at Kita Fuji, through July 9) North Korean soldiers cross the Military Demarcation Line (MDL) and exchange fire with ROK troops Inauguration of second reshuffled Hashimoto Cabinet Guidelines for New Japan–U.S. defense cooperation approved by Security Consultative Committee (SCC) North Korean Workers’ Party Secretary Kim Jong-il assumes the post of General Secretary China–Russia summit talks: China–Russian joint statement signed (Beijing), and demarcation of the China– Russian eastern border declared Japan signs Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Treaty Final Report of the Administrative Reform Committee Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Treaty signing ceremony in Ottawa (121 nations) Review of the Mid-Term Defense Program (FY1996– FY2000) approved by the Security Council of Japan and the Cabinet|


1998 Mar.26 Introduction of a system of SDF ready reserve personnel
Apr.28 The signing of an agreement to revise the Japan–U.S.
Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement
May 11 India carries out underground nuclear tests (repeated
May 13)
May 12 Fukuoka High Court Naha Branch renders judgment in the
first through third Kadena base noise suits
May 28 Pakistan carries out underground nuclear tests (repeated
May 30)
Jun.06 U.N. Security Council resolution adopted that condemns
nuclear tests by India and Pakistan
Jun.12 Announcement and enactment of Basic Act on Central
Government Reform
Jun.12 Revision of the International Peace Cooperation
Law promulgated and comes into force (the section
concerning use of force enters into force July 12)
Jun.22 A North Korean submarine intrudes into the east coast of
ROK, seized by ROK forces
Jul.27 China publishes its first comprehensive defense white
“D f f Chi ”


|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|1998|Jul.29 Jul.30 Aug.31 Aug.31 Sep.01 Sep.02 Sep.24 Sep.30 Oct.21 Nov.14 Nov.15 Nov.20 Dec.17 Dec.22 Dec.22 Dec.25|Bilateral search and rescue exercise between MSDF/ ASDF and Russian Navy — the first full-fledged bilateral exercise between Japan and Russia Obuchi Cabinet established; Nukaga becomes Minister of State for Defense North Korea launches a ballistic missile which flies through Japanese airspace Government refuses to sign Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization (KEDO) resolution on cost sharing after North Korean missile launch Temporary freezing of Japan–North Korea normalization talks Additional sanctions on North Korea (suspension of charter flights) implemented Japan–ROK Fisheries Agreement concluded (Takeshima Issue shelved) Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Treaty concluded KEDO signed Departure of GSDF dispatch units to Honduras (operations in region November 18–December 1, return to Japan December 5) First joint exercise involving all three branches (a total of 2,400 personnel from the GSDF, MSDF and ASDF) (Iwo Jima) Norota becomes Minister of State for Defense U.S. and U.K. forces initiate Operation Desert Fox against Iraq as a punishment for refusal to cooperate with UNSCOM inspections (through December 20) Cabinet decision on the introduction of information gathering satellite Aha Training Area returned (the frist resolved issue of SACO) Security Council approves Japan–U.S. Cooperative Research on Ballistic Missile Defense Technologies|
|1999|Jan.14 Mar.01 Mar.23 Mar.29 Apr.01 May 24 May 28 Jun.15 Jul.23 Aug.05 Aug.16 Aug.16 Aug.25 Sep.02 Sep.23 Sep.29 Sep.30 Oct.05 Nov.22 Nov.22 Dec.17 Dec.20 Dec.27 Dec.27 Dec.28|Inauguration of reshuffled Obuchi Cabinet Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Treaty enters into force in Japan Discovery of a suspicious ship off the Noto Peninsula (Maritime security operations ordered on March 24) GSDF establishes first brigade Establishment of Committee for the Promotion of Information Gathering Satellites (Cabinet) Agreement between Japan and U.S. to amend the “Acquisition and Cross Servicing Agreement” (adding cooperation for operations to respond to situations in areas surrounding Japan) approved in Diet (effective September 25) Act Concerning the Measures for Peace and Safety of Japan in Situations in Areas Surrounding Japan promulgated (enters into force August 25), Act for Partial Revision of the Self-Defense Forces Act promulgated and enters into force Shooting incident between North Korean Naval ships which had crossed the Northern Limit Line and South Korean Naval ships Tokyo High Court renders judgment in second Atsugi Air Facility noise suit First Bilateral Exercise of Search and Rescue Exercise between MSDF and ROK Navy (waters west of Kyushu) Signing of a memorandum on developing infrastructure for the development of exchange and dialogue between Japan’s and Russia’s Ministries of Defense (Moscow) Signing of the Memorandum of Understanding between the Governments of Japan and the U.S. on Japan–U.S. Cooperative Research on Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD) The Law Concerning Measures to Ensure the Peace and Security of Japan in Situations in Areas Surrounding Japan comes into force North Korea announces the invalidation of the Northern Limit Line in the Yellow Sea and the establishment of a new military demarcation line on the sea SDF personnel dispatched to implement the transportation of necessary resources for international disaster relief operations in the Republic of Turkey (through November 22) Russian military unit advances into the Republic of Chechnya Disaster relief teams dispatched in response to the accident at a uranium processing facility in Tokaimura (through October 3) Kawara becomes Minister of State for Defense SDF personnel dispatched to Indonesia for Timor-Leste Refugees Support (through February 8, 2000) Governor of Okinawa Prefecture declares the site proposed for the relocation of Futenma Air Station U.N. Security Council adopts a comprehensive resolution relating to the Iraq issue and establishes UNMOVIC in place of UNSCOM Rule over Macao transferred to China Decision with the Japan Coast Guard on the “Joint Response Manual for Suspicious Ships” Mayor of Nago City, Okinawa Prefecture announces the acceptance of alternative facilities for Futenma Air Station Cabinet decision on Government Policy for the Relocation of Futenma Air Station|


2000 Jan.17 Anti-personnel mine disposal begins
Feb.16 First assembly of the Research Commissions on the
Constitution in the Upper House (Lower House on
February 17)
Apr.01 Enactment of the “Self-Defense Forces Personnel
Ethics Act”
Apr.05 Mori Cabinet established
Apr.14 Russian Duma ratifies the Strategic Arms Reduction
Treaty II (START-II)
May 07 Russian Acting President Putin officially assumes duties
as President
May 08 Defense Agency moves to the Ichigaya building
Jun.16 The Special Law for Nuclear Emergency Preparedness
(Establishment of nuclear disaster relief dispatch) comes
into force
Jul.04 Inauguration of second Mori Cabinet; Torashima becomes
Minister of State for Defense
Jul.21 Kyushu-Okinawa Summit (through July 23)
Jul.21 U.S.–Russia summit meeting held, Cooperation on
Strategic Stability announced
Aug.25 Replacement Facilities Council on the Relocation of
F t Ai St ti t bli h d


|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|2000|Sep.13 Oct.12 Oct.12 Nov.20 Dec.05 Dec.15|SDF personnel dispatched to dispose of Abandoned Chemical Weapons (ACW) in China U.S. and North Korea announce U.S.–North Korea Joint Communique Terrorist attack on the U.S.S Cole, an American destroyer, in Yemen The 22nd Japanese Communist Party Convention decides to accept the SDF Inauguration of second reshuffled Mori Cabinet; Saito becomes Minister of State for Defense Security Council of Japan and the Cabinet adopts the Mid-Term Defense Program (FY2001–FY2005)|
|2001|Feb.05 Feb.09 Feb.10 Mar.01 Mar.07 Apr.01 Apr.01 Apr.26 May 14 Jun.15 Aug.08 Sep.11 Sep.12 Sep.19 Sep.21 Oct.01 Oct.02 Oct.06 Oct.07 Oct.08 Oct.29 Nov.02 Nov.16 Nov.25 Nov.27 Dec.05 Dec.20 Dec.22 Dec.22 Dec.29|SDF units dispatched to India for International Disaster Relief Operation (through February 11), following the major earthquake which hit western India on January 26 Personnel dispatched to UNMOVIC (through March, 2005) Collision between Ehime Maru and U.S. submarine The Ship Inspection Operations Law comes into effect Former Maritime Self-Defense official is given a jail sentence for providing confidential documents to officer of the Russian Embassy Information Disclosure Act (IDA) comes into force Collision between U.S. and Chinese military planes Koizumi Cabinet established; Nakatani becomes Minister of State for Defense Diplomatic relations established between North Korea and EU Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) established Disaster relief teams dispatched for submarine rescue ship Chihaya to cooperate in raising the Ehime Maru (returned December 16) Terrorist attacks in the U.S. occur U.N. Security Council adopts resolution condemning the terrorist attacks Prime Minister Koizumi announces immediate measures in response to the September 11th terrorist attacks in the U.S. First Meeting of the Committee to Consider the Modality of National Defense U.S. announces Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) In response to the September 11th terrorist attacks in the U.S., NATO invokes Article 5 (on collective self-defense) of the North Atlantic Treaty International peace cooperation for the relief of Afghan refugees (through October 12) U.S. and U.K. forces begin attacks in Afghanistan (October 19, U.S. Forces sends special operation forces, first ground fighting) Government of Japan establishes the Emergency Anti- Terrorism Headquarters and decides upon Emergency Response Measures at the first meeting Anti-Terrorism Special Measures Law and other measures passed in the House of Councilors plenary session Anti-Terrorism Special Measures Law and Law to Amend the Self-Defense Forces Law are promulgated and enforced (strengthening penalties to ensure secrecy is separately enforced on November 1, 2002) A Cabinet decision is made for a basic plan based on the Anti-Terrorism Special Measures Law Based on the Anti-Terrorism Special Measures Law, an MSDF supply vessel, minesweeper tender, and destroyers depart for cooperation and support activities Exchange of fire in the Korean demilitarized zone (DMZ) U.S. and Russia complete implementation of START-I U.N. Security Council adopts a resolution establishing an International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) Afghanistan Interim Authority formed, with Hamid Karzai serving as Chairman Suspicious boat incident in waters southwest of Kyushu Russia withdraws troops from its base in Cuba|


2002 Jan.29 U.S. President G.W. Bush depicts “Axis of Evil” in the State
of the Union Address
Feb.15 Cabinet decision on international cooperation execution
plan for Timor-Leste
Mar.02 680 SDF personnel dispatched on the First Dispatch
Engineering Group to Timor-Leste (through June 25, 2004)
Mar.27 Introduction of Candidates for SDF Reserve Personnel
System
Apr.22 2nd Western Pacific Submarine Rescue Exercise held (the
first multilateral exercise organized by Japan, through
May 2)
May 04 Independence of Timor-Leste
May 20 The United Nations Transitional Administration in TimorLeste (UNTAET) switches to the United Nations Mission
Support in Timor-Leste (UNMISET)
May 24 Signing of Treaty Between the United States of America
and the Russian Federation on Strategic Offensive
Reductions
Jun.13 U.S. withdraws from the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty
Jun.29 Exchanges of fire between ROK patrol boats and North
Korean patrol boats which crossed the NLL
Jul.16 U.S. government releases "National Strategy for
Homeland Security"
Jul.29 Basic Plan of the Futenma Replacement Facility agreed
Sep.17 Japan–North Korea Summit held Kim Jong-il, the North
Korean President, admits and apologizes for abductions
Sep.20 U.S. government announces "National Security Strategy"
Sep.30 Inauguration of reshuffled Koizumi Cabinet; Ishiba
becomes Minister of State for Defense
Oct.01 Personnel deployed to the Organisation for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (Head of Operations and
Planning Branch) (through July 6)
Oct.13 First International Fleet Review in Japan (Tokyo Bay)
Oct.15 Five of those abducted return to Japan
Oct.16 U.S. government announces that North Korea admitted
the fact that they had a uranium enrichment plan for
nuclear weapons during Assistant Secretary of State
Kerry’s visit
Nov.01 Introduction of stricter penalties in order to protect
classified information (defense secrets)
Nov.14 KEDO Executive Board decides to freeze provision of
heavy oil to North Korea from December
Nov.18 First SDF and police authority hold joint command post
i i H kk id


-----

|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|2002|Nov.21 Dec.02 Dec.12 Dec.16 Dec.17|NATO Summit decides new membership for seven countries in Central and Eastern Europe, announces the Prague Declaration, and agrees to establish its high- readiness unit SDF personnel dispatched for the first time to the U.N. Department of Peacekeeping Operations (UNDPKO) North Korea announces it will resume operation and establishment of nuclear-related facilities Kirishima, vessel equipped with Aegis air defense systems, departs the port of Yokosuka, according to revision (December 5) in Implementation Plan based on the Anti-Terrorism Special Measures Law U.S. announces deployment of a missile defense system|
|2003|Jan.10 Jan.24 Jan.28 Feb.08 Mar.14 Mar.20 Mar.27 Mar.30 Apr.21 May 01 May 31 Jun.01 Jun.06 Jun.13 Jul.04 Jul.17 Jul.26 Jul.29 Aug.27 Sep.11 Sep.12 Sep.14 Sep.22 Sep.30 Oct.07 Oct.10 Oct.15 Nov.03 Nov.15 Nov.19 Nov.29 Dec.04 Dec.13 Dec.18 Dec.19 Dec.19 Dec.26 Dec.30|North Korea announces it is leaving the Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty (NPT) U.S. Department of Homeland Security established Establishment of Consultative Body on Construction of Futenma Replacement Facility concerning Futenma Air Station Replacement Disposal of antipersonnel landmines complete (with some exceptions) U.S. President G.W. Bush announces the lifting of economic sanctions against Pakistan U.S. and U.K. Forces begin military operations in Iraq Act for Partial Revision of the Defense Agency Establishment Act, etc. (changes in SDF personnel quota and number of Ready Reserve personnel) enters into force International peace cooperation activities are conducted for relief of Iraqi refugees (Airborne unit for Iraqi refugee relief returns to Japan on April 2) ASDF in-flight refueling training (through May 1) U.S. President G.W. Bush declares termination of major military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan U.S. President G.W. Bush proposes Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) for the first time U.S.–Russia leaders talk, enforcement of Treaty Between the United States of America and the Russian Federation on Strategic Offensive Reductions Three Armed Attack Situation Response related laws passed in the House of Councilors plenary session Cabinet decision on the Bill Concerning the Special Measures on Humanitarian and Reconstruction Assistance in Iraq Cabinet approval for “Implementation Plan for International Peace Cooperation Assignment for Iraqi Afflicted Persons” International peace cooperation activities are conducted for relief of affected people in Iraq (Airborne unit for relief of affected people in Iraq returns to Japan August 18) Law concerning Special Measures on Humanitarian and Reconstruction Assistance in Iraq passed in the House of Councilors plenary session Cabinet decision on changes to the implementation plan of the International Peace Cooperation Operations in the Golan Heights First Round of the Six-Party Talks held (Beijing, through August 29) Ceremony to celebrate the completion of the Memorial Zone First joint exercise of PSI held in the Coral Sea northeast of Australia (through September 14) Government survey mission dispatched to Middle East countries, including Iraq Inauguration of reshuffled Koizumi Cabinet (second term) Cabinet decides to newly establish, in its decoration system, an award for people engaged in dangerous activities Joint communique signed for the first time at Japan– China–ROK Summit meeting Anti-Terrorism Special Measures Law remains in force for another two years China launches its first manned spacecraft Shenzhou 5 Former SDF officials decorated for their engagement in dangerous activities SDF special research group dispatched to Iraq Inauguration of second Koizumi Cabinet Ambassador Oku and First Secretary Inoue shot to death in the central region of Iraq Australia decides to participate in missile defense program U.S. forces capture former President Hussein in Iraq Iran signs IAEA agreement Libya announces abandonment of weapons of mass destruction program Government decides to introduce ballistic missile defense system (Security Council of Japan and Cabinet meeting) ASDF advance team leaves for Kuwait Relief materials transported by air in response to great earthquake in Iran under the Law concerning the Dispatch of Japan Disaster Relief Teams (January 1–2, 2004)|


2004 Jan.12 Japan and India release "Next Steps in Strategic
Partnership" (NSSP) statement
Jan.22 ASDF main contingent leaves for Kuwait
Feb.03 Departure of first SDF contingent for Iraqi humanitarian
and reconstruction support activities
Feb.09 Implementation of Iraq-related response measures
approved in Diet
Feb.09 MSDF unit for marine transport leaves for Kuwait (return
on April 8)
Feb.25 Second Round of the Six-Party Talks held (Beijing, through
February 29)
Mar.04 Disaster relief teams dispatched for the first time in
response to bird flu (Tanbacho, Kyoto Prefecture, through
March 11)
Mar.22 EU General Affairs Council agrees upon development
of the structure and organization of EU rapid response
capabilities
Mar.26 Diet decides on installation of ballistic missile defense
system (FY2004 draft budget passed in the House of
Councilors plenary session)
Apr.15 First transport of Japanese nationals living overseas
implemented, 10 nationals transported from Iraq to
Kuwait
Apr.15 Ceremony commemorating the 50th anniversary of the
Defense Agency/SDF
Apr.28 U.N. Security Council unanimously adopts Resolution
1540 calling for the nonproliferation of weapons of mass
d t ti


|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|2005|Nov.11 Nov.16 Nov.27 Dec.01 Dec.14 Dec.16 Dec.24|The Cabinet approves “the government’s actions to be taken for the time being in connection with the matters approved at the Japan–U.S. Security Consultation Committee held on October 29, 2005” India and Pakistan complete the opening of five areas on the effective control line in Kashmir to enable disaster rescue activities for the sufferers from the great earthquake in Pakistan etc. Field training under the Civil Protection Law takes place for the first time in Fukui Prefecture Partial revision of the Act on Remuneration of Defense Agency Personnel (revised remuneration) enters into force The first East Asia Summit is held (Kuala Lumpur) U.N. General Assembly adopts resolution criticizing the human rights situation in North Korea The Security Council and the Cabinet approve “Japan– U.S. Joint Development of Interceptor Missiles Having Improved Capability of Ballistic Missile Defense”|
|2006|Jan.10 Feb.03 Feb.04 Mar.06 Mar.16 Mar.27 Apr.23 May 01 May 05 May 11 May 15 May 27 May 29 Jun.01 Jun.16 Jun.19 Jun.20 Jun.23 Jun.29 Jul.05 Jul.19 Jul.31 Aug.16 Aug.29 Aug.29 Sep.20 Sep.26 Oct.09 Oct.13 Dec.19 Dec.30|Iran begins an uranium enrichment experiment The United States releases "Quadrennial Defense Review" (QDR) Japan–North Korea negotiations concerning abduction issue, normalization of diplomatic relations and nuclear/ missile issues are held (through February 6) At the Japan–China intergovernmental conference, China makes a proposal of joint development of gas field in East China Sea (through March 7) The United States announces the National Security Strategy Partial amendment (measures for destructing ballistic missiles, etc., establishment of Joint Staff Office, etc.) of the Defense Agency Establishment Law is enacted. With the creation of the Joint Staff Office, the SDF establishes a joint operations posture Japan and the United States agree to the sharing of expenses of relocation of U.S. Marine Corps in Okinawa to Guam as part of realignment of USFJ The Japan–U.S. Security Consultative Committee (“2+2,” Washington, D.C.) announces the “United States– Japan Roadmap for Realignment Implementation” Peace agreement between Sudanese government and certain rebel forces in Darfur Conflict The Governor of Okinawa Prefecture and Minister of State for Defense sign a basic agreement on the realignment of USFJ U.S. rescinds designation of Libya as a state sponsor of terrorism Large-scale earthquake takes place in the middle part of Java, Indonesia First P-3C visit to Australia SDF units dispatched to Indonesia to conduct international disaster relief activity for damages from the earthquake that occurred in central Java (through June 22) Nepalese government and Maoists sign peace accord Iraqi Prime Minister Maliki announces that the authority to maintain public order in the province of Muthannna is transferred from the multilateral forces to Iraq The Government makes a decision to discontinue the activities of the GSDF contingent dispatched to Iraq. ASDF units continue to support the United Nations and the multinational forces Agreement concerning provision of arms and military technologies to the United States is signed Japan-U.S. Summit Meeting, joint document “The Japan- U.S. Alliance of the New Century” announced North Korea launches a total of seven ballistic missiles into the Sea of Japan Decision made to transfer weapons and their technologies to the U.S. to jointly develop a Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD) system, and the memorandum concluded with the U.S. Partial enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment of the Defense Agency Establishment Law (inc. reinforcement of facilities administration function of the agency, establishment of the Equipment headquarters and reorganization of the Prefecture Liaison Offices into the Provincial Cooperation Offices) A Russian patrol boat fires on a Japanese fishing boat, killing one of its crew members. The Government files a strong protest to Russia U.S. Navy, deploys Aegis ships equipped with SM-3 at Yokosuka naval facility The Council Meeting on Measures for Relocation of Futenma Air Station established, and its first meeting held Chinese Navy performs joint search and rescue exercises with U.S. Navy (sea around San Diego) Abe Cabinet established; Kyuma becomes Minister of State for Defense North Korea conducts an underground nuclear test Sanctions implemented against North Korea, which announced that it had conducted a nuclear weapon test U.N. General Assembly adopts draft resolution condemning abduction of foreign citizens by North Korea Iraqi government executes death sentence of former Iraqi President Hussein|


2007 Jan.09 Enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment of the
Defense Agency Establishment Law (reorganization of
the Defense Agency into the Ministry of Defense and
stipulation of the SDF’s international peace cooperation
activities as its primary mission)
Jan.12 China conducts an anti-satellite test
Jan.23 U.N. Security Council decides to set up the U.N. Mission in
Nepal (UNMIN) to oversee disarmament in Nepal
Feb.13 North Korea agrees to disable all of its nuclear facilities
during the Six-Party Talks
Mar.05 First Aviation Training Relocation associated with
realignment of the U.S. Forces in Japan (Tsuiki, through
March 8)
Mar.13 Australian Prime Minister Howard visits Japan, and the
Japan–Australia Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation
signed
Mar.23 Emergency response procedures for destruction
measures against ballistic missiles are prepared
Mar.28 Establishment of the Central Readiness Force
M 30 A P t i t PAC 3 t i d l d t th ASDF I B


Year Date Major Events


|2004|May 20 May 22 Jun.01 Jun.01 Jun.14 Jun.14 Jun.18 Jun.23 Jun.28 Jul.20 Aug.13 Sep.10 Sep.27 Oct.06 Oct.25 Oct.25 Nov.07 Nov.10 Nov.16 Dec.26 Dec.27 Dec.10 Dec.28|United Nations Mission of Support to East Timor (UNMISET) transfers defense and security authority to Timor-Leste Japan–North Korea Summit held (Pyongyang). Five family members of abductees return to Japan Interim Iraqi Government inaugurated (sovereignty transferred on June 28), and Iraqi Governing Council dissolved U.N. Security Council unanimously adopts Resolution 1546 on reconstruction of Iraq Seven bills on legislation concerning contingency response measures passed in House of Councilors plenary session and conclusion of three treaties approved Special Measures Law for the Embargo on Specific Ships passed Cabinet agreement for SDF’s activities in Iraq for humanitarian and reconstruction assistance after reestablishment of Iraq sovereignty (joining multinational forces) Third Round of the Six-Party Talks held (Beijing, through June 26) Transfer of sovereignty to the Iraqi Interim Government In the Straits of Malacca and Singapore, patrols commenced by the navies of three countries, Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia U.S. helicopter crash at the university campus in Ginowan City, Okinawa FPDA (Five Power Defense Arrangements) conducts the first antimaritime terrorism exercise in the South China Sea (-September 25) Inauguration of second reshuffled Koizumi Cabinet; Ohno becomes Minister of State for Defense The U.S. and ROK announce a plan of three stage reduction of 12,500 U.S. forces stationed in the ROK by 2008 PSI exercise for maritime interdiction operation hosted by Japan for the first time (in the offing of Sagami Bay and in Yokosuka Harbor, through October 27) EU leaders sign the EU Constitution Defense Agency/SDF 50th anniversary commemorative troop review Intrusion of submerged Chinese nuclear powered submarine into Japan’s territorial waters–Maritime security operations order issued (through November 12) Chinese Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs expresses regret over its nuclear submarine’s intrusion into Japan’s territorial waters Sumatra earthquake and Indian Ocean tsunami disaster China releases a white paper, “China’s National Defense in 2004” “National Defense Program Guidelines, FY2005” and “Mid-Term Defense Program for FY2005–FY2009” adopted by the Security Council and the Cabinet MSDF ships dispatched to the offing of Thailand’s Phuket Island to engage in the international disaster relief activities for Indonesia’s Sumatra earthquake and Indian Ocean tsunami disaster (through January 1, 2005)|
|---|---|---|


2005 Jan.04 SDF units dispatched to Indonesia to engage in the
international emergency assistance in response to the
major earthquake off the coast of Sumatra and tsunami in
the Indian Ocean (All teams returned home by March 23)
Jan.19 The Japanese Government newly formulates measures
to cope with intrusion of the submerged submarines in
Japan’s territorial waters
Feb.10 North Korean Foreign Ministry releases a statement
implying its manufacture of nuclear weapons (May 11,
announces the unloading of 8,000 spent nuclear fuel rods)
Feb.19 Japan–U.S. Security Consultative Committee (“2+2,”
Washington, D.C.) — common strategic objectives confirmed
Mar.08 “ROK’s government protest over Asahi Shimbun aircraft
approaching Takeshima without authorization”
Mar.14 National People’s Congress adopts “Anti-Secession Law”
Mar.14 A Japanese boat attacked in the Straits of Malacca, and
three crew abducted (Released on March 20)
Mar.16 Shimane Prefecture establishes “Takeshima Day”
Mar.25 Cabinet decision made on Basic Guidelines for the
Protection of Civilians
Apr.25 Disaster relief teams dispatched after the railroad
accident on JR West’s Fukuchiyama Line
May 02 SDF officially takes part for the first time in the
multinational exercise Cobra Gold 2005 conducted in
Chiang Mai, Thailand (through May 13)
Jul.14 Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry announces
permission granted to Teikoku Oil for trial drilling in the
East China Sea
Aug.05 An MSDF vessel dispatched to conduct international
disaster relief activity in Connection with the accident of a
small submarine of the Russian Navy off Kamchatka (All
units returned home by August 10)
Sep.09 First China-Russia joint military exercises “Peace Mission
2005” (through August 25)
Sep.09 Five destroyers of the Chinese Navy, including
Sovremenny Class,are navigating in the sea area
surrounding “Kashi” gas field near the median line
between Japan and China in the East China Sea
Sep.19 Joint statement adopted at Fourth Round of Six-Party Talks
Sep.21 Inauguration of third Koizumi Cabinet
Oct.12 Japan Disaster Relief Team dispatched for international
emergency assistance activities in response to largescale
earthquake in Pakistan, etc. (All teams returned home by
December 2)
Oct.20 GSDF and Hokkaido Prefectural Police conduct joint field
training against terrorist attacks for the first time
Oct.29 Japan–U.S. Security Consultative Committee (“2+2,”
Washington, D.C.) joint announces “Japan–U.S. Alliance:
Transformation and Realignment for the Future”
Oct.31 Inauguration of third reshuffled Koizumi Cabinet; Nukaga
becomes Minister of State for Defense
Oct.31 Partial amendment of the Anti-Terrorism Special
Measures Law comes into force (validity is extended for
one year)
Nov.09 First session of the Fifth Round of the Six-Party Talks held
(B iji th h N b 11)”


-----

|Year|Date|Major Events|
|---|---|---|
|2009|Oct.01 Oct.05 Oct.20 Oct.27 Nov.10 Nov.11 Nov.12 Nov.23 Dec.01 Dec.03 Dec.05 Dec.17|China conducts 60th Anniversary Military Parade SDF units dispatched to aid international disaster relief activities after the Padang earthquake in Indonesia (though October 17) 1st Ministry of Defense Policy Meeting Destroyer Kurama collides with ROK cargo ship Carina Star in the Kammon Straits North and South Korean ships engage in fire in the Yellow Sea Government Revitalization Unit “project screening” (through November 27) Celebration of the 20th Anniversary of the Emperor of Japan’s coronation Deployment Surface Force for Counter Piracy Enforcement (DSPE) receives the IMO Award for Exceptional Bravery at Sea Lisbon treaty comes into effect Tokyo High Court rejects appeal by MSDF Lieutenant Commander in Aegis information leakage case (appeal to Supreme Court) START I lapses Security Council and Cabinet approve the document on the building up of defense capability for FY2010|
|2010|Jan.01 Jan.12 Jan.17 Jan.19 Jan.29 Feb.05 Feb.27 Mar.07 Mar.11 Mar.26 Mar.26 Apr.01 Apr.02 Apr.06 Apr.12 May 01 May 19 May 26 May 27 May 28 Jun.08 Jun.09 Jun.25 Jun.28 Jul.01 Jul.13 Aug.01 Aug.31 Sep.07 Sep.07 Sep.10 Sep.17 Sep.28 Oct.01 Oct.12 Oct.19 Nov.01 Nov.19 Nov.23 Dec.07 Dec.17|China announces that it has performed missile interception test M7 earthquake occurs in Haiti Japan Disaster Relief Team dispatched in response to the earthquake in Haiti (February 14, operation completed) “2+2” joint statement on the 50th anniversary of Japan–U.S. Security Treaty First test flight of Russian fifth-generation fighter PAK FA Decision made to dispatch SDF units to United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (February 6, deployment commences) (January 25, 2013, operation completed) U.S. announces “Quadrennial Defense Review” (QDR) and “Ballistic Missile Defense Review” (BMDR) Russia publishes new Navy doctrine ASDF Hyakuri Base, joint civilian use of runway ROK naval patrol ship “Cheonan” sank in the Yellow Sea by a torpedo attack from a North Korean submarine Partial enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment of the Ministry of Defense Establishment Law (new establishment of the 15th Bridge and reorganization of the Youth Technical School) Partial enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment of the Ministry of Defense Establishment Law (establishment of the job status of GSDF students) In Thailand, Thaksin supporters occupy the center of cities such as Bangkok. On April 10, they clash with Thai government security forces (through May 19) U.S. announces “Nuclear Posture Review” (NPR) 1st Nuclear Security Summit (Washington, D.C., through April 13) Disaster relief teams dispatched in response to foot and mouth disease in Miyazaki Prefecture (through July 27) Japan–Australia 2+2 (signing of Japan–Australia ACSA), Japan–Australia “2+2” Defense Ministers’ Meeting (Kitazawa and Faulkner, Tokyo) Enactment of the “Act on the Preservation of the Law-Water Line and Development of Basic Infrastructure of Remote Islands for the Maintaining and Promoting Utilization of the Exclusive Economic Zone and Continental Shelf” U.S. announces “National Security Strategy” (NSS) Joint Statement of Japan-U.S. Security Consultative Committee (“2+2”) Kan Cabinet established U.N. Security Council adopts Resolution 1929 regarding additional sanction on Iran Conclusion of the “Japan–NATO Information Security Agreement” Release of the U.S. "National Space Policy" (NSP) Partial enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment of the Ministry of Defense Establishment Law (establishment of the job status of SDF recruits) Cabinet approves “Act on the Preservation of the Law-Water Line and Development of Basic Infrastructure of Remote Islands for the Maintaining and Promoting Utilization of the Exclusive Economic Zone and Continental Shelf” Coming into effect of the Convention on Cluster Munitions Air transport activities by helicopter in aid of flood disaster in Pakistan (through October 10) Release of the “Future Direction of Procurement Reform” by the Comprehensive Procurement Reform Promotion Committee Chinese fishing boat collides with Japan Coast Guard patrol vessel in waters near the Senkaku Islands Cabinet approves dispatch of SDF officers as key military contact personnel (military observers) to the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) (dispatched on September 27) Inauguration of reshuffled Kan Cabinet North Korea holds conference of the Workers’ Party of Korea and a Plenary Meeting of Central Committee; Kim Jong-un is appointed Vice-Chairman of the Central Military Commission Partial enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment of the Ministry of Defense Establishment Law (abolition of the lowest enlisted ranks) 1st ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM Plus) convenes (Hanoi) The United Kingdom releases "Strategic Defence and Security Review" (SDSR) Russian President Medvedev visits the Kunashiri Island NATO adopts New Strategic Concept North Korea shells the ROK’s Yeonpyeong island Establishment of a governmental committee to review information security, as a result of the leakage of the video showing the fsihing boat collision off the Senkaku Islands Security Council and Cabinet approved the National Defense Program Guidelines for FY2011 and Beyond, and the Mid-term Defense Program (FY2011 to FY2015)|


2011 Jan.11 China conducts test flight of fighter aircraft touted as the
t ti t lth i ft


Year Date Major Events


|2007|Mar.30 Apr.11 Apr.16 Apr.16 May 01 May 18 May 28 May 29 Jun.01 Jun.02 Jun.06 Jun.28 Jul.04 Jul.14 Jul.20 Jul.31 Aug.10 Aug.27 Aug.29 Sep.01 Sep.26 Sep.27 Oct.03 Oct.17 Nov.01 Nov.16 Nov.21 Nov.28 Dec.13 Dec.18 Dec.19 Dec.24|SDF personnel dispatched for the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) as military observers (through January 18, 2011) First Japan-India Vice-Ministerial level talks on defense policy Japan–U.S.–India naval drill conducted for the first time Nagoya District Court, Kanazawa Branch renders judgment on the third and fourth trials for the suit pertaining to noise generated by the Komatsu Air Base Japan–U.S. Security Consultative Committee (“2+2,” Washington, D.C.) announces the joint statement “Alliance Transformation: Advancing United States–Japan Security and Defense Cooperation” ASDF controllers positioned at the Yokota RAPCON facility U.S and Iran begin official talks for the first time in 27 years (ambassadorlevel) Russia announces that it succeeded in launching a new intercontinental ballistic missile Partial amendment (abolition of the Defense Facilities Administration Agency and its consolidation into the Ministry of Defense, establishment of the Inspector General’s Office of Legal Compliance and the Local Defense Bureau, joint units of GSDF, MSDF and ASDF, etc) of the Ministry of Defense Establishment Law and the Self-Defense Forces Law enacted Japan–U.S.–Australia Defense Ministers’ Meeting held for the first time (Minister of Defense Kyuma, U.S. Secretary of Defense Gates, and Minister of Defense Nelson, in Singapore) Japan–Australia Joint Foreign and Defense Ministerial Consultations held for the first time (“2+2,” Tokyo) Russia succeeds in the experimental launch of new submarinelaunched ballistic missile (SLBM), Bulava. Koike becomes Minister of State for Defense Russian President Putin signs presidential order on the termination of the execution of the Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) Enactment of the “Basic Act on Ocean Policy” The U.N. Security Council adopts Resolution 1769 on the dispatch of the U.N./AU Joint PKO Unit (UNMID) to the Darfur region in Sudan Conclusion of the General Security of Military Information Agreement between the Government of Japan and the Government of the United States (GSOMIA) Inauguration of reshuffled Abe Cabinet; Koumura becomes Minister of State for Defense Enactment of the USFJ Realignment Special Measures Law Local Cooperation Bureau, Equipment and Facilities Headquarters, Inspector General’s Office of Legal Compliance, and Local Defense Bureau created Fukuda Cabinet established; Ishiba becomes Minister of State for Defense Second session of the Sixth Round of the Sixth Six-Party Talks held (Beijing) (through September 30) (October 3, Sixth Six-Party Talks Agreement “Second-Phase Actions for the Implementation of the Joint Statement” published) The Six-Party Talks Joint Statement, the “Second-Phase Actions for the Implementation of the Joint Statement,” is announced First Japan–U.S.–Australia trilateral exercises (MSDF, U.S. Navy and the Royal Australian Air Force) Anti-Terrorism Special Measures Law expires Order issued on termination of response measures based on Anti-Terrorism Special Measures Law Council for MOD Reform established The USS Kitty Hawk is denied docking in Hong Kong and returns to Yokosuka via the Taiwan Strait (through November 25) Chinese naval vessel visits Japan for the first time (through December 1) Russia seizes four Japanese fishing vessels off Kunashiri Island Review of USFJ Local Employee Wages (Abolishment of USFJ Differential, etc.) Aegis vessel MSDF Kongo conducts a successful test on counter-missile by ballistic missile Front headquarters of 1st Corps headquarters of U.S. forces formed at USFJ Camp Zama in line with the USFJ realignment Cabinet decisions on “Improvement of next fixedwing aircraft,” “Important issues among contents of Defense Capability Buildup in FY2008,” “Changes of emergency response measures on destruction measures by ballistic missiles”|
|---|---|---|


2008 Jan.16 Enactment of the Replenishment Support Special
Measures Law (units depart for Indian Ocean on
January 24, 25)
Jan.25 New Special Measures Agreement concerning the Cost
Sharing on the Stationing of U.S. forces in Japan signed
Feb.19 Collision between Aegis vessel MSDF and fishing boat
Feb.20 U.S. Navy Aegis ship succeeds in shooting down outof-control satellite outside the earth’s atmosphere with
an SM-3
Feb.21 Based on the Replenishment Support Special Measures
Law, MSDF replenishment ships resume refueling U.S.
ships in the Indian Ocean (through January 15, 2010)
Mar.14 Demonstration by Buddhist monks in the regional capital
of Lhasa in the Tibet Autonomous Region, China
Mar.18 Cabinet approval for the “Basic Plan on Ocean Policy”
Mar.26 Enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment of the
Ministry of Defense Establishment Law (inc. reorganization
of the SDF Command and Communication Unit)
Apr.24 Announcement by U.S. Government that North Korea
assisted with the construction by Syria of nuclear facilities
destroyed in an air attack
May 12 M7.8 earthquake occurs in Sichuan Province, China
May 30 The Convention on Cluster Munitions is adopted at an
international conference in Dublin
Jun.24 First visit of MSDF vessel to China (through June 28)
Jun.26 Agreement reached between the Government of Japan
and Government of China on the joint development of
natural gas in the East China Sea
Jun.26 North Korea submits its nuclear program
Jul.07 G8 Hokkaido Toyako Summit (through July 9)
Jul.12 Publication of the Press Communique of the Heads of
D l ti M ti f th Si th R d f th Si P t T lk

|2008|Jul.15 Aug.02 Aug.08 Aug.10 Aug.29 Sep.09 Sep.24 Sep.25 Sep.25 Oct.03 Oct.10 Oct.19 Oct.22 Oct.24 Nov.02 Dec.02 Dec.03 Dec.20 Dec.23 Dec.26|Report by the Council for Reforming the Ministry of Defense released Inauguration of reshuffled Fukuda Cabinet; Hayashi becomes Minister of Defense Russian Armed Forces intervene in military clashes between Georgian and South Ossetian forces Armed groups attack public security facilities in Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, China TRDI receives prototype of next-generation fixed-wing patrol aircraft XP-1 no. 1 U.S. President G.W. Bush announces reduction of U.S. troops stationed in Iraq and increase of troops in Afghanistan Aso Cabinet established; Hamada becomes Minister of Defense Commissioning of the nuclear-powered aircraft carrier USS George Washington China launches a manned spacecraft “Shenzhou 7,” and conducts successful extravehicular activity for the first time U.S. DoD informs Congress of sale of PAC-3s, AH-64Ds, attack helicopters, etc., to Taiwan U.S. removes North Korea from its list of state sponsors of terrorism Four Chinese naval warships including a destroyer sail through Tsugaru Strait for the first time Japan–India Summit Meeting: Japan–India Joint Statement on the Advancement of the Strategic and Global Partnership, and Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation signed SDF personnel dispatched to United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) (through September 30, 2011) Four Chinese vessels pass between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island and advance to the Pacific Ocean for the first time U.N. Security Council adopts Resolution 1846 on countering piracy off the coast of Somalia Convention on Cluster Munitions signed Review of the Mid-Term Defense Program (FY2005– FY2009) adopted by Security Council of Japan and Cabinet ASDF Airlift Wing that was deployed under the Law Concerning Special Measures on Humanitarian and Reconstruction Assistance in Iraq returns to Japan Chinese naval fleet of three destroyers sets off to Somalia for escort mission|
|---|---|---|


Year Date Major Events

2008 Jul.15 Report by the Council for Reforming the Ministry of
Defense released
Aug.02 Inauguration of reshuffled Fukuda Cabinet; Hayashi
becomes Minister of Defense
Aug.08 Russian Armed Forces intervene in military clashes
between Georgian and South Ossetian forces
Aug.10 Armed groups attack public security facilities in Xinjiang
Uyghur Autonomous Region, China
Aug.29 TRDI receives prototype of next-generation fixed-wing
patrol aircraft XP-1 no. 1
Sep.09 U.S. President G.W. Bush announces reduction of
U.S. troops stationed in Iraq and increase of troops in
Afghanistan
Sep.24 Aso Cabinet established; Hamada becomes Minister of
Defense
Sep.25 Commissioning of the nuclear-powered aircraft carrier
USS George Washington
Sep.25 China launches a manned spacecraft “Shenzhou 7,”
and conducts successful extravehicular activity for the
first time
Oct.03 U.S. DoD informs Congress of sale of PAC-3s, AH-64Ds,
attack helicopters, etc., to Taiwan
Oct.10 U.S. removes North Korea from its list of state sponsors
of terrorism
Oct.19 Four Chinese naval warships including a destroyer sail
through Tsugaru Strait for the first time
Oct.22 Japan–India Summit Meeting: Japan–India Joint
Statement on the Advancement of the Strategic and
Global Partnership, and Joint Declaration on Security
Cooperation signed
Oct.24 SDF personnel dispatched to United Nations Mission in
Sudan (UNMIS) (through September 30, 2011)
Nov.02 Four Chinese vessels pass between the main island of
Okinawa and Miyako Island and advance to the Pacific
Ocean for the first time
Dec.02 U.N. Security Council adopts Resolution 1846 on
countering piracy off the coast of Somalia
Dec.03 Convention on Cluster Munitions signed
Dec.20 Review of the Mid-Term Defense Program (FY2005–
FY2009) adopted by Security Council of Japan and Cabinet
Dec.23 ASDF Airlift Wing that was deployed under the Law
Concerning Special Measures on Humanitarian and
Reconstruction Assistance in Iraq returns to Japan
Dec.26 Chinese naval fleet of three destroyers sets off to Somalia
for escort mission
2009 Jan.08 ASDF deploys F-15s to Okinawa (Hyakuri)
Jan.15 Ministry of Defense decides on “Basic Policy Relating to
the Development and Use of Space”
Jan.27 Japanese fishing boat No. 38 Yoshimaru caught by
Russian Coast Guard in Sea of Japan
Jan.31 Provisional government in Somalia, Ahmed elected as
new president
Feb.10 Order issued relating to the conclusion of withdrawal
duties for the Iraq Reconstruction Support Group by the
redeployment group
Feb.17 Signing of the “Agreement on the Relocation of USMC in
Okinawa to Guam”
Feb.17 U.S. President Obama decides to increase the number
of troops dispatched to Afghanistan by approximately
17,000
Mar.06 U.S.–Russia Foreign Ministers’ Meeting, agreement to
“reset” bilateral relations (Geneva)
Mar.13 Cabinet approval for Anti-Piracy Measures Law
Mar.13 SDF mobilization order issued for maritime security
operations as part of anti-piracy measures off the Coast
of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden
Mar.17 First Japan-ASEAN Defense Vice-Ministerial Forum
Mar.27 SDF action order for implementation of destruction
measures against ballistic missiles is issued
Apr.03 Foreign Minister Nakasone signs Status of Forces
Agreement with Djibouti
Apr.05 North Korea launches a ballistic missile which flies
through Japanese airspace
Apr.05 U.S. President Obama delivers speech in Prague
Apr.06 SDF action order for termination of destruction measures
against ballistic missiles is issued
Apr.11 Cancellation of ASEAN Summit due to invasion by
protestors in Thailand. State of emergency declared in
Bangkok on April 12
May 04 1st ARF Disaster Relief Training (Philippines)
May 15 Order issued for P-3Cs to be dispatched to Djibouti
international airport
May 19 “Agreement on the Relocation of USMC in Okinawa to
Guam” comes into force
May 25 North Korea conducts the underground nuclear test
May 30 First Japan–U.S.–ROK Defense Ministers’ Meeting
(Hamada, Gates, Lee, in Singapore)
Jun.02 Basic Plan for Space Policy formulated
Jun.11 Commencement of warning and surveillance flights in the
Gulf of Aden by P-3Cs
Jun.16 Provisional government of Somalia declares a state of
emergency due to outbreak of fighting
Jul.04 North Korea launches a total of seven ballistic missiles
into the Sea of Japan
Jul.14 Ratification of Convention on Cluster Munitions
Jul.17 Announcement of Law Concerning the Prohibition of
Manufacture of Cluster Munitions and Regulation of their
Possession
Jul.24 Anti-Piracy Measures Law enacted, Order issued for
anti-piracy operations
Jul.28 The exterior of the body of oil tanker “M. STAR” damaged
in an explosion at the Straits of Hormuz
Jul.31 Completion of withdrawal of non-American multinational
forces from Iraq
Aug.01 Partial enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment
of the Ministry of Defense Establishment Law (inc.
establishment of the Defense Council and the Special
Advisors to the Minister of Defense, and abolition of the
Defense Councilors System)
Sep.16 Hatoyama Cabinet established; Kitazawa becomes
Minister of Defense
Sep.17 U.S. President Obama announces review of MD
deployment in Europe
S 30 M 6 h k ff h f S I d i


-----

Year Date Major Events


Year Date Major Events


|2011|Jan.14 Jan.14 Jan.21 Jan.28 Feb.04 Feb.05 Feb.08 Feb.12 Feb.23 Mar.11 Mar.11 Mar.11 Mar.12 Mar.16 Mar.16 Mar.17 Mar.19 Apr.05 Apr.11 Apr.14 Apr.15 Apr.27 May 02 Jun.01 Jun.21 Jun.22 Jun.24 Jun.28 Jul.08 Jul.09 Jul.11 Jul.14 Aug.10 Aug.24 Sep.02 Sep.09 Sep.19 Sep.27 Sep.29 Sep.30 Oct.10 Oct.14 Oct.24 Oct.31 Nov.11 Nov.12 Nov.15 Nov.22 Dec.18 Dec.19 Dec.20 Dec.20 Dec.20 Dec.27 Dec.28 Dec.31|U.N. Security Council chairman’s statement concerning the conclusion of the UNMIN mandate is adopted Inauguration of reshuffled Kan Cabinet (second term) Signing of the new Special Measures Agreement in connection with cost-sharing arrangements on the stationing of U.S.Forces in Japan (comes into effect on April 1) Prime Minister Kan attends the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting (Davos meeting) (through January 30) The United States releases "National Security Space Strategy" (NSSS) New START comes into effect The United States releases the "National Military Strategy" Egyptian President Mubarak resigns Japan Disaster Relief Team dispatched in response to the earthquake in New Zealand (through March 3) Four pirates that had shot at Japanese vessels off the Oman Coast in the Arabian Sea were arrested under the Anti-Piracy Law Great East Japan Earthquake strikes Disaster relief teams dispatched in response to the Great East Japan Earthquake (through August 31) Nuclear disaster relief teams dispatched in response to the Great East Japan Earthquake (through December 26) Cabinet decision regarding first disaster call-up of SDF reserve personnel and ready reserve personnel in the wake of the Great East Japan Earthquake Disaster relief call-up order is issued to dispatch GSDF ready reserve personnel and reserve personnel (through August 31) U.N. Security Council adopts Resolution 1973 allowing use of force against Libya The coalition force led by the U.S., U.K., and France commence military operations against Libya U.S. President Obama gives speech in Prague Reconstruction Design Council in Response to the Great East Japan Earthquake established First BRICS (five emerging economies) summit is held Disaster relief call-up order is issued to dispatch MSDF and ASDF reserve personnel (through August 31) Partial revision to the Environmental Improvement Law (extended target projects for subsidies to improve the environment surrounding specified defense facilities) U.S. President Obama announces the killing of Osama bin Laden, leader of the international terrorist organization Al-Qaeda SDF activity base in Djibouti initiates operation Japan–U.S. Security Consultative Committee (“2+2” in Washington, D.C.) joint statement; release of “Toward a Deeper and Broader Japan–U.S. Alliance: Building on 50 years of Partnership” U.S. President Obama announces guidelines to withdraw U.S. troops from Afghanistan Exercise of the Basic Act on Reconstruction First meeting of the headquarters for reconstruction measures U.N. Security Council adopts Resolution 1996 to establish UNMISS Independence of the Republic of South Sudan U.N. Security Council adopts Resolution 1997 to terminate UNMIS U.S. DoD releases “Department of Defense Strategy for Operating in Cyberspace” Conducts its frist navigation Chinese aircraft carrier Varyag The Chinese fisheries patrol ships enter Japan’s territorial waters near the Senkaku Islands Noda Cabinet established; Ichikawa becomes Minister of Defense 24 Russian vessels sail through Soya Strait Detection of cyber attacks against defense industry Japan-Philippines Summit (Tokyo), Japan-Philippines joint statement made Chinese space laboratory “Tiangong 1” launched Cabinet decision on “Promotion of the operational Quasi-Zenith Satellite System project” and “Promoting development and utilization of aerospace” ATR to Guam as part of the U.S. Forces realignment (through October 28) Decision made on next transport plane (C-130R) replacing MSDF’s YS-11 Conclusion of the “Japan-France Information Security Agreement” NATO ends operations in Libya U.S.-Philippines sign “Manila Declaration” Japan-U.S. summit meeting (Honolulu) Cabinet decision made on dispatch of SDF personnel as headquarters staff for the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) (departing Japan on November 28) Six Chinese vessels pass between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island and advance to the Pacific Ocean Completion of U.S. troop withdrawal from Iraq North Korea announces the death of Chairman of the National Defense Commission Kim Jong-il (December 17) Decision made by the Security Council and seconded by the Cabinet regarding “acquisition of the next-generation fighter aircraft” F-35A decided to be the next-generation fighter aircraft Decision made by the Cabinet on dispatching engineer units, etc. for United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (deployed from on January 11, 2012) Statement by the Chief Cabinet Secretary on Guidelines for Overseas Transfer of Defense Equipment etc. Environmental impact statement for the Futenma Replacement Facility construction project is submitted to Okinawa Prefecture (through January 6, 2012) Third supplementary budget approved Japan-India Summit (Delhi), Joint statement on strengthening “Japan-India strategic global partnership” signed|
|---|---|---|


2012 Jan.05 U.S. announces the defense strategic guidance
J 11 Ad t f UNMISS d t J


|2012|Jan.13 Feb.10 Mar.16 Mar.26 Mar.27 Mar.30 Apr.10 Apr.11 Apr.13 Apr.13 Apr.17 Apr.27 Apr.29 May 17 Jun.03 Jun.04 Jun.28 Jul.01 Jul.03 Jul.11 Jul.12 Jul.12 Aug.10 Aug.19 Sep.07 Sep.11 Sep.23 Sep.25 Oct.01 Oct.16 Nov.15 Nov.26 Dec.04 Dec.07 Dec.12 Dec.13 Dec.26 Dec.31|Inauguration of reshuffled Noda Cabinet; Tanaka becomes Minister of Defense Establishment of the Reconstruction Agency Chinese government ship “Haijian” enters Japan’s territorial waters near the Senkaku Islands Transfer of ASDF Air Defense Command to Yokota Air Base Prime Minister Noda attends the Nuclear Security Summit SDF action order for implementation of destruction measures against ballistic missiles is issued (terminated April 13) Japan-U.K. summit meeting (Tokyo), Japan-U.K. joint statement is announced Kim Jong-un becomes North Korea’s First Secretary of the Korean Workers’ Party North Korea launches a ballistic missile disguised as a “Satellite” Kim Jong-un becomes the First Chairman of the National Defense Commission Ten-month extension of SDF dispatch to support the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) (through February 28, 2013) Japan-U.S. Security Consultative Committee “2+2” joint statement Three Chinese vessels sail through Osumi Strait to the Pacific Ocean “Japan-Australia Information Security Agreement” signed Exchange of memorandum regarding Japan-U.K. defense cooperation Inauguration of reshuffled Noda Cabinet (second term); Morimoto becomes Minister of Defense Third working-level talks on maritime communication mechanisms between Japan and China’s defense authorities (Beijing) (through June 29) 26 Russian vessels sail through Soya Strait (through July 2) PSI Air Interdiction Exercise hosted by Japan (Hokkaido, through July 5) Three vessels of Chinese Fishery Law Enforcement Command (FLEC) enter Japanese waters near the Senkaku Islands One FLEC vessel enters Japanese waters near the Senkaku Islands Enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment of the Law for Establishment of Cabinet Office South Korean President Lee Myung-bak visits Takeshima UNSMIS ended “Toward Stable and Effective Use of Cyberspace by the MOD/JSDF” is released Government’s purchase of the three Senkaku Islands SDF dispatch to the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) ended The first Chinese aircraft carrier “Liaoning” commissioned Inauguration of reshuffled Noda Cabinet (third term) Seven Chinese warships pass through the waters between the Yonaguni Island and the Nakanokami Island for the first time Xi Jinping elected as General Secretary of the Communist Party of China and Chairman of the Central Military Commission at the first plenary session of the 18th Central ommittee of the Communist Party of China Promulgation and partial enforcement (regarding Japan-U.S. ACSA) of partially amended laws, including the Self-Defense Forces Act, etc. Launch of capacity building program in East Timor SDF action order for implementation of destruction measures against ballistic missiles is issued (terminated December 12) North Korea launches a ballistic missile disguised as a “Satellite” A Chinese aircraft violates Japanese airspace for the first time (airspace surrounding the Senkaku Islands) Inauguration of second Abe Cabinet; Onodera becomes Minister of Defense UNMIT ends|
|---|---|---|


2013 Jan.11 France’s military intervention in Mali
Jan.16 Abduction of Japanese nationals in Algeria
Jan.16 Japan-Vietnam summit meeting (Hanoi)
Jan.17 Japan-Thailand summit meeting (Bangkok)
Jan.18 Japan-Indonesia summit meeting (Jakarta)
Jan.19 A Chinese naval vessel may direct fire-control radar at a
helicopter based on a JMSDF destroyer
Jan.20 SDF dispatch to the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) ended (ceremony to return
unit flag)
Jan.20 As a measure for the Transportation of Japanese
Nationals Overseas (TJNO) prescribed in the Self-Defense
Forces Act, SDF transports Japanese victims of the
Algerian hostage crisis from Algeria to Japan (return
home on January 24)
Jan.23 Australia announces the National Security Strategy
Jan.25 Security Council and Cabinet approve the document on
the building up of defense capability for FY2013
Jan.27 China announces that it has performed missile
interception test
Jan.30 A Chinese vessel directs fire-control radar at a JMSDF
destroyer in the East China Sea
Jan.31 Three Chinese vessels sail northeast of Miyako Island to
the Pacific Ocean
Jan.31 Japan–Australia ACSA enters into force
Jan.31 Partial enforcement (regarding Japan-Australia ACSA)
of partially amended laws, including the Self-Defense
Forces Act, etc.
Feb.01 Partial enforcement (regarding pilot allowance) of partially
amended laws, including the Self-Defense Forces Act, etc.
Feb.07 Russian fighters intrude into Japan’s airspace
Feb.12 North Korea’s underground nuclear test
Feb.15 First meeting of a panel of experts on the establishment
of a Japanese National Security Council (NSC)
Feb.20 Naha District Court renders judgment on Henoko
environmental assessment case
Feb.23 Meeting between U.S. President Obama and Prime
Minister Abe
Mar.01 Statement by the Chief Cabinet Secretary on participation
f J ’ i d t i i th d ti f th F 35A


Year Date Major Events

2013 Mar.15 SDF dispatch for the MINUSTAH mission ended (ceremony
to return unit flag)
Mar.22 Japan-Australia Information Security Agreement enters
into force
Mar.26 Partial enforcement (regarding shift of Air Rescue Wing’s
affiliation) of partially amended laws, including the Self-
Defense Forces Act, etc.
Mar.30 Four Chinese vessels sail southwest of the main island of
Okinawa to the Pacific Ocean
Apr.02 North Korea announces that it will readjust and restart
the graphite moderated reactor that was mothballed and
disabled under an agreement reached at the Six-Party
Talks in October, 2007
Apr.29 France releases "White Paper on Defence and National
Security"
May 07 Two Chinese vessels sail northeast of the Yonaguni Island
to the Pacific Ocean
May 27 Three Chinese vessels pass between the main island
of Okinawa and Miyako Island and advance to the
Pacific Ocean
Jun.17 Japan-Russia summit meeting
Jun.18 Afghanistan starts final phase of transition of security
responsibilities from the International Security
Assistance Force
Jul.04 Japan-U.K. Agreement Concerning the Transfer of Arms
and Military Technologies and Information Security
Agreement signed
Jul.05 China-Russia joint naval exercise. “Naval Interaction
2013” (through July 11)
Jul.13 Chinese naval fleets sail through Soya Strait to the Sea
of Okhotsk
Jul.22 China Coast Guard sign put up
Jul.24 Chinese early warning aircraft fly between the main island
of Okinawa and Miyako Island
Aug.21 Many civilians die in outskirts of Damascus, Syria due to
use of chemical weapons
Aug.21 Three Chinese vessels sail through Osumi Strait to the
Pacific Ocean
Aug.22 Russian bombers intrude into Japan’s airspace
Aug.27 Two Chinese vessels pass between the main island of
Okinawa and Miyako Island and advance to the Pacific
Ocean
Aug.29 2nd ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM Plus)
(Bandar Seri Begawan)
Aug.30 “Direction of the MOD Reform” released
Sep.01 Council on Security and Defense Capabilities holds first
meeting
Sep.05 Japan-U.S. summit meeting (St. Petersburg)
Sep.08 Chinese bombers fly between the main island of Okinawa
and Miyako Island
Sep.09 Unmanned aircraft (presumed) of unidentified nationality
flies over the East China Sea
Sep.10 1st meeting of MOD/SDF Special Action Committee on the
Tokyo 2020 Olympic and Paralympic Games held
Sep.27 U.N. Security Council adopts Resolution 2118 on
elimination of Syrian chemical weapons
Oct.03 Japan-U.S. Security Consultative Committee (“2+2”, Tokyo)
Oct.03 Signing of the “Protocol to amend the agreement
concerning the relocation of the U.S. Marine Corps from
Okinawa to Guam”
Oct.16 Disaster relief teams dispatched after Typhoon No. 26
(through November 8)
Oct.23 Five Chinese vessels pass between the main island of
Okinawa and Miyako Island and advance to the Pacific
Ocean
Oct.25 Chinese early warning aircraft and bombers fly between
the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island (through
October 27) (three consecutive days)
Oct.30 Three Chinese vessels sail southwest of the main island
of Okinawa to the Pacific Ocean
Nov.02 First Japan-Russia “2+2” (Tokyo)
Nov.08 Typhoon No. 30 Haiyan hit Leyte Island, Philippines
Nov.12 Japan Disaster Relief Team dispatched in response to
typhoon disaster in the Philippines (through December 18)
Nov.15 Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) decides on detailed terms of the destruction of
Syrian chemical weapons, etc.
Nov.22 Revisions of the Self-Defense Forces Act (e.g., expanded
category of people who may be transported by the JSDF, in
the event of disasters, insurgencies, and other emergencies
overseas) promulgated and entered into force
Nov.23 China announces establishment of the “East China Sea Air
Defense Identification Zone”
Nov.24 Iran and EU3 (U.K., France, Germany) +3 (U.S.,
China, Russia) reach first phase agreement for the
comprehensive settlement of the nuclear issue
Dec.04 National Security Council established
Dec.05 French forces launch military intervention in the Central
African Republic
Dec.08 The ROK announces establishment of new Air Defense
Identification Zone
Dec.13 ASEAN-Japan Commemorative Summit (Tokyo) (through
December 15)
Dec.13 Act on the Protection of Specially Designated Secrets
promulgated
Dec.13 North Korea announces execution (December 12) of
Vice-Chairman of the National Defense Commission Jang
Song-thaek
Dec.15 Chinese lunar probe successfully achieves soft lunar landing
Dec.15 Confrontations occur between forces aligned with the
president and forces aligned with the former vice president
Dec.15 Japan-Cambodia summit meeting (Tokyo). Memorandum
on Defense Cooperation and Exchanges signed.
Dec.17 National Security Council and Cabinet approve “National
Security Strategy,” “National Defense Program Guidelines
for FY2014 and beyond,” and “Medium Term Defense
Program (FY2014-FY2018)”
Dec.23 Three Chinese vessels sail southwest of the main island
of Okinawa to the Pacific Ocean
Dec.23 Second Russian Borey-class SSBN commissioned
(incorporated into Pacific Fleet)
Dec.27 Governor of Okinawa Prefecture approves application for
public water reclamation for the Futenma Replacement
F ilit t ti j t


-----

Year Defense Domestic International


|2014|Jan.06 Jan.09 Jan.15 Jan.22 Feb.15 Mar.11 Mar.19 Apr.01 Apr.06 Apr.14 Apr.17 Apr.28 Apr.29 May 07 May 08 May 09 May 31 May 31 May 31 Jun.11 Jun.11 Jun.19 Jun.21 Jul.08 Jul.11 Jul.25 Jul.29 Jul.29 Aug.01 Aug.06 Aug.10 Aug.17 Aug.17 Aug.20 Sep.03 Sep.11 Sep.27 Oct.16 Oct.26 Oct.28 Nov.04 Nov.04 Nov.06 Nov.19 Nov.21 Nov.23 Nov.28 Dec.01 Dec.06 Dec.19 Dec.24 Dec.31|Japan-India Defense Ministerial Meeting (New Delhi) First Japan-France Foreign and Defense Ministers’ Meeting (Paris) Collision accident between transport vessel and fishing vessel Committee for Promoting the Mitigation of the Impact of Bases on Okinawa established Disaster relief teams dispatched after heavy snowfall disaster (through February 23) Japan Disaster Relief Team dispatched in response to the missing Malaysian Airplane (through April 28) A submarine seen navigating underwater in Japan’s contiguous zone (waters east of Miyako Island) Partial enforcement (establishment of Faculty of Nursing at National Defense Medical College) of partially amended laws, including the Self-Defense Forces Act, etc. Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) Disaster relief teams dispatched in response to the bird flu outbreak in Kumamoto Prefecture (through April 16) Japan-Mongolia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) Japan-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Perth) Japan-Malaysia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Kuala Lumpur) Japan-Italy Defense Ministerial Meeting (Rome) Japan-South Sudan Defense Ministerial Meeting (Juba) Japan-Djibouti Defense Ministerial Meeting (Djibouti) Prime Minister Abe and Defense Minister Onodera attend 13th Asia Security Summit (held by IISS) (Singapore) Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore) Japan-U.S.-ROK Defense Ministers’ Meeting and Japan-U.S.-Australia Defense Ministers’ Meeting (Singapore) Japan-Australia “2+2” (Tokyo) Japan-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) Strategy on Defense Production and Technological Bases released Partial enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment of the Ministry of Defense Establishment Law (response to early retirement system) Japan-Australia Agreement concerning the Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology is signed Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting (Washington, D.C.) Enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment of the Ministry of Defense Establishment Law (establishment of Vice-Minister of Defense for International Affairs) Japan-France Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) Japan-France declaration of intent on defense cooperation and exchanges is signed Enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment of the Ministry of Defense Establishment Law (quota for SDF personnel posts of Internal Bureau, establishment of Air Tactics Development & Training Wing, etc.) Disaster relief teams dispatched after the heavy rainfall in Yamaguchi Prefecture (through August 8) Disaster relief teams dispatched to provide water supply supports in Kochi Prefecture (through August 14) Disaster relief teams dispatched for lifesaving activities in Fukuchiyama City, Kyoto Prefecture Disaster relief teams dispatched for lifesaving activities in Tamba City, Hyogo Prefecture Disaster relief teams dispatched for lifesaving activities in Hiroshima City, Hiroshima Prefecture (through September 11) Eto becomes Minister of Defense Disaster relief teams dispatched to provide water supply supports in Ebetsu City, Hokkaido (through September 13) Disaster relief teams dispatched after the eruption of Mt. Ontake (through October 16) Japan-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) Air Review commemorating the 60th anniversary of the MOD/SDF Japan-Finland Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) Japan-Spain Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) Memorandum on Japan-Spain Defense Cooperation and Exchanges is signed Japan-U.S.-Australia joint exercise (Michinoku ALERT 2014) (through November 9) First Japan-ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Informal Meeting (Bagan) “Global Hawk” is decided as the model of unmanned aerial vehicle Disaster relief teams dispatched in response to an earthquake with an epicenter in northern Nagano Prefecture Transport of supplies necessary for Japan Disaster Relief operations in response to the outbreak of the Ebola virus disease in West Africa (Republic of Ghana, through December 11) SDF personnel dispatched to NATO for the first time Disaster relief teams dispatched after the heavy snowfall in Tokushima Prefecture (through December 11) Joint Statement of the Japan-U.S. Security Consultative Committee (2+2) Nakatani becomes Minister of Defense Japan Disaster Relief Team dispatched in response to disappearance of AirAsia plane (through January 11)|Jan.01 Jan.07 Feb.14 Mar.18 Mar.24 Mar.25 Apr.01 Apr.07 Apr.24 May 14 May 15 Jul.01 Jul.01 Jul.07 Jul.08 Jul.10 Jul.22 Jul.25 Jul.29 Jul.31 Aug.01 Sep.01 Sep.03 Sep.06 Sep.07 Sep.26 Oct.03 Oct.16 Oct.24 Nov.10 Nov.12 Nov.16 Nov.20 Dec.10 Dec.17 Dec.24 Dec.26|Japan-U.K. Information Security Agreement enters into force National Security Secretariat launched Council for Promoting the Mitigation of the Impact of MCAS Futenma on Okinawa established Japan-Vietnam summit meeting (Tokyo) Prime Minister Abe attends Nuclear Security Summit Japan-U.S.-ROK summit meeting Cabinet decision on “Three Principles on Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology” Japan-Australia summit meeting (Tokyo) Japan-U.S. summit meeting (Tokyo) “Protocol to amend the agreement concerning the relocation of the U.S. Marine Corps from Okinawa to Guam” comes into force The Advisory Panel on Reconstruction of the Legal Basis for Security submits its report Cabinet decision on “Development of Seamless Security Legislation to Ensure Japan’s Survival and Protect its People” Japan-Macedonia summit meeting (Tokyo) Japan-New Zealand summit meeting (Auckland) Japan-Australia summit meeting (Canberra) Japan-Papua New Guinea summit meeting (Port Moresby) Japan-Mongolia summit meeting (Tokyo) Japan-Mexico summit meeting (Mexico City) Japan-Colombia summit meeting (Bogota) Japan-Chile summit meeting (Santiago) Japan-Brazil summit meeting (Brasilia) Japan-India summit meeting (Tokyo) Inauguration of the second Abe Cabinet Japan-Bangladesh summit meeting (Dhaka) Japan-Sri Lanka summit meeting (Colombo) Prime Minister Abe attends U.N. Summit Meeting on UN Peacekeeping Operations (New York) Cabinet decision on “Establishment of the Headquarters for Creating a Society where All Women Shine” 10th ASEM Summit (Milan, Italy, through October 17) Japan-Georgia summit meeting (Tokyo) APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting (Beijing, China, through November 11) ASEAN-related summit meetings (Naypyidaw, Myanmar, through November 13) Candidate Onaga defeats incumbent Governor Nakaima in Okinawa gubernatorial election Japan-Jordan summit meeting (Tokyo) Act on the Protection of Specially Designated Secrets enters into force Japan-Palau summit meeting (Tokyo) Inauguration of the third Abe Cabinet Deployment of U.S. Forces TPY-2 (“X-band radar”) to Kyogamisaki is completed|Jan.28 Feb.11 Mar.01 Mar.03 Mar.04 Mar.09 Mar.18 Mar.24 Mar.26 Apr.10 Apr.12 Apr.13 Apr.28 May 02 May 07 May 10 May 19 May 20 May 24 May 27 Jun.07 Jun.10 Jun.11 Jun.29 Jun.29 Jul.8- Jul.09 Jul.13 Jul.14 Jul.17 Jul.17- Jul.26 Aug.08 Aug. 8- Aug.12 Aug.19 Aug.26 Sep.04 Sep.05 Sep.08 Sep.10 Sep.18 Sep.19 Sep.20 Sep.22 Sep.29 Sep.30 Oct.03 Oct.5- Oct.22 Nov.12 Nov.13 Nov.15 Nov.24 Dec.01 Dec.01 Dec.04 Dec.4- Dec.06 Dec.24 Dec.31|U.N. Security Council adopts Resolution 2134 approving deployment of EU units to Central Africa First ministerial consultation between China and Taiwan Three Chinese vessels pass between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island and advance to the Pacific Ocean North Korea launches two ballistic missiles The United States releases QDR, releases FY2014 budget proposal China’s Y-8 intelligence gathering aircraft and H-6 bomber fly between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island Russian “annexation” of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea 3rd Nuclear Security Summit (Hague, through March 25) North Korea launches two ballistic missiles U.N. Security Council adopts Resolution 2149 approving PKO deployment to Central Africa Separatist armed groups occupy government buildings in Eastern Ukraine Russian aircraft fly near Japanese airspace for seven consecutive days (through April 19) U.S. and Philippines sign Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement: (EDCA) Two Chinese vessels pass between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island and advance to the Pacific Ocean Collision and confrontation between Chinese and Vietnamese vessels occur 24th ASEAN Summit (through May 11) U.S. Department of Justice indicts Chinese PLA officers and others for conducting cyber attacks China-Russia joint maritime military exercise “Naval Interaction 2014” (East China Sea) (through May 26) Chinese Su-27 fighter jets fly abnormally close to SDF aircraft U.N. Security Council adopts Resolution 2155 that extends UNMISS mandate and limits it to four areas including civilian protection, etc. Three Chinese vessels pass between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island and advance to the Pacific Ocean ISIL seizes Mosul Chinese Su-27 fighter jets fly abnormally close to SDF aircraft ISIL declares establishment of “Islamic State” and caliphate North Korea launches two ballistic missiles Israel Defense Forces start Operation Protective Edge against Gaza North Korea launches two ballistic missiles North Korea launches two ballistic missiles Russia-India joint naval exercise (Indra-2014) (through July 19) Malaysian airliner is shot down (Ukraine) Israel Defense Forces begin ground invasion of Gaza North Korea launches a ballistic missile WHO issues declaration of state of emergency over Ebola virus disease U.S. Central Command begins airstrikes on ISIL in Northern Iraq Russian Armed Forces conduct exercises in the Northern Territories and Chishima Islands Chinese J-11 fighter jets fly abnormally close to U.S. Forces’ patrol aircraft Israel and Hamas agree on ceasefire NATO Wales Summit (through September 5) Minsk agreement (ceasefire in Ukraine, etc.) Iraq’s new Cabinet is formed U.S. President Obama announces strategy to counter ISIL U.N. Security Council adopts Resolution 2177 on Ebola virus disease countermeasures; UNMEER’s establishment is announced Russia begins large-scale exercise “Vostok 2014” (through September 25) Ukrainian government and separatist armed groups reach ceasefire agreement The United States and other coalition countries begin airstrikes on ISIL in Syria Afghanistan’s new government is launched U.S.-Afghanistan bilateral security agreement and NATO-Afghanistan states of force agreement are signed Flight of China’s Y-9 intelligence gathering aircraft in the East China Sea is confirmed for the first time Shelling between India and Pakistan in Kashmir Shooting incident at Canada’s Parliament U.S.-China summit meeting East Asia Summit (EAS), ASEAN Summit G20 Summit (through November 16) ROK Armed Forces conduct military drill in waters near Takeshima Russia establishes the Northern Joint Strategic Command Over 60 countries attend Counter-ISIL Coalition Ministerial Meeting (Brussels) Five Chinese vessels sail through Osumi Strait to the Pacific Ocean Chinese People’s Liberation Army begins exercise in Western Pacific. Subsequently, some vessels transit Soya Strait (December 24) and Tsushima Strait (December 27) and circle Japan Chinese Y-9 intelligence gathering aircraft, Y-8 early warning aircraft, and H-6 bomber fly between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island (December 7, 10, and 11) Arms Trade Treaty comes into effect ISAF’s combat mission in Afghanistan ends|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|


2015 Jan.12 Fourth Joint Working Group meeting on the “Maritime
and Air Communication Mechanism” between
Japanese and Chinese defense authorities (Tokyo)
Jan.15 Disaster relief teams dispatched in response to the
bird flu outbreak in Okayama Prefecture (through
January 19)
Jan.18 Disaster relief teams dispatched in response to
the bird flu outbreak in Saga Prefecture (through
January 20)
Jan.18 Defense Minister Nakatani visits Djibouti
Jan.19 Defense Minister Nakatani visits South Sudan
Jan.21 First Japan-U.K. Foreign and Defense Ministers’
Meeting (London)
2015 Jan.21 Japan-U.K. Defense Ministerial Meeting
J J Phili i D f Mi i i l M i (T k )


Jan.16 Japan-Egypt summit meeting (Cairo)
Jan.17 Japan-Jordan summit meeting (Amman)
Jan.18 Japan-Israel summit meeting (Jerusalem, through
January 19)
Jan.26 Convocation of the 189th Ordinary Diet Session
(through September 27)
Feb.09 Japan-Thailand summit meeting (Tokyo)
Feb.10 Japan-Mongolia summit meeting (Tokyo)
Feb.20 Japan-Qatar summit meeting (Tokyo)
Feb.27 Japan-Poland summit meeting (Tokyo)
Mar.06 Japan-Laos summit meeting (Tokyo)
Mar.09 Japan-Germany summit meeting (Tokyo)
Mar.20 The Ruling Coalition on the Development of
Security Legislation presents “Concrete Vision for


Jan.01 NATO begins “Resolute Support Mission”
Jan.07 Shooting incident against a publisher (Charlie Hebdo), etc. in Paris
Jan.20 ISIL releases video of Japanese hostages (videos of the murder of the Japanese
nationals subsequently released on January 24 and February 1) President Obama
delivers States of the Union address
Jan.29 African Union decides to establish a Multinational Joint Task Force against Boko Haram
Feb.02 U.S. President Obama presents his budget for FY2016
Feb.06 The United States releases "National Security Strategy" (NSS)
Feb.12 Minsk agreement II (German, French, Russian, and Ukrainian leaders agree on new
ceasefire agreement)
Feb.13 Two Chinese vessels pass between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island and
advance to the Pacific Ocean
Feb.14 China’s Y-9 intelligence gathering aircraft fly between the main island of Okinawa and
Miyako Island (February 15)


-----

Year Defense Domestic International

Jan.29 Memorandum on Japan-Philippines Defense Mar.23 Japan-Indonesia summit meeting (Tokyo) Mar.02 North Korea launches two ballistic missiles
Cooperation and Exchanges is signed Mar.24 Japan-New Zealand summit meeting (Tokyo) Mar.05 China announces FY2015 defense budget
Feb.02 Disaster relief teams dispatched to help remove Mar.27 Japan-Portugal summit meeting (Tokyo) Mar.07 Nigeria’s Boko Haram pledges loyalty to ISIL (ISIL accepts on March 12)
snow to eliminate isolated areas as a result of the Apr.28 Japan-U.S. summit meeting (Washington, D.C.) Mar.18 An armed group attacks Bardo Museum in Tunisia (three Japanese nationals killed)
severe snowstorm in Rausu Town, Hokkaido (through May 13 Japan-Belgium summit meeting (Tokyo) Apr.01 The Rome Statue entered into force for Palestine
February 3) May 14 Cabinet decision on “Bill for the Development Apr.02 EU3+3 and Iran agree on “Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action”
Mar.13Mar.13Feb.08Feb.20 Inaugural airborne exercise under Japan-U.S. joint exercise (North Wind 2 (through February 22)Memorandum on Japan-Qatar Defense Exchange is signedSecond Japan-France Foreign and Defense Ministers’ Meeting (2+2) (Tokyo)Japan-France Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) May 14 of Legislation for Peace and Security” and “International Peace Support Bill”Cabinet decisions on “Responses to Foreign Naval Vessels Carrying Out Navigation through the Territorial Sea or the Internal Waters of Japan that Does Not Fall Under Innocent Passage in International Law,” “The Government’s Responses MayMayApr.23Apr.260809 U.S. DoD releases “Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China”Russia holds parade commemorating capitulation of Nazi Germany and showcases new Armata tank modelU.S. DoD releases “The DoD Cyber Strategy”ASEAN Summit (Kuala Lumpur) (through April 27)
Mar.13 Japan-France Agreement concerning the Transfer of to Illegal Landing on a Remote Island or its May 09 North Korea announces SLBM launch test was conducted successfully
Defense Equipment and Technology is signed Surrounding Seas by an Armed Group,” and May 11 China-Russia naval combined exercise Joint Sea 2015 (I) is held (Mediterranean Sea)
Mar.14 Japan-Colombia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) “Responses to Acts of Infringement When Self- (through May 21)
Mar.19 Japan-China Security Dialogue (Tokyo) Defense Force Ships or Aircraft Detect Foreign May 21 Two Chinese H-6 bombers fly between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island
Mar.20Mar.23 Japan-Timor Leste Defense Ministerial MeetingMemorandum on Japan-Indonesia Cooperation and Ships Committing Said Acts Against Japanese Private Ships on the High Seas” to the Pacific Ocean (Air Force spokesperson announces first flight by Chinese Air Force aircraft in this airspace)
Exchanges in the Field of Defense is signed May 20 Japan-Mongolia summit meeting (Tokyo) May 25 Signing of India-Vietnam Joint Vision Statement on Defense Cooperation (Vietnamese
Mar.30 Japan-India Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) May 25 Japan-Malaysia summit meeting (Tokyo) Minister of National Defence visits India)
Apr.08 Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) May 29 Japan-EU Summit (Tokyo) May 26 China releases defense white paper, “China’s Military Strategy”
Apr.14Apr.21 Japan-ROK Security Dialogue (Seoul)National Defense Medical College instructor dispatched to support WHO’s epidemiological studies on the outbreak of the Ebola virus disease in West Jun.04Jun.07Jun.07Jun.08 Japan-Philippines summit meeting (Tokyo)Japan-France summit meeting (Germany)Japan-Germany summit meeting (Germany)Japan-U.K. summit meeting (Germany) Jun.01Jun.03 Signing of U.S.-Vietnam Joint Vision Statement on Defense Relations (U.S. Secretary of Defense visits Vietnam)Signing of Framework for the India-U.S. Defense Relationship (U.S. Secretary of Defense visits India)
Africa, etc. (through May 29) Jun.11 Naha District Court’s Okinawa Branch renders Jun.12 Two Chinese vessels pass between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island and
Apr.27 Japan Disaster Relief Team dispatched in response to judgment in 3rd Futenma Air Station noise suit advance to the Pacific Ocean
earthquake in Nepal (through May 22) Jul.30 Tokyo High Court renders judgment in 4th Atsugi Jul.01 U.S. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Dempsey releases National Military Strategy
Apr.27 The new “Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Air Facility noise suit Jul.07 Signing of U.S.-Vietnam Joint Vision Statement (General Secretary of the Vietnamese
Cooperation” is approved at the Japan-U.S. Security Aug.03 Japan-Italy summit meeting (Tokyo) Communist Party pays first visit to the United States)
Consultative Committee meeting (“2+2,” New York) Sep.15 Japan-Vietnam summit meeting (Tokyo) Jul.07 Oral arguments in the South China Sea arbitral tribunal proceedings instituted by the
Apr.28 Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting (Washington, Sep.19 Legislation for Peace and Security ("Bill for Philippines (The Hague) (through July 13)
D.C.) the Development of Legislation for Peace and Jul.18 Three Chinese vessels pass between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island and
Apr.30 Promulgation and enforcement of the Special Security" and "International Peace Support Bill") is advance to the Pacific Ocean
Measures Act on the Number of Years of the National passed in the House of Councilors plenary session Jul.29 China’s Y-9 intelligence gathering aircraft, Y-8 early warning aircraft, and two H-6
Subsidization of Specific Defense Procurements Sep.26 Prime Minister Abe visits the United States bombers fly between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island towards the Pacific
(socalled “Long-term Contract Act”) (through September 29) Ocean (July 30)
May 18 Japan-China Defense Director-General-level Sep.27 Japan-Qatar summit meeting (New York) Aug.01 Russia creates Aerospace Force by merging the Air Force and Aerospace Defense Forces
Consultations (Tokyo) Sep.27 Japan-Iran summit meeting (New York) Aug.04 Landmines explode in the ROK’s area of the DMZ, injuring two ROK Force personnel
May 29 Disaster relief teams dispatched after the eruption at Sep.28 Japan-Russia summit meeting (New York) Aug.05 France and Russia agree to annul agreement on France’s delivery of two Mistral-class
Kuchinoerabu Island (through June 1) Sep.28 Japan-Ukraine summit meeting (New York) amphibious assault ships
May 30 Defense Minister Nakatani attends 14th Asia Security Sep.28 Japan-Bangladesh summit meeting (New York) Aug.17 Seven Chinese vessels sail Tsushima Strait northward. Subsequently, China-Russia naval
MayMay 3030 Summit (held by IISS) (Singapore) (through May 31)Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore)Japan-U.S.-ROK Defense Ministers’ Meeting and Japan-U.S.-Australia Defense Ministers’ Meeting Sep.28Oct.05Oct.06 Japan-Pacific Islands Leaders Meeting (New York)Japan-France summit meeting (Tokyo)Japan-Sri Lanka summit meeting (Tokyo) combined exercise, Joint Sea 2015 (II), is held (Sea of Japan) (August 20-28). Following the exercise, five vessels sail Soya Strait eastward (August 29), sail in the high seas in the Bering Sea (statement by U.S. DoD official, September 2), and enter into U.S. territorial waters near the Aleutian Islands (statement by U.S. DoD official, September 4).
(Singapore) Oct.07 Inauguration of the third reshuffled Abe Cabinet Aug.17 Bombing in Thailand (Bangkok) (20 people are killed)
May 31 Pacific Partnership 2015 (through August 14) Oct.08 Japan-Turkey summit meeting (Tokyo) Aug.20 Shelling incident occurs between North Korea and the ROK
May 31 Dispatched MSDF personnel as commander of Oct.15 Yamaguchi District Court’s Iwakuni Branch renders U.S. DoD submits Asia-Pacific Maritime Security Strategy to Congress
Combined Task Force (CTF 151) for counter-piracy judgment in 1st Iwakuni Air Base noise suit Aug.22 Prime Minister Medvedev visits Etorofu Island
operations (through August 27) Oct.27 Cabinet verbal understanding regarding Aug.25 Agreement on inter-Korean joint press statement (August 25 agreement)
Jun.03 Japan-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) “Revocation of reclamation approval based on Aug.26 Signing of agreement on the resolution of the conflict in South Sudan

the Act on Reclamation of Publicly-owned Water

Jun.07 Joint disaster response exercise with U.S. Forces Surface pertaining to the Futenma Replacement Sep.03 China holds commemorative event for the 70th anniversary of the victories against
(TREX) Facility construction project” Japanese aggression and the World Anti-Fascist War. In an address, President Xi Jinping
Jun.19 Fifth Joint Working Group negotiation meeting on Oct.28 Written notice regarding start of construction announces reduction in troop strength by 300,000.
the “Maritime and Air Communication Mechanism” work related to Futenma Replacement Facility Sep.15 Turnbull sworn in as Australian Prime Minister
between Japan-China Defense Authorities (Beijing) construction project is submitted to Okinawa Sep.15 Presumed Russian aircraft intrudes into Japanese territorial airspace over the coast of
Jun.29 SDF Joint Exercise for Rescue (through July 3) Prefecture the Nemuro Peninsula
Jul.03 Disaster relief teams dispatched to support search of Nov.01 Japan-China summit meeting (Seoul) Sep.25 U.S.-China summit meeting (Washington, D.C.)
missing persons in Mt. Ontake (through August 7) Nov.02 Japan-ROK summit meeting (Seoul) Sep.30 Russia’s second Borey-class SSBN Alexander Nevsky arrives in Kamchatka
Aug.18 Combined exercise in the United States (Dawn Blitz Nov.10 Japan-Netherlands summit meeting (Tokyo) Sep.30 Russia begins airstrikes on ISIL forces, etc. in Syrian territory
2015) (through September 9) Nov.13 Japan-Turkey summit meeting (Istanbul) Oct.02 The leaders of Russia, France, Germany, and Ukraine agree to postpone local elections in
Sep.01Sep.10 Exercise for medical activities in the aftermath of large-scale earthquakesDisaster relief teams dispatched after the heavy rain in Kanto and Tohoku in September 2015 (through September 19) Nov.15Nov.15Nov.15Nov.15 Japan-Australia summit meeting (Antalya, Turkey)Japan-EU summit meeting (Antalya, Turkey)Japan-U.K. summit meeting (Antalya, Turkey)Japan-Russia summit meeting (Antalya, Turkey) Oct.03Oct.10 pro-Russian regions (eastern Ukraine)Shooting attack in Bangladesh (one Japanese national is killed; ISIL Bangladesh claims responsibility for the attack in a statement)North Korea holds commemorative event of the 70th anniversary of the Korean Workers’ Party (KWP)
Sep.29 Japan-U.S. Agreement on Environmental Stewardship Nov.16 Japan-Germany summit meeting (Antalya, Turkey) Oct.10 Suicide bombings at a protest staged by supporters of a Kurdish political party in Ankara,
Cooperation Supplementary to Status of Forces Nov.16 Japan-Saudi Arabia summit meeting (Antalya, the capital of Turkey
Agreement is signed Turkey) Oct.26 U.S. naval destroyer USS Lassen sails within 12 nautical miles of Subi Reef, Spratly
Oct.01 Enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment of the Nov.26 Suit is instituted for “Case regarding retraction Islands in the South China Sea and conducts Freedom of Navigation Operation
Ministry of Defense Establishment Law (unification of actual unit operations into Joint Staff, establishment of Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Agency, etc.) order request for revocation of the landfill permit based on provisions of Article 246-8, Paragraph 3 of the Local Autonomy Act” (“administrative suit”) Oct.26 U.S.-Indonesia joint statement (Indonesian President visits the United States; includes maritime cooperation in defense field, etc.)
Oct.01 Technical Research and Development Institute and Equipment Procurement and Construction Office Dec.04 Japan-U.S. Joint Press Release "Implementation of Bilateral Plans for Consolidating Facilities and Oct.29 The tribunal rules that it has jurisdiction with respect to some of the matters in the South China Sea arbitral tribunal proceedings instituted by the Philippines (The Hague)
are abolished; Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Areas in Okinawa" Oct.31 A Russian jetliner crashes in the Sinai Peninsula, killing all passengers and
Agency is established Dec.12 Japan-India summit meeting (New Delhi) crewmembers. ISIL’s Sinai Province claims responsibility for the incident.
Oct.18 FY2015 SDF Fleet Review Agreement Between the Government of Japan Nov.03 ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM Plus) (Kuala Lumpur) (through
Oct.20 Japan-ROK Defense Ministerial Meeting (Seoul) and the Government of the Republic of India November 4)
Oct.23 SDF Joint Exercise (Field Training Exercise) (through concerning Security Measures for the Protection of Nov.05 U.S. Secretary of Defense and the Malaysian Minister of Defence board U.S. aircraft
November 23) Classified Military Information carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt in the South China Sea
Nov.03 Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting (Malaysia) Dec.18 Japan-Australia summit meeting (Tokyo) Nov.07 China and Taiwan hold first summit meeting since their split
Nov.03 3rd ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM Nov.08 Myanmar general election (opposition party NLD wins majority)
Plus) (Kuala Lumpur) (through November 4) Nov.11 A Chinese Navy Dongdiao-class AGI repeatedly conducts east-west passages near the
Nov.04 Japan-China Defense Ministerial Meeting (Kuala contiguous zone south of the Senkaku Islands (through November 12)
Lumpur) Nov.13 Terror attacks in Paris, France. ISIL France claims responsibility for the attacks in a
Nov.06 Japan-Vietnam Defense Ministerial Meeting (Vietnam) statement.
Nov.12 Japan-Georgia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) Nov.15 G20 Antalya Summit (Antalya, Turkey) (through November 16)
Nov.22 Japan-Australia Foreign and Defense Ministerial Nov.18 APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting (Manila) (through November 19)
Consultations (Sydney) Nov.22 East Asia Summit (EAS), ASEAN Summit (November 21-22)
Japan-Australia Defense Ministerial Meeting (Sydney) Nov.23 The United Kingdom releases "National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and
Dec.04 Japan-Czech Republic Defense Ministerial Meeting Security Review 2015" (NSS-SDSR 2015)
(Tokyo) Nov.24 Oral arguments in the South China Sea arbitral tribunal proceedings instituted by the
Dec.12 Japan-India Agreement Concerning the Transfer of Philippines (The Hague) (through November 30)
Defense Equipment and Technology is signed (New Nov.24 CMC Reform Work Conference is held, and President Xi Jinping delivers address on the
Delhi) direction of military reforms (through November 26)
Dec.17 Japan-Indonesia Foreign and Defense Ministerial Nov.24 Turkish Armed Forces shoots down Russian Armed Forces aircraft saying it violated
Meeting (Tokyo) Turkish airspace

Nov.27 China’s four H-6 bombers, a Tu-154 intelligence gathering aircraft, and a Y-8 intelligence
gathering aircraft pass between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island and
fly over the Pacific Ocean (Air Force spokesperson announces flight by PLA Air Force
aircraft). At around the same time, four H-6 bombers and a Y-8 early warning aircraft
conduct operations near the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island.
Nov.28 Two FA-50 light fighters the Philippines purchased from the ROK arrive at Clark Air Base
Dec.02 Shooting terror attack in California, United States
Dec.07 Three Chinese vessels sail through Osumi Strait to the Pacific Ocean
Dec.07 U.S. P-8 aircraft are deployed to Singapore (through December 14)
Dec.08 U.S.-Singapore Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement is signed (Minister for
Defence Ng visits United States)
Dec.13 Two Chinese vessels pass between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island and
advance to the Pacific Ocean
Dec.16 The United States decides to sell weapons including two missile frigates to Taiwan and
notifies Congressl


-----

|Year|Col2|Defense|Col4|Domestic|Col6|International|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||Dec.23 Dec.24 Dec.26 Dec.30 Dec.31 Dec.31 Dec.31 Dec.31|A Chinese Navy Dongdiao-class AGI repeatedly conducts northeast-southwest passages near the contiguous zone southeast of the Boso Peninsula (through December 26) Russia-India joint statement (includes cooperation on military technology, joint development of military equipment, etc.) A China Coast Guard vessel carrying weapons that appear to be cannons intrudes into Japanese territorial waters surrounding the Senkaku Islands for the first time The leaders of Russia, France, Germany, and Ukraine agree to extend ceasefire agreement in eastern Ukraine that was set to expire in end of 2015 China announces its first domestic aircraft carrier is being built in Dalian, Liaoning Province China establishes PLA Army Headquarters, Rocket Force, and Strategic Support Force ASEAN Community inaugurated (Political-Security, Economic, and Socio-Cultural) Russia revises National Security Strategy|
|2016|Jan.06 Jan.08 Jan.08 Jan.09 Jan.12 Jan.19 Jan.25 Jan.27 Jan.31 Feb.03 Feb.07 Feb.08 Feb.10 Feb.12 Feb.29 Mar.16 Mar.28 Mar.30 Apr.12 Apr.14 Apr.17 Apr.17 Apr.18 Apr.22 May 02 Jun.03 Jun.04 Jun.04 Jun.04 Jun.06 Jun.13|Special survey of radioactivity related to North Korea's nuclear test (through January 15) Japan-U.K. Foreign and Defense Ministerial Meeting (Tokyo) Japan-ROK Defense Ministerial Telephone Conference 1st escort flotilla U.S. deployment exercise in FY2015 (Guam direction) (through January 30) Japan-U.S. bilateral exercise (command post exercise) (through February 2) MOD/SDF participate in multinational exercise Cobra Gold 2016 (through February 19) Disaster relief teams dispatched to provide water supply supports due to heavy snowfall, etc. (through February 1) "X-2" is established as the Advanced Technology Demonstrator model Enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment of the Ministry of Defense Establishment Law (establishment of 9th Air Wing) SDF action order for implementation of destruction measures against ballistic missiles is issued Japan-ROK Defense Ministerial Telephone Conference SDF action order for termination of destruction measures against ballistic missiles is issued Japan-U.S.-ROK Trilateral Joint Chiefs of Staff Video- Teleconference is held Defense State Minister Wakamiya attends Munich Security Conference (through February 14) Japan-Philippines Agreement Concerning the Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology is signed (Manila) 20th Tokyo Defense Forum (Forum for Defense Authorities in the Asia-Pacific Region) is held (through March 18) Enforcement of the Law for Partial Amendment of the Ministry of Defense Establishment Law (establishment of JGSDF Camp Yonaguni, etc.) Disaster relief teams dispatched after the forest fire in Ryozen, Date City, Fukushima Prefecture (through April 1) Disaster relief teams dispatched after the forest fire in Beppu City, Oita Prefecture (through April 13) Disaster relief teams dispatched after the 2016 Kumamoto Earthquake (through May 30) Cabinet decision regarding disaster relief call-up of ready reserve personnel in the wake of the 2016 Kumamoto Earthquake Disaster relief call-up order to ready reserve personnel is issued (through May 9) Disaster relief teams dispatched to remove fallen trees in Hiroo Town, Hiroo District, Hokkaido (through April 21) First flight of Advanced Technology Demonstrator (X-2) Japan-Philippines Defense Ministerial Telephone Conference Prime Minister Abe and Defense Minister Nakatani attend 15th Asia Security Summit (held by IISS) (Singapore) (through June 5) Japan-U.S. Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore) Japan-ROK Defense Ministerial Meeting and Japan- U.S.-ROK Defense Ministerial Meeting (Singapore) Memorandum of Understanding between the U.S. DoD and the Japanese MOD concerning Reciprocal Defense Procurement is signed Defense Minister Nakatani visits Myanmar, Thailand, and Timor-Leste (through June 10) MOD/SDF participate in Pacific Partnership 2016 (through August 24)|Jan.04 Jan.22 Jan.22 Jan.27 Feb.02 Feb.19 Feb.29 Mar.04 Mar.16 Mar.19 Mar.23 Mar.29 Mar.31 Apr.01 Apr.14 May 25 May 26 May 27|Convocation of the 190th Ordinary Diet Session Cabinet decision on 5th Science and Technology Basic Plan The New Special Measures Agreement (SMA) between Japan and the United States is signed Private company conducts test flight of Zero fighter from MSDF Kanoya Air Base Judgment is rendered on appeal suit requesting termination of the monitoring activities of the Appeal Intelligence Security Command Decision is rendered on the immediate appeal against decision to dismiss petition against order of provisional disposition to suspend construction of SDF camp in Yonaguni Island Japan-Egypt summit meeting The government announces it would accept the court’s settlement recommendation in the “Case regarding retraction order request for revocation of the landfill permit based on provisions of Article 246-8, Paragraph 3 of the Local Autonomy Act” (“administrative suit”) and suspends landfill work Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism issues correction instruction to Okinawa Prefecture for revocation of the landfill permit Agreement Between the Government of Japan and the Government of the Italian Republic on the Security of Information is signed Okinawa Prefecture applies for a review by the Central and Local Government Dispute Management Council regarding the correction instruction issued by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Enforcement of Legislation for Peace and Security ("Act for the Development of the Legislation for Peace and Security" and "International Peace Support Act") Japan-U.S.-ROK summit meeting (Washington, D.C.) Japan-U.S. summit meeting (Washington, D.C.) 2016 Kumamoto Earthquake strikes (main shock on April 16) Japan-U.S. summit meeting (Ise Shima) G7 Ise-Shima Summit (through May 27) U.S. President Obama visits Hiroshima|Jan.02 Jan.06 Jan.10 Jan.11 Jan.12 Jan.14 Jan.16 Jan.16 Jan.20 Jan.21 Jan.25 Jan.26 Jan.27 Jan.30 Jan.31 Feb.01 Feb.02 Feb.04 Feb.07 Feb.07 Feb.09 Feb.10 Feb.11 Feb.12 Feb.15 Feb.15 Feb.16 Feb.17 Feb.22 Feb.25 Mar.05 Mar.07 Mar.10 Mar.18 Mar.18 Mar.22 Mar.28 Mar.31 Mar.31 Apr.07 Apr.08 Apr.15 Apr.17 Apr.20 Apr.20 Apr.23 Apr.28 Apr.29 May 02 May 06 May 10 May 14 May 17 May 19 May 20 May 22 May 23 May 24 May 25 May 31 Jun.03 Jun.06 Jun.07 Jun.08 Jun.09 Jun.12|China conducts aircraft test flights to Fiery Cross Reef (January 3 and 6) North Korea conducts fourth nuclear test which it called a “hydrogen bomb test” U.S. Force B-52 bomber conducts low-level flight near Osan Air Base in the ROK Chinese Ministry of National Defense announces organizational realignment of the Central Military Commission (dismantlement of four general departments, CMC’s introduction of multiple section system) U.S. President Obama delivers State of the Union address U.S.-Philippines Foreign and Defense Ministerial Meeting (2+2) (Washington, D.C.) Terror attacks occur in Jakarta, Indonesia. ISIL Indonesia claims responsibility for the attacks in a statement. Legislative Yuan and presidential elections are held in Taiwan, confirming change in government to the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) for the first time in eight years. Western countries lift sanctions against Iran related to its nuclear development program Shooting terror attacks occur at a university in Pakistan The United States begins airstrikes on ISIL in Afghanistan At the National Maritime Work Conference, China’s State Oceanic Administration Director announces priorities of the next five years would include building a “Spratly Island reef ecological protected area” Russian bomber conducts flight along the perimeter of Japan Four Chinese vessels sail Tsushima Strait northward U.S. naval destroyer USS Curtis Wilbur sails within 12 nautical miles of Triton Island, Paracel Islands in the South China Sea and conducts Freedom of Navigation Operation China’s Y-9 intelligence gathering aircraft and Y-8 early warning aircraft pass Tsushima Strait for the first time and fly over the Sea of Japan Chinese Ministry of National Defense dismantles seven Military Regions and announces the establishment of five theaters of operations Four Chinese vessels sail through Tsugaru Strait to the Pacific Ocean A Chinese Navy Dongdiao-class AGI conducts round-trip northeast-southwest passages near the contiguous zone southeast of the Boso Peninsula (through February 8) North Korea launches a ballistic missile disguised as a “Satellite” ROK decides to begin formal consultations on THAAD deployment by U.S. Forces Korea U.S. President Obama presents his budget for FY2017 The ROK decides to completely suspend operations at the Kaesong Industrial Complex in response to North Korea’s nuclear test and long-range missile launch North Korea declares the Kaesong Industrial Complex a military control zone and expels all ROK nationals from the zone U.S. DoD submits “Annual Report: Military and Security Developments Involving the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea” to Congress U.S.-ASEAN summit meeting (California) (through February 16) A submerged submarine sails Tsushima Strait southwestward from the Sea of Japan to the East China Sea Locations of equipment deemed to be surface-to-air missile in Woody Island, Paracel Islands are confirmed Terror attack occurs in Ankara, Turkey U.S.-Russia agreement on Syrian ceasefire Australia releases "2016 Defence White Paper" China announces FY2016 defense budget U.S.-ROK Key Resolve and Foal Eagle combined exercise (through April 30) North Korea launches two ballistic missiles North Korea launches a ballistic missile The United States and the Philippines agree to utilize five Philippine bases for carrying out defense cooperation based on the EDCA Terror bombing attacks occur in Brussels, Belgium Two Chinese vessels sail through Osumi Strait to the Pacific Ocean U.S.-China summit meeting (Washington, D.C.) Nuclear Security Summit (Washington, D.C.) (through April 1) Three Chinese vessels pass between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island and advance to the Pacific Ocean Three Chinese vessels pass between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island and advance to the Pacific Ocean North Korea launches a ballistic missile Chinese naval patrol aircraft lands in Fiery Cross Reef in Spratly Islands and evacuates sick people China’s Y-8 early warning aircraft flies between the main island of Okinawa and Miyako Island to the Pacific Ocean China releases images from President Xi Jinping’s visit to the Central Military Commission Joint Operations Command Center North Korea launches an SLBM North Korea launches two ballistic missiles Transitional Government of National Unity of South Sudan is established China deploys landing ship to Fiery Cross Reef in the Spratly Islands 7th KWP Congress (through May 9) U.S. naval destroyer USS William P. Lawrence sails within 12 nautical miles of Fiery Cross Reef, Spratly Islands in the South China Sea An expedition unit comprised of approximately 200 personnel led by the Deputy Commander of the Russian Pacific Fleet arrives in Matsuwa Island of the Chishima Islands and subsequently begins survey activities A Chinese PLA fighter jet flies abnormally close to a U.S. Navy reconnaissance aircraft over the South China Sea Russia-ASEAN summit meeting (through May 20) Tsai Ing-wen, Chairperson of DPP, becomes President in Taiwan U.S. President Obama visits Vietnam (through May 25), fully lifts arms embargo on Vietnam China and Russia hold first joint missile defense exercise (through May 28) ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM) (through May 27) Hibatullah Akhundzada is chosen as new Emir of the Taliban in Afghanistan North Korea launches a ballistic missile 15th Shangri-La Dialogue (Singapore) (through June 5) 8th U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue (Beijing) (through June 7) A Chinese PLA fighter jet conducts dangerous flight, approaching a U.S. Air Force reconnaissance aircraft at a high speed over the East China Sea New Zealand releases "Defence White Paper 2016" A Chinese combatant vessel enters the contiguous zone near the Senkaku Islands for the first time Shooting terror attack in Florida, United States|


-----

Chief of Staff, GSDF

Ground Staff Office


Northern Army Headquarters (Sapporo) Middle Army Headquarters (Itami)

5th Field Artillery Regiment (Obihiro) 10th Logistics Support Regiment (Kasugai)

14th Field Artillery unit (Matsuyama)

18th Infantry Regiment (Makomanai)

Middle Army


4th Field Artillery Regiment (Kurume)

Northern Army Combined Brigade (Higashi Chitose) 52nd Infantry Regiment (Makomanai) Other units

20th Infantry Regiment (Jinmachi) 8th Field Artillery Regiment (Kita Kumamoto)
22nd Infantry Regiment (Tagajo) 8th Logistics Support Regiment (Kita Kumamoto)

Other units 15th Antiaircraft Artillery Regiment (Yaese)

9th Artillery Regiment (Iwate)
9th Logistics Support Regiment (Hachinohe) Western Field Artillery Unit (Yufuin) 5th Surface-to-Ship Missile Regiment (Kengun)
Other units

2nd Antiaircraft Artillery Brigade (Iizuka) 3rd Antiaircraft Artillery Group (Iizuka)

Northeastern Field Artillery Unit (Sendai) 4th Surface-to-Ship Missile Regiment (Hachinohe) Western Air Wing (Takayubaru)

9th Engineer Group (Ogori)

2nd Engineer Brigade (Funaoka)

Other units

Western Army

Other units Central Readiness Force Headquarters (Zama)

Eastern Army Headquarters (Asaka) Central Readiness Force 1st Airborne Brigade (Narashino)

1st Logistics Support Regiment (Nerima)

2nd Infantry Regiment (Takada)
13th Infantry Regiment (Matsumoto) Other units

Central Readiness Force

30th Infantry Regiment (Shibata)12th Field Artillery unit (Utsunomiya) Signal Brigade (Ichigaya)
12th Helicopter Unit (Somagahara)12th Logistics Support Unit (Shinmachi) Ground Research & Development Command (Asaka)
Other units Ground Material Control Command (Jujo)

2nd Antiaircraft Artillery Group (Matsudo) Other units and organizations

Eastern Air Wing (Tachikawa)

1st Engineer Brigade (Koga) 4th Engineer Group (Zama)

5th Engineer Group (Takada)

Eastern Army Combined Brigade 31st Infantry Regiment (Takeyama)
(Takeyama) 48th Infantry Regiment (Somagahara)

Other units

*Refers to a regional directly controlled unit, but is placed under the commander of the 4th division


Northern Army


Northeastern Army


Eastern Army


-----

**Organizational Diagram of the Self-Defense Forces**


Minesweeper Division 41

Other units

Other units

Minesweeper Division 44

Other units

Boat Division 1

Air Training Squadron 211 (Kanoya)

Training Division 1 (Kure)

MSDF Ship Supply Depot (Yokosuka)
MSDF Air Supply Depot (Kisarazu)


Minister of Defense

Chief of Staff, Joint Staff

Joint Staff

Chief of Staff, MSDF

Maritime Staff Office

Self-Defense Fleet Fleet Escort Force Escort Flotilla 1 (Yokosuka) Escort Division 1 (Yokosuka)

Escort Division 5 (Sasebo) Yokosuka District

Escort Flotilla 2 (Sasebo) Escort Division 2 (Sasebo)

Escort Division 6 (Yokosuka)

Kure District Sub Area Activity Hanshin (Kobe)

Escort Flotilla 3 (Maizuru) Escort Division 3 (Ominato)

Escort Division 7 (Maizuru)

Escort Flotilla 4 (Kure) Escort Division 4 (Kure) Sasebo District Sub Area Activity Shimonoseki

Escort Division 8 (Sasebo)

Sub Area Activity Okinawa (Uruma)

Fleet Training Command Yokosuka Fleet Training Group
(Yokosuka) Kure Fleet Training Group Coastal Defense Group Tsushima

Sasebo Fleet Training Group Other units
Maizuru Fleet Training Group
Ominato Fleet Training Group (Mutsu) Maizuru District
Missile System Training Center
(Yokosuka)

Escort Division 11 (Yokosuka) Ominato District Sub Area Activity Hakodate

Escort Division 12 (Kure) Coastal Defense Group Yoichi

Escort Division 13 (Sasebo)

Base Facility Wakkanai

Escort Division 14 (Maizuru) Other units

Escort Division 15 (Ominato)

Landing Ship Division 1 (Kure) Air Training Command Air Training Group Shimofusa

(Kashiwa)

Replenishment-at-Sea Squadron 1
(Yokosuka) Air Training Group Tokushima

Drone Support Squadron 1 (Kure) (Itano-gun Matsushige Town)

Air Training Squadron Ozuki

Other units (Shimonoseki)

Fleet Air Force Fleet Air Wing 1 (Kanoya) Air Patrol Squadron 1 (Kanoya)

Fleet Air Wing 2 (Hachinohe) Air Patrol Squadron 2 (Hachinohe)

Training Squadron

Fleet Air Wing 4 (Ayase) Air Patrol Squadron 3 (Ayase) Other units

Air Station Iwo-to (Ogasawara)

Fleet Air Wing 5 (Naha) Air Patrol Squadron 5 (Naha)

Communications Command (Ichigaya)

Fleet Air Wing 21 (Tateyama) Air ASW Helicopter Squadron 21

(Tateyama)

Air ASW Helicopter Squadron 23 (Maizuru) MSDF Maritime Materiel
Air ASW Helicopter Squadron 25 (Mutsu) Command (Jujo)
Helicopter Rescue Squadron 73
(Tateyama)

Other units and organizations

Fleet Air Wing 22 (Omura) Air ASW Helicopter 22 (Omura)

Air ASW Helicopter 24 (Komatsushima)
Helicopter Rescue Squadron 72 (Omura)

Fleet Air Wing 31 (Iwakuni) Air Rescue Squadron 71 (Iwakuni)

Air Reconnaissance Squadron 81 (Iwakuni)
Air Training Support Squadron 91 (Iwakuni)

Air Development Squadron 51 (Ayase)

Air Transport Squadron 61 (Ayase)

Mine Countermeasure Helicopter
Squadron 111 (Iwakuni)

Other units

Fleet Submarine Force Headquarters (Yokosuka)

Submarine Flotilla 1 (Kure) Submarine Division 1 (Kure)

Submarine Division 3 (Kure)
Submarine Division 5 (Kure)

Submarine Flotilla 2 Submarine Division 2 (Yokosuka)
(Yokosuka) Submarine Division 4 (Yokosuka)

Training Submarine Division 1 (Kure)

Submarine Training Center (Kure)

Mine Warfare Force Minesweeper Division 1 (Kure)
(Yokosuka) Minesweeper Division 2 (Sasebo)

Minesweeper Division 51 (Yokosuka)
Minesweeper Division 101 (Kure)
Mine Warfare Support Center (Yokosuka)

Fleet Intelligence Command Operational Intelligence Center (Yokosuka)
(Yokosuka) Basic Intelligence Center (Ichigaya)

Electronic Intelligence Center (Yokosuka)

Oceanography ASW Anti-Submarine Warfare Center (Yokosuka)
Support Command ASW Evaluation Center (AEC) (Yokosuka)
(Yokosuka) Oceanographic Observation Okinawa

(Uruma)
Oceanographic Observation Shimokita
(Higashidoori Shimokita-gun,
Aomori Prefecture)

Other units

Fleet Research and C4I Systems Center (Yokosuka)
Development Command Surface Systems Center (Yokosuka)
(Yokosuka) Air Systems Programming Center (Ayase)

Other units


-----

(As of March 31, 2016)

1st Tactical Airlift Group (Komaki)

2nd Tactical Airlift Group (Iruma)

3rd Tactical Airlift Group (Miho)

Air Traffic Control Service Group
(Fuchu, Each region)

Air Weather Service Group
(Fuchu, Each region)

Flight Check Squadron (Iruma)

Special Airlift Group (Chitose)

Aeromedical Evacuation

Air Support Command

Squadron (Komaki)

1st Air Wing (Hamamatsu)

4th Air Wing (Matsushima)

11th Flying Training Wing
(Shizuhama)

12th Flying Training Wing
(Hofu-kita)

13th Flying Training Wing
(Ashiya)
Air Basic Training Wing
(Hofu-minami, Kumagaya)

Fighter Training Group
(Nyutabaru)

Other units and organizations

Air Training Command


Air Development and Test Wing
(Gifu)

Electronics Development and
Test Group (Fuchu)
Aero-Medical Laboratory

Air Development and Test Command

(Iruma, Tachikawa)

Air Communications and System
Wing (Ichigaya, Each region)

Aero Safety Service Group
(Tachikawa)
Air Material Command
(Jujo, Each region)

Other units and organizations


Chief of Staff, ASDF

Air Staff Office


2nd Air Wing (Chitose)

3rd Air Wing (Misawa)

Northern Aircraft Control and 42nd Aircraft Control and Warning Group (Ominato)
Warning Wing (Misawa) 45th Aircraft Control and Warning Group (Tobetsu)

18th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Wakkanai)

26th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Nemuro)

28th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Abashiri)

29th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Okushiritou)
33rd Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Kamo)
36th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Erimo)

37th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Yamada)

1st Mobile Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Chitose)
Other units

Northern Air Civil Engineering Group (Misawa, Chitose)

Other units

6th Air Wing (Komatsu)

7th Air Wing (Hyakuri)

Central Aircraft Control and 1st Aircraft Control and Warning Group (Kasatoriyama)
Warning Wing (Iruma) 23rd Aircraft Control and Warning Group (Wajima)

27th Aircraft Control and Warning Group (Ohtakineyama)
5th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Kushimoto)

22nd Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Omaezaki)

35th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Kyogamisaki)

44th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Mineokayama)
46th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Sado)

2nd Mobile Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Iruma)
Other units

1st Air Defense Missile Group 1st Fire Unit (Narashino)
(Iruma) 2nd Fire Unit (Takeyama)

3rd Fire Unit (Kasumigaura)
4th Fire Unit (Iruma)

4th Air Defense Missile Group 12th Fire Unit (Aibano)
(Gifu) 13th, 15th Fire Unit (Gifu)

14th Fire Unit (Hakusan)

Central Air Civil Engineering Group (Iruma, Each region)

Other units

5th Air Wing (Nyutabaru)

8th Air Wing (Tsuiki)

Western Aircraft Control and 13th Aircraft Control and Warning Group (Takahatayama)
Warning Wing (Kasuga) 43rd Aircraft Control and Warning Group (Sefuriyama)

7th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Takaoyama)

9th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Shimo-Koshikijima)

15th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Fukuejima)
17th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Mishima)
19th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Unishima)

3rd Mobile Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Kasuga)
Other units

(Kasuga) 7th Fire Unit (Tsuiki)

8th Fire Unit (Kouradai)

Western Air Civil Engineering Group (Ashiya, Each region)

Other units

9th Air Wing (Naha)

Southwestern Aircraft Control 56th Aircraft Control and Warning Group (Yozadake)
and Warning Wing (Naha) 53rd Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Miyakojima)

54th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Kumejima)

55th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Okinoerabujima)

4th Mobile Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron (Naha)
Other units

(Naha) 17th Fire Unit (Naha)

19th Fire Unit (Onna)

Southwestern Air Civil Engineering Group (Naha)

Other units

Air Rescue Wing (Iruma, Each region)

Tactical Air Training Group (Yokota, Each region)

Tactical Reconnaissance Group (Hyakuri)

Airborne Warning and Control Wing (Hamamatsu, Each region)

Other units


Northern Air Defense Force

Central Air Defense Force

Western Air Defense Force

Southwestern Composite Air Division


-----

Location of Principal SDF Units (As of March 31, 2016)


Yonagunijima


-----

-----

Abbreviation List and Index

(Note) 1. This index is complied aiming at terms used in the main text (including footnotes), columns, and figures.

2. Numbers indicate the page number where the term appears. For terms that are frequently used, only major page numbers

are listed.

BPM / Bilateral Planning Mechanism

A2/AD / anti-access/area-denial 241, 246, 247, 248

5, 10, 11, 42, 43, 48, 51, 58, 159 BWC / Biological Weapons Convention

ACSA / Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement 354

233, 249, 250, 313, 314, 315, 323, 324, 334, 335, 338

ACM / Alliance Coordination Mechanism

**C**

232, 233, 235, 241, 245, 246, 247, 248, 251 CAP / Combat Air Patrol

ADIZ / Air Defense Indentif cation Zone 55

5, 39, 51, 52, 54, 55, 56, 58, 87, 141, 286, 287 C[4]ISR / Command, Control, Communication, Computer,

ADMM / ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting Intelligence, Surveillance, Reconnaissance

101, 102, 314, 316 148, 159

ADMM Plus / ASEAN Defense Ministers’ Meeting-Plus CARAT / Cooperation Af oat Readiness and Training

5, 6, 102, 142, 241, 313, 314, 316, 317, 327, 328, 92, 94, 95, 96

330, 333, 334, 344 CBRN / Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear

ALGS / Autonomic Logistics Global Sustainment 189, 235

161 CCW / Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the

ANZUS / Security Treaty between Australia, New Zealand and Use of Certain Conventional Weapons which may

the United States of America be deemed to be Excessively Injurious or to have

86, 87, 89 Indiscriminate Effects

AQAP / Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula 159, 354, 355

121, 130, 131, 132 CDPWG / Cyber Defense Policy Working Group

AQIM / Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb 251, 252, 299

126, 127, 131, 132 CHOD / Chief of Defence

ARF / ASEAN Regional Forum 318, 334

5, 32, 35, 66, 80, 101, 102, 313, 314, 316, 317, 322, CICA / Conference on Interaction and Conf dence-Building

330 Measures in Asia

ASAT / Anti-Satellite 42, 63

5, 7, 48, 148, 151, 171, 178 CIS / Commonwealth of Independent States

ASBM / Anti-Ship Ballistic Missile 79, 82

46, 48 COC / Code of the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea

ASEAN / Association of Southeast Asian Nations 97, 100, 146

3, 5, 32, 56, 58, 66, 84, 91, 95, 98, 100, 101, 102, CTBT / Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty

103, 142, 146, 172, 211, 241, 243, 244, 296, 309, 135, 354

312, 314, 316, 317, 320, 321, 329, 330, 333, 334, CTF151 / Combined Task Force151

344, 367 340, 341

AU / African Union CUES / Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea

67, 117, 125, 126, 127, 128 60, 142, 296, 318, 332, 344

CWC / Chemical Weapons Convention

23, 116, 136, 137, 354, 363

**B**

BMD / Ballistic Missile Defense CYMAT / Cyber incident Mobile Assistanse Team

12, 15, 17, 33, 48, 70, 104, 160, 172, 178, 179, 186, 298

234, 235, 248, 252, 270, 273, 284, 289, 290, 291,

292, 293, 363, 364


-----

**D**


**J**


DMZ / Demilitarized Zone

18, 19, 33, 36

DOC / Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South

China Sea

97, 100, 146

**E**


EAS / East Asia Summit

80, 243

EEZ / Exclusive Economic Zone

53, 60, 64, 101, 141, 143, 145, 283, 284

EU / European Union

5, 7, 67, 71, 94, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114,

119, 120, 125, 139, 140, 141, 144, 145, 148, 150,

176, 211, 316, 317, 337, 339, 343

EWG / Experts’ Working Group

314, 316, 317, 333, 334

FACO / Final Assembly and Check Out

364, 365

FPDA / Five Power Defence Arrangements

92, 95

F-35A / 37, 181, 186, 188, 189, 359, 364, 365, 373

**H**


HA/DR / Humanitarian Assistance / Disaster Relief

92, 96, 102, 186, 236, 333, 337

**I**


IAEA / International Atomic Energy Agency

22, 138, 139, 140, 354

ICBM / Intercontinental Ballistic Missile

15, 23, 27, 30, 46, 47, 71, 73, 74, 77, 87, 165

ICT / Information and Communications Technology

3, 7, 8, 153, 154, 156, 159, 160

IISS / The International Institute for Strategic Studies

93, 97, 145, 318, 331

IMO / International Maritime Organization

291

ISAF / International Security Assistance Force

82, 89, 107, 111, 122, 123

ISIL / Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant

2, 3, 7, 9, 10, 13, 68, 80, 81, 83, 84, 87, 89, 91, 109,

110, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 118, 119, 120, 121,

122, 123, 124, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134,

137, 153, 154, 155, 157

ISR / Inteligence Surveillance Reconnaissance

11, 12, 37, 86, 87, 92, 96, 112, 142, 173, 176, 177,

178, 180, 183, 186, 189, 232, 233, 234, 236, 238,

246, 248, 249, 288, 357, 358


JICA / Japan International Cooperation Agency

345, 355

KFOR / Kosovo Force

111

**L**


LAWS / Lethal Autonomous Weapons System

159

LCS / Littoral Combat Ship

12, 17, 95, 98

**M**


MAGTF / Marine Air Ground Task Force

256, 263

MCAP / Multinational Cooperation program in the Asia Pacif c

322

MD / Missile Defense

15, 72, 74, 82, 83, 84

MEF / Marine Expeditionary Force

91, 204, 256, 258, 263, 265

MRBM / Medium-Range Ballistic Missile

46, 47, 48

MSO / Maritime Security Operation

40

NATO / North Atlantic Treaty Organization

10, 71, 72, 83, 84, 89, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112,

113, 114, 122, 144, 145, 155, 157, 176, 193, 299,

300, 313, 315, 337, 339, 343

NBC / Nuclear, Biological and Chemical

7, 135, 186, 201, 280, 294, 295

NEO / Non-Combatant Evacuation Operation

309, 321

NGO / Non-Governmental Organization

219, 319, 321, 345, 347

NISC / National center of Incident readiness and Strategy for

Cybersecurity

298

NLL / Northern Limit Line

33

NPR / Nuclear Posture Review

13

NPT / Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

135, 139, 167, 354

NSC / National Security Council

213, 338


-----

NSS / National Security Strategy

9, 10, 11, 112, 135, 145, 156, 157, 169, 170, 172,

173, 175, 247, 295, 297

NSSS / National Security Space Strategy

149

**O**


ODA / Off cial Development Assistance

176, 243, 345

OECD / Organization for Economic Co-operation and

Development

90, 193, 371

OPCW / Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical

Weapons

116, 137, 354

OSCE / Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe

71, 80, 84, 176

**P**


PAC-3 / Patriot Advanced Capability-3

37, 69, 70, 186, 188, 189, 254, 273, 289, 290, 291,

292

PBL / Performance Based Logistics

360, 361, 362

PFI / Private Finance Initiative

302, 360

PKO / UN Peacekeeping Operations

39, 41, 61, 68, 96, 103, 114, 116, 172, 209, 213, 217,

218, 219, 220, 230, 250, 311, 319, 320, 330, 331,

345, 346, 347, 349, 350, 351

PSI / Proliferation Security Initiative

186, 251, 334, 354, 355

QDR / Quadrennial Defense Review

9, 10, 11, 12, 64, 115, 156, 159, 231

**R**


RAP / Readiness Action Plan

84, 109

RMC / Role Mission Capability

230

**S**


S&TF / Systems and Technology Forum

252

SACO / Special Action Committee on Okinawa

90, 188, 190, 191, 238, 239, 254, 255, 257, 260, 261,

269

SCO / Shanghai Cooperation Organization

66, 80


SCWG / Space Cooperation Working Group

251, 297

SDCF / Security and Defense Cooperation Forum

324

SDSR / Strategic Defence and Security Review

109, 112, 135, 145, 157

SEW / Shared Early Warning

292

SLBM / Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missile

15, 25, 27, 29, 47, 73, 74, 77, 87

SM-3 / Standard Missile-3

15, 186, 189, 248, 291, 292, 293, 359, 373

SOFA / Status of Forces Agreement

122, 241, 244, 245, 253, 254, 255, 260, 275, 276,

376

SOM / Senior Off cials Meeting

316, 317

SSA / Space Situational Awareness

11, 87, 148, 152, 172, 178, 186, 236, 297

SSBN / Ballistic Missile Submarine Nuclear-Powered

47, 74, 77

SSR / Security Sector Reform

111, 116, 347

START / Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty

7, 15, 74, 82, 83, 135

**T**


TTP / Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan

106, 133

**U**


UNCLOS / United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea

41, 60, 66, 94, 99, 100, 101, 141, 142, 146, 216, 340

UNDOF / United Nations Disengagement Observer Force

117, 124, 345

UNHCR / Off ce of the United Nations High Commissioner

for Refugees

345, 347

UNMISS / United Nations Mission in the Republic of South

Sudan

40, 61, 117, 125, 324, 347, 348, 349

UNTSO / United Nations Truce Supervision Organization

117, 124

VJTF / Very High Readiness Joint Task Force

84, 109

**W**


WPNS / Western Pacif c Naval Symposium

60, 142, 296, 297, 318, 332


-----

