[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

# NATIONAL DEFENSE STRATEGY

December 16, 2022

Table of Contents

I Objectives of National Defense Strategy

II Changes in the Strategic Environment and Defense Challenges

1 Changes in the strategic environment

2 Military trends of Japan’s neighboring countries and regions

3 Defense challenges

III Japan’s Basic Defense Policy

1 Strengthening Japan’s own architecture for national defense

(1) Fundamental reinforcement of Japan’s defense capabilities

(2) Reinforcing the defense architecture of the whole country

2 Joint deterrence and response by the Japan-U.S. Alliance

(1) Strengthening Japan-U.S. joint deterrence and response capabilities

(2) Reinforcing alliance coordination functions

(3) Reinforcing joint response infrastructure

(4) Measures to support the stationing of U.S. Forces in Japan

3 Collaboration with like-minded countries and others

IV Key Capabilities for Fundamental Reinforcement of Defense Capabilities

1 Stand-off Defense Capabilities

2 Integrated Air and Missile Defense Capabilities

3 Unmanned Defense Capabilities

4 Cross-Domain Operation Capabilities

5 Command and Control and Intelligence-related Functions

6 Mobile Deployment Capabilities / Civil Protection

7 Sustainability and Resiliency

V The Future of Self-Defense Forces (SDF)

1 Role of SDF in the seven key fields

2 Concept for developing SDF’s architecture

3 Reinforcing policy-making function

VI Protection of Life, Person and Property of Japanese Nationals Utilizing Defense Capability

and Measures for Global Security Cooperation

1 Measures for protection of life, person and property of Japanese nationals

2 Measures for security cooperation against global challenges

VII Defense Production and Technological Base as Virtually Integral Part of Defense Capability

1


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

1 Reinforcing defense production base

2 Reinforcing technological base

3 Promoting transfer of defense equipment and technology

VIII Reinforcing Foundation for SDF Personnel, the Core Element of Defense Capability, to

Demonstrate their Abilities

1 Reinforcing human resource base

2 Transformation of medical function

IX Points of Attention

2


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

I Objectives of National Defense Strategy

The most consequential responsibility of the Government of Japan is to resolutely defend to

the end the lives of Japanese nationals and their peaceful livelihood as well as Japan’s territorial

land, waters and airspace and it is the very heart of Japan’s national security.

Since the end of World War II, in the face of the Cold War as well as the dramatic changes in

the security environment that ensued its ending, Japan has preserved peace and security for 77

years by: enhancing its diplomatic strength and defense capability and expanding and

deepening cooperation with other countries, with the Japan-U.S. Alliance being the key pillar.

In so doing, adhering under the Constitution to the basic precepts of maintaining an exclusively

defense-oriented policy and not becoming a military power that poses threats to other countries,

Japan has ensured civilian control of the military and observed the Three Non-Nuclear

Principles. Japan under these basic precepts will not ever change the course it has taken as a

peace-loving nation.

As Russia’s aggression against Ukraine attests, the international community, of which Japan

is a member, is facing serious challenges, and has plunged into a new crisis. China continues to

advance its unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts in the East China

Sea and the South China Sea. North Korea escalates its activities as it launches ballistic missiles

at an unprecedented high frequency, and pursues further miniaturization of its nuclear weapons.

Russia has launched an aggression against Ukraine while its military activities in the Far East

have been trending upward. Given the foregoing, in the future one cannot rule out the possibility

of serious events taking place in the Indo-Pacific region, particularly in East Asia, that might

shake the foundation of the stable post-war international order. As Japan is situated on the very

frontline of these trends, it is no exaggeration to say the future shape of Japan’s security and

defense policy has a direct link to the peace and stability of the region and the international

community.

The fact that Russia, a permanent member of the United Nation Security Council (hereinafter

referred to as the “UNSC”), has launched an aggression against Ukraine, tells us that

maintaining Japan’s own sovereignty and independence can be achieved through its own

independent and voluntary efforts, and that it is important to expand the role Japan can play to

avoid inviting foreign aggression. In today’s circumstance, no country can now protect its own

security alone. As challenges to the post-war international order continue, it is critical for Japan

to deepen cooperation and collaboration with its ally and like-minded countries with whom

Japan shares universal values and strategic interests. For this cooperation and collaboration to

produce meaningful results, Japan must strengthen its own efforts more than ever before, and

our ally, like-minded countries and others also expect Japan to play a role commensurate with

its national strength. Japan, its ally, like-minded countries and others are called upon to not

tolerate unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts through further

synergistic effects from common efforts.

3


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

Amid the most severe and complex security environment since the end of WWII, Japan needs

to squarely face the grim reality and fundamentally reinforce Japan’s defense capabilities, with

a focus on opponent capabilities and new ways of warfare, to protect the lives and peaceful

livelihood of Japanese nationals. Japan also needs to strengthen Japan’s architecture for national

defense that integrates various elements of national power. Thinking strategically, Japan should

promote these two lines of effort as a coherent whole. It is this undertaking that provides the

way forward to bolster Japan’s deterrence capabilities and further strengthen the Japan-U.S.

Alliance, and which forms the foundation of security cooperation with like-minded countries

and others.

The United States this year devised a new National Defense Strategy. It is therefore timely

for Japan and the United States to align their respective strategies and promote defense

cooperation in an integrated manner.

Based on this recognition, the Government hereby finalizes the National Defense Strategy

(hereinafter referred to as “NDS”) to comprehensively present Japan’s defense objectives,

approaches and means by which to accomplish those objectives. The NDS replaces the National

Defense Program Guidelines (hereinafter referred to as “NDPG”), which have served as Japan’s

basic guidelines for development, sustainment and operation of defense capability with the Self
Defense Forces (hereinafter referred to as “SDF”) as its core and formulated six times since

1976.

The policies concerning the fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities and the levels

of defense buildup that underpin it, which have been decided by the Government through the

NDS and “Defense Buildup Program” (“DBP”, approved by the National Security Council and

the Cabinet on December 16, 2022), represent a major turning point for post-war defense policy.

By formulating this Strategy, which provides mid- to long-term directions and a breakdown of

the reinforcement of defense capabilities, the Government will make efforts to deepen the

Japanese public’s understanding about the significance of this major turning point.

II Changes in the Strategic Environment and Defense Challenges

1 Changes in the strategic environment

Following the development of information society and the expansion of international trade,

economic and culture interactions among states further expand and deepen. On the other hand,

states that do not share universal values or political and economic systems based on these

values are expanding their influence. Unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such

attempts represent significant challenges to the free and open international order underpinned

by the rule of law. Russia’s aggression against Ukraine has revealed this in a most blatant

way. The international community is facing the greatest post-war trial yet, and has entered a

new era of crisis.

In addition, the global power balance has significantly changed and interstate competition

4


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

across the political, economy and military spheres is emerging. Such trends are especially

notable in the Indo-Pacific region, where China has been continuing and amplifying its

unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts. Not only China but also North

Korea and Russia have further intensified their activities.

As the interstate competition between China and the United States in particular is expected

to further intensify in various fields, the United States has presented a view that the next ten

years will be the decisive decade for its competition with China.

Rapid advances in science and technology are fundamentally changing the paradigm of

security. Countries are striving to develop cutting-edge technologies that could dramatically

alter the character of warfare and thus prove to become “game changers.” China in particular

has been rapidly promoting accelerated technological innovation and its application for

military purposes under the name of the "military-civilian integration strategy": China is

notably accelerating military capability development premised on unmanned assets that

leverage artificial intelligence (AI). These trends are resulting in fundamental changes to the

way the military is organized as well as the way warfare is prosecuted.

In addition, there exist a range of global security challenges such as increasingly serious

risks in cyber and other domains, the expansion of information warfare including the spread

of disinformation, and climate change.

2 Military trends of Japan’s neighboring countries and regions

In the report to the National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party in 2017 (hereinafter

referred to as “NCCPC”), China sets the goals of "basically completing modernization of

national defense and the military" by 2035 and building “a world-class forces” by the middle

of this century. And in the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19[th] Communist Party of China Central

Committee in 2020, the achievement of “the centenary goal of the People’s Liberation Army”

by 2027 was added as a target. In a report to the NCCPC in 2022, it was newly stated that

elevating the People’s Liberation Army to a “world-class standards” at an early stage is a

strategic task for fully building “a modern socialist country.”. With these goals in mind, China

calls for a “new system for mobilizing resources nationwide,” promotes integrated

development of “mechanization, informatization and the application of smart technologies”

and thereby extensively and rapidly enhancing its military capability in a qualitative and

quantitative manner. China defines the next five years as the crucial period to start the full
scale construction of a “modern socialist country.”

China’s published national defense expenditures exceeded Japan’s defense-related

expenditures for the first time in Fiscal Year (FY) 1998 and has since increased at a rapid

pace, reaching in FY2022 approximately 4.8 times of Japan’s defense-related expenditure.

China’s published national defense expenditures are assessed to represent only a portion of

actual amount spent for military purposes. Supported by the rapid growth of defense

5


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

expenditures, China now possesses modern naval and air assets in larger numbers than does

Japan. China is strengthening its capabilities in new domains including the space and cyber.

Regarding nuclear forces, it appears highly likely that China intends to possess at least 1,000

deliverable nuclear warheads by the end of the 2020s. With respect to missile forces, China,

a non-signatory to the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, has deployed

numerous surface-launched intermediate-range missiles, which the INF Treaty covered.

China is also operationalizing anti-ship ballistic missiles and long-range land-attack cruise

missiles, and developing and deploying hypersonic glide vehicles (HGV). These efforts are

aimed at improving military capabilities to deny foreign military’s access to, and deployment

in, China’s surrounding areas as well as to impede foreign military activities in those areas

(the so-called anti-access/area-denial, or “A2/AD” capability). China also continues to

develop and deploy unmanned assets. Increased activities of unmanned assets have been

confirmed in Japan’s surrounding areas.

Backed by these military capabilities, China has been intensifying its activities across the

entire region surrounding Japan, including in the East China Sea, particularly in the areas

around the Senkaku Islands, the Sea of Japan, and the western Pacific Ocean including areas

around the Izu and Ogasawara Islands, extending beyond the so-called first island chain to

the second island chain. China is increasing military pressure on Taiwan. In the South China

Sea, it continues to entrench its military foothold.

Chinese naval ships are intensifying their activities in waters around the Senkaku Islands.

Under such circumstances, China Coast Guard ships repeatedly make intrusion into Japanese

territorial waters around the Senkaku Islands. Chinese navy vessels have been seen

navigating in Japan's territorial waters and contiguous zones around Japan’s southwestern

islands.

Regarding Taiwan, the report to NCCPC in 2022 reiterated that China “will continue to

strive for peaceful reunification with the greatest sincerity and the utmost effort, but we will

never promise to renounce the use of force.” At the same time, the report also stated that “we

have thus maintained the initiative and the ability to steer in cross-Strait relations,” and

“complete reunification of our country must be realized, and it can, without doubt, be

realized.” In recent years, the overall military balance between China and Taiwan is rapidly

tilting in China’s favor, and China has been intensifying military activities around Taiwan. It

is believed that through the series of activities around Taiwan, China seeks to create a fait

accompli where Chinese military is continuously operating, and improve its actual combat

capabilities. Moreover, China has launched nine ballistic missiles in August 4, 2022, five of

which landed within Japan’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). This was perceived as a threat

to local residents. China thus has intensified its coercive military activities around Taiwan,

and concerns about the peace and stability of the Taiwan Strait are rapidly growing not only

in the Indo-Pacific region including Japan but also in the entire international community.

6


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

China’s current external stance, military activities, and other activities have become a

matter of serious concern for Japan and the international community, and present an

unprecedented and the greatest strategic challenge in ensuring the peace and security of Japan

and the peace and stability of the international community, as well as in strengthening the

international order based on the rule of law, to which Japan should respond with its

comprehensive national power including defense capability and in cooperation and

collaboration with its ally, like-minded countries and others.

In order to maintain its regime, North Korea has concentrated its efforts on enhancing its

arsenal of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and ballistic missiles. It is assessed that

North Korea already possesses technological capability to mate nuclear warheads with its

ballistic missiles that range Japan and attack Japan with those missiles. Regarding ballistic

missiles, a delivery means of WMDs, North Korea is rapidly improving its related

technologies and operational capabilities by, for example, diversifying launch modes. In

particular, North Korea in recent years, with the aim of complicating indication and warning,

detection, and interception of its missiles, has been pursuing the operationalization of ballistic

missiles that can fly at low altitudes with irregular trajectories as well as launching these

missiles from various platforms such as Transporter-Erector-Launchers (TEL), submarines

and trains. North Korea is also promoting its research and development by prioritizing the

realization of “hypersonic gliding flight warheads” and “solid fuel-propelled intercontinental

ballistic missiles (ICBM)” with a range covering the U.S. mainland, which renews concerns

over its future technological advancements. These nuclear and missile developments and

others by North Korea violate a series of UNSC resolutions and others, and significantly

undermine the peace, stability and security of the region and the international community.

North Korea’s military activities pose an even more grave and imminent threat to Japan’s

national security than ever before.

Russia’s aggression against Ukraine has shaken the very foundation of the international

order and is perceived as the most significant and direct threat to defense in the European

region. As for the areas surrounding Japan, the Russian forces are also accelerating their

military activities including through the deployment of newer-model equipment and

implementation of large-scale military exercises in the Far East region including the Northern

Territories. In recent years, Russia has ramped up its military coordination with China by

conducting activities such as joint navigation of their naval vessels and joint flights of their

bombers. Russia’s military activities in the Indo-Pacific region including Japan, together with

its strategic coordination with China, are of strong concern from a defense perspective.

In case that these activities are conducted simultaneously in the Indo-Pacific region, it

would be necessary to take a close look at what implication they would have for the region.

3 Defense challenges

7


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

An unprecedented situation is unfolding: Russia, a permanent member of the UNSC and a

nuclear weapon state that bears primary responsibility for maintaining international peace

and stability, has launched an outright aggression against Ukraine, repeatedly taken actions

and sent messages that can be interpreted as threat of nuclear weapons use. This is an event

that shakes the very foundation of the international order that the international community

has built since the end of World War II. Such unilateral change to the status quo by force that

is occurring in Europe could also occur in the Indo-Pacific region.

The military background for Russia’s aggression against Ukraine was that Ukraine's

defense capability against Russia was insufficient, thus failing to discourage and deter

Russian aggression; Ukraine did not possess sufficient capabilities.

Also, while no country can defend its own security by itself alone, there is a renewed

recognition of the importance of cooperation with allies who have the intention and capability

to respond to invasions jointly to deter invasions from outside.

Also worth attention in this event is that a country with strong military capability has one

day come to possess the intention to launch an aggression. A threat materializes when the

capability to inflict harm is combined with the intention to do so; Accurately gauging other’s

intent from outside is inherently difficult. When a state’s decision-making process is opaque,

there always exists conditions under which threat may materialize.

To protect one’s own country from such states, it is necessary to have deterrence capability,

thereby making said states realize that unilateral changes to the status quo by force are

difficult; it is also necessary to build one’s own capability, that is defense capability focusing

on opponent capabilities, to discourage opponents from harboring the intention to launch an

aggression.

The way of warfare has also drastically changed. In addition to the traditional forms of

invasion through air, sea, and land, new ways of warfare have emerged with the combination

of massive missile strike by ballistic and cruise missiles with enhanced precision strike

capabilities, hybrid warfare including information warfare such as false-flag operations,

asymmetric attacks leveraging the space, cyber, and electromagnetic spectrum domains and

with unmanned assets, and public remarks by nuclear powers that could be interpreted as

threat using nuclear weapons. Whether or not to be able to respond to these new ways of

warfare is a major challenge in building future defense capabilities.

Surrounded by seas and with long coastlines, Japan possesses numerous islands remote

from the mainland and is endowed with a vast EEZ and continental shelves: spread widely

therein are the life, person, and property of the Japanese nationals, as well as its territory,

territorial waters, airspace, and various natural resources, all of which Japan must defend to

the end. For Japan, a maritime nation that depends on overseas trade for the majority of its

resources and food, it is essential to reinforce the free and open maritime order as well as to

ensure the freedom and safety of navigation and overflight.

8


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

Japan is prone to natural disasters that exact heavy damage. Industry, population, and

information centers concentrate in urban areas and many critical facilities such as nuclear

power plants are located in coastal areas. Protecting Japanese nationals and critical

infrastructures from various threats is among Japan’s security challenges.

Japan is undergoing rapid population decline and ageing with declining birth rates. Tight

fiscal conditions linger. It is essential that Japan make more efficient use of budget and labor

force.

III Japan’s Basic Defense Policy

Defense capability is the ultimate guarantor for ensuring Japan’s security. It will deter threats

from extending to Japan, and in the case that a threat does reach Japan, it will be disrupted and

defeated, thereby demonstrating Japan’s resolve and capability to defend itself to the end.

Since the end of World War II, Japan has consistently committed to modest and efficient

development of defense capability. In particular, since the formulation of the NDPG in 1976

(approved by the National Defense Council and the Cabinet on October 29, 1976), the purpose

of Japan’s possessing its own defense capability had been presented as, rather than to counter

specific threats, to avoid Japan’s becoming a power vacuum and thus a destabilizing factor in

the region surrounding Japan.

After the end of the Cold War, SDF’s roles and missions have expanded to cover various

situations including domestic and international large-scale disaster responses and International

Peace Cooperation Activities. The 2010 NDPG (approved by the Security Council of Japan and

the Cabinet on December 17, 2010) stated that defense capability development will no longer

depend on the “Basic Defense Force Concept,” which placed importance on the deterrence

effect form the existence of defense capability itself. The subsequent 2013 NDPG (approved by

the National Security Council and the Cabinet on December 17, 2013) called to squarely face

the reality of increasingly severe security environment and to build a truly effective defense

capability. Meanwhile, Japan’s neighboring countries have drastically strengthened their

military capabilities, and rapidly expanded and intensified missile launches and coercive

military activities, threatening the security of Japan and the region.

As these activities escalate, it is extremely difficult to predict when and how intentions will

change and unilateral changes to the status quo by force will occur. It is clear from Russia's

aggression against Ukraine that a unilateral change to the status quo by force causes massive

human and material damage, with disruption in economy, finance, energy as well as maritime

and air traffic felt not only regionally but also globally, seriously affecting people's daily lives.

To account for the foregoing, Japan must clearly demonstrate the intention that Japan will

never tolerate unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts. To this end, Japan

must: fundamentally reinforce defense capability with a focus on opponents’ capabilities and

the ways they prosecute warfare; and, actively adapt to new ways of warfare. Japan cannot

9


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

engage in these efforts alone: Japan needs close cooperation and collaboration with its ally, like
minded countries and others. This strategy thus intends to clearly define Japan’s defense

objectives and present approaches and specific means to achieve those objectives, thereby

ensuring all efforts will be made in an integrated manner.

 - Japan’s defense objectives are as follows:

The first objective is to shape a security environment that does not tolerate unilateral

changes to the status quo by force;

The second objective is to deter, through cooperation with our ally, like-minded countries

and others, unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts that concern

Japan’s peace and security. Should such an eventuality occur, our objective is to swiftly

respond in whatever ways and bring the situation under control at an early stage so that the

situation would not lead to invasion of Japan;

The third objective is, should deterrence fail and invasion of Japan occur, to rapidly

respond to the invasion in a tailored and seamless manner; to take primary responsibility to

deal with the aggression; and, while receiving support from the ally and others, to disrupt

and defeat the invasion.

In dealing with the threat of nuclear weapons, U.S. extended deterrence, with nuclear

deterrence at its core, is essential. Japan will defend itself to the end in all situations through

the combination of its own efforts to achieve the first, second and third defense objectives

and extended deterrence and others provided by the United States.

 - Approaches to realize Japan’s defense objectives are as follows. Specific means will be

presented later in the description of respective approaches:

The first approach is, in an effort of strengthening of Japan’s own architecture for national

defense, to fundamentally reinforce Japan’s defense capabilities, which constitute the core

of national defense, and to reinforce the defense architecture of the whole country.

The second approach is to further reinforce joint deterrence and response capability of the

Japan-U.S. Alliance by further strengthening cooperation with the United States, our ally.

The third approach is to reinforce collaboration with like-minded countries and others with

whom Japan cooperate to uphold and reinforce a free and open international order.

1 Strengthening Japan’s own architecture for national defense

It goes without saying that the success of Japan’s national defense depends on its own

efforts. Only when a country musters strong will and efforts to defend itself can it protect and

support itself and its allies, etc., in times of emergency. The first approach therefore is to

make renewed efforts to strengthen Japan's own architecture for national defense that

integrates all aspects of national power. At the core of such efforts is the fundamental

10


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

reinforcement of defense capabilities.

(1) Fundamental reinforcement of Japan’s defense capabilities

Defense capability is the ultimate guarantor of Japan’s security. Japan has aimed to build

a defense capability that can respond to and deter a range of possible situations in a truly

effective manner. More specifically, in accordance with the “National Defense Program

Guidelines for FY2019 and beyond” (approved by the National Security Council and the

Cabinet on December 18, 2018), Japan, in order to operate seamlessly across all phases

from peacetime to armed contingencies, has striven to build the Multi-Domain Defense

Force, which organically fuses capabilities in space, cyber and the electromagnetic

spectrum with those in ground, maritime and air domains and is capable of sustained and

flexible activities through joint operations.

As the international community finds itself in the most challenging time since the end of

WWII, Japan has explored the shape of future defense capability, considering the

opponent’s capabilities as well as new ways of warfare, performing various analyses,

including capability assessment, regarding responses to various possible situations.

Building upon these efforts, to continue to protect the lives and peaceful livelihood of

Japanese nationals from unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts,

Japan will fundamentally reinforce the current Multi-Domain Defense Force through

further accelerated efforts.

The basic thoughts that underpin our efforts to fundamentally reinforce defense

capabilities are as follows:

a. First, with a fundamentally reinforced defense capability, Japan should be able to take

primary responsibility to disrupt and defeat invasion against Japan. This means that

Japan will possess a capability that makes the opponent realize that the goal of invasion

of Japan is not achievable by military means, and that the damage the opponent will

incur makes the invasion not worth the cost. In addition, if Japan possesses a defense

capability to enable disrupting and defeating invasion, this capability, coupled with that

of the United States, Japan’s ally, will be able to deter not only invasion against Japan,

but also deter unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts in the

Indo-Pacific region. This will help foster a security environment where such forcible

actions are not tolerated.

b. Second, a fundamentally reinforced defense capability should be able to deter invasion

against Japan through activities such as: persistent intelligence, surveillance and

reconnaissance (ISR); training and exercises conducted as Flexible Deterrent Options

(FDO); and measures against aircraft intruding into Japan’s territorial airspace. Such a

defense capability should also be able to swiftly respond to and address a range of

situations in a seamless manner.

11


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

Such a defense capability must come with high readiness and response capability. We

need to prepare training infrastructures both inside and outside Japan; we also need a

flexible work environment so that SDF can, even in the face of ever-increasing volume

of peacetime operations, conduct sufficient volume of training and exercises necessary

for improving the ability of SDF personnel and the proficiency of SDF units.

c. Third, a fundamentally reinforced defense capability should be able to adapt to new

ways of warfare. It must operate with U.S. forces and integrate a variety of missions

such as cross-domain operations, hybrid operations including information warfare, and

missile interception and counterstrike. To that end, Japan first needs to identify

functions and capabilities necessary for national defense, in accordance with the

guidance in the National Security Strategy (NSS), NDS and DBP as well as joint

operational concepts aligned with the guidance, and then determine how those

capabilities should be distributed among the Ground, Maritime, and Air Self-Defense

Forces.

d. As part of the functions and capabilities required for the defense of Japan described

above, Japan needs capabilities with which to disrupt and defeat invading forces over

long distances, thereby deterring invasion itself. Japan therefore will strengthen “stand
off defense capabilities” and “integrated air and missile defense capabilities.”

Should deterrence fail and an invasion of Japan occur, Japan would need to ensure

asymmetric advantage by leveraging, in addition to these capabilities, manned as well

as unmanned assets and gain superiority across domains such as underwater, surface,

and air. To this end, Japan will strengthen “unmanned defense capabilities,” “cross
domain operation capabilities,” and “command and control/intelligence related

functions.”

Japan would also need to operate in a swift as well as persistent manner to crush to

the opponent’s will to invade. Japan will thus strengthen “mobile deployment

capabilities, civil protection,” and “sustainability and resiliency.”

e. Japan will need to promptly realize the fundamental reinforcement of its defense

capabilities as when and how unilateral changes to the status quo occurs is hard to

predict:

More specifically, by FY2027, five years after the formulation of the Strategy, Japan

will strengthen its defense capability to the point where Japan is able to take primary

responsibility for dealing with invasions against its nation, and disrupt and defeat such

threats with the support of its ally and others. By approximately ten years from now,

Japan will make further efforts to attain this defense objective and will reinforce its

defense capabilities to the point where Japan is able to disrupt and defeat invasion much

earlier and at places further afield.

The top priorities for the next five years are twofold: first, to maximize effective use

12


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

of its current equipment, Japan will improve operational rates, secure sufficient

munitions and fuel, and accelerate investments in defense facilities for improved

resiliency; and second, Japan will strengthen its core capabilities for future operations.

This defense capability development will be constantly reviewed and adapted

according to the ever-evolving security environment surrounding Japan.

f. This fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities entails significant costs and a

commensurate increase in personnel strength. In a way that serves to realize

fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities, Japan will, while adhering to a

scrap-and-build approach, optimize SDF’s organization and authorized strength as well

as equipment. We will also further the ongoing efforts toward more efficient

procurement, which have achieved significant cost reductions, while giving due

consideration to the defense production base. In addition, to account for population

decrease and declining birthrates/aging population, Japan will robustly promote

automation, labor-saving and optimization.

g. The purposes of the above-mentioned fundamental reinforcement of defense

capabilities are none other than to not allow unilateral changes to the status quo by force

and such attempts and to deter invasion against Japan.

Fundamentally reinforcing Japan’s own defense capabilities will further enhance

deterrence and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance; collaboration with like
minded countries will be enhanced as well. By doing so, Japan will ensure that opponent

fully recognize Japan’s intention and capability, do not underestimate Japan, and do not

overestimate their own capabilities, thereby deterring invasion against Japan. This is

the purpose of Japan's fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities.

h. A key to deterring invasion against Japan is counterstrike capabilities that leverage

stand-off defense capability and other capabilities.

In recent years, in Japan’s surroundings, there have been dramatic advances in

missile-related technologies, including hypersonic weapons, and practical skills for

missile operations, such as saturation attack. Missile forces in the region have

significantly improved in both qualitative and quantitative terms, and missiles

themselves have been repeatedly launched. Missile attacks against Japan have become

a palpable threat. Under these circumstances, Japan will continue its steadfast efforts to

both qualitatively and quantitatively enhance its missile defense capabilities by

continuing to develop technologies that bring the ability to deal with missiles with

irregular trajectories.

Looking ahead, however, if Japan continues to rely solely upon ballistic missile

defenses, it will become increasingly difficult to fully address missile threats with the

existing missile defense network alone.

For this reason, Japan needs counterstrike capabilities: capabilities which, in the case

13


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

of missile attacks by an opponent, enable Japan to mount effective counterstrikes

against the opponent to prevent further attacks while defending against incoming

missiles by means of the missile defense network.

Counterstrike capabilities are SDF’s capabilities that leverage stand-off defense

capability and other capabilities. In cases where armed attack against Japan has occurred,

and as part of that attack ballistic missiles and other means have been used, counterstrike

capabilities enable Japan to mount effective counterstrikes against the opponent’s

territory. Counterstrikes are done as a minimum necessary measure for self-defense and

in accordance with the Three New Conditions for Use of Force.

By possessing such capabilities to mount effective counterstrikes, Japan will deter

armed attack itself. If an opponent ever launches missiles, it will be able to prevent the

opponent’s further armed attacks by counterstrike capabilities, while protecting itself

against incoming missiles by the missile defense network, thereby defending the lives

and peaceful livelihoods of Japanese nationals.

Counterstrike capabilities are the capabilities on which the Government expressed its

view on February 29, 1956, which stated that, under the Constitution, “as long as it is

deemed that there are no other means to defend against attack by guided missiles and

others, to hit the bases of those guided missiles and others is legally within the purview

of self-defense and thus permissible.” These are also capabilities that the Government

has chosen not to acquire up to now as a matter of policy decision.

This Government view squarely applies to measures for self-defense taken under the

Three New Conditions for Use of Force, presented in the 2015 Legislation for Peace

and Security, and the capabilities that Japan has now decided to acquire can be used

when the above-mentioned Three Conditions are met in compliance with this view.

Counterstrike capabilities fall within the purview of Japan’s Constitution and

international law; they do not change Japan’s exclusively defense-oriented policy; and,

they will be used only when the above-mentioned Three New Conditions are fulfilled.

Needless to say, preemptive strikes, namely striking first at a stage when no armed

attack has occurred, remain impermissible.

While the basic division of roles between Japan and the United States will remain

unchanged, as Japan will now possess counterstrike capabilities, the two nations will

cooperate in counterstrikes just as they do in defending against ballistic missiles and

others.

(2) Reinforcing the defense architecture of the whole country

To defend Japan, SDF needs to be strong. Also self-evident is that national defense

cannot be achieved without a whole-of-country approach. In addition to fundamentally

reinforcing defense capabilities, Japan will build an overall national defense architecture

14


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

by integrating Japan’s national power--diplomatic, intelligence, economic, and

technological--as well as by systematically combining all policy means. To enhance the

whole-of-government undertaking, it is essential to break down sectionalism within the

Government. From this perspective, Japan will enhance the comprehensive defense

architecture that draws upon Japan’s national power. This undertaking is an indivisible part

of the fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities. The national government will

also promote cooperation with local governments and private entities.

a. Diplomatic efforts underpinned by Japan’s enhanced defense architecture are

important for our efforts to prevent unilateral changes to the status quo by force. By

promoting robust diplomatic efforts through the promotion such as the vision of a Free

and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP), Japan will: proactively create a peaceful, stable, and

predictable international environment; prevent unilateral changes to the status quo by

force; and ensure Japan’s peace and security and the peace, stability, and prosperity of

the region and the international community.

Working together with these diplomatic efforts, the Ministry of Defense/Self-Defense

Forces (hereinafter referred to as “MOD/SDF”) will promote cooperation with our ally

and multilayered collaboration with like-minded countries and others to create a

desirable security environment. Also, in order to continue to demonstrate the intention

and capability to deter unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts

and influence opponent’s actions, it is necessary to improve and enhance training and

exercises as FDO and Strategic Communication (SC) with a whole-of-government

approach, as well as with our ally and like-minded countries and others.

b. To detect indications of contingencies at early stages, relevant government agencies

need to conduct persistent ISR and analysis in collaboration from peacetime. Also

important are swift government-level decision-making and inter-agency coordination

tailored to the given situation. With respect to integrated information warfare with

special regard to the cognitive dimension, Japan will enhance fact-checking and

counter-messaging to deal with disinformation, thereby enhancing the whole-of
government response from the current point in time as well as during contingency.

c. It is important not to allow unilateral changes to the status quo by force through acting

collaboratively between relevant agencies based on the whole-of-government decision
making. For this purpose, Japan will improve the effectiveness of its response by

conducting simulations and integrated training and exercises while establishing

coordination procedures from peacetime across the whole government. In particular, to

protect critical facilities such as nuclear power plants and respond to infringements that

do not amount to armed attacks from outside and armed attack situations in the vicinity

of remote islands, SDF will conduct training and exercises assuming contingencies with

the police and Japan Coast Guard from peacetime, and establish necessary collaboration

15


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

procedures, including the procedure to have the Minister of Defense control the Japan

Coast Guard in an armed attack situation.

d. The domains of space, cyber, and the electromagnetic spectrum are basic infrastructure

in people's daily lives as well as being vitally important for carrying out cross-domain

operations in defense of Japan, and Japan will reinforce relevant capabilities across the

whole government.

Regarding the space domain, securing its stable use for information gathering,

communication, positioning, etc., is vitally for ensuring the lives of our nationals and

our defense, and MOD/SDF will reinforce cooperation and collaboration including

research and development with relevant agencies including the Japan Aerospace

Exploration Agency (JAXA) and private companies. In doing so, MOD/SDF will

further apply civilian technologies into the defense field, facilitate investment in

technology development in the private sector and improve space capabilities for Japan

as a whole.

In the cyber domain, it is important to work together with international partners,

relevant ministries and agencies, and private companies to gather and share information

at all phases from peacetime to armed contingencies as well as to strengthen response

capability in the cybersecurity field as a whole country. In line with the government’s

overall cybersecurity policy which will be comprehensively coordinated in a centralized

manner, MOD/SDF will enhance its cybersecurity capability, while also promoting

initiatives that contribute to strengthening cooperation with relevant ministries and

agencies, critical infrastructure providers, and defense industry.

With regard to the electromagnetic spectrum domain, its range of application and use

have expanded to cover the ground, maritime, air, space, and cyber domains, making it

the frontlines of offense and defense in contemporary warfare. For this reason, ensuring

superiority in the electromagnetic spectrum domain is extremely important for

reinforcing deterrence and conducting cross-domain operations. MOD/SDF will work

closely with the relevant ministries and agencies to ensure SDF's stable and flexible use

of radio waves both for civilian purposes and for SDF's command and control as well

as intelligence gathering activities.

e. In an era where victory or defeat is determined by the mastery of new ways of warfare

underpinned by advanced technologies, it has become critical to leverage cutting-edge

technologies for defense purposes.

Under the whole-of-government mechanism for strengthening comprehensive

defense architecture, Japan will leverage the cutting-edge technology research and

development conducted by relevant government organizations for defense purposes

based on the needs of MOD/SDF. In addition, MOD/SDF will implement initiatives to

link the results of research and development conducted by start-ups and other

16


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

companies and various research institutions into early production and deployment of

defense equipment, utilizing the defense industry.

f. National administrative agencies, local governments, public entities, and private

enterprises must make joint efforts in a cooperative and collaborative manner, in order

to respond to an invasion against Japan while protecting the lives of the Japanese

nationals and in order to respond to various contingencies including large-scale

disasters.

First, based on defense needs, under the inter-agency mechanism for strengthening

comprehensive defense architecture, the Government will develop and upgrade airports,

seaports and other facilities, particularly in the southwestern region. To enable SDF to

use, for purposes including peacetime training, facilities such as existing airports and

seaports as operation infrastructure, the Government will take necessary measures such

as the establishment of a framework for interagency coordination.

Japan will also deepen collaboration with relevant organizations regarding the

expansion of the use of civilian vessels and aircraft for SDF's maneuver and deployment,

and coordinate and cooperate to systematically implement civil protection measures

employing such vessels and aircraft. In addition, MOD/SDF will promote various

measures such as reinforcing whole-of-government civil protection training assuming

an armed attack situation and other situations, as well as enhancing information

transmission function of the national early warning system (J-ALERT) in preparation

for an attack by ballistic missiles or other means.

Furthermore, Japan will establish an effective mechanism to balance defense

requirements with socioeconomic activities such as the installation of wind power

generation facilities so that the defense-related facilities can fully function through the

smooth use of sea, airspace and radio waves.

In addition, concerning the transportation and storages of SDF's ammunition and fuel,

Japan will reinforce collaboration with the relevant ministries and agencies while taking

measures for further facilitation.

Japan will promote similar initiatives for smooth implementation of Japan-U.S.

bilateral responses to various contingencies.

g. For Japan, a maritime nation, reinforcing the maritime order and ensuring the freedom

and safety of navigation and overflight are extremely important for peace and security.

To this end, Japan will work to secure the national interest in Japan's territorial waters

and the stable use of its important sea lanes.

First, MOD/SDF will promote maritime security cooperation guided by the vision of

FOIP, with our ally and like-minded countries as well as coastal states in the Indo
Pacific, while closely cooperating and collaborating with Japan Coast Guard,

responsible for maritime security in Japan.

17


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

In order to secure the stable use of sea lanes, Japan will make necessary efforts to

conduct counter-piracy operations and ensure the safety of Japan-related vessels in

cooperation and collaboration with relevant organizations. In this regard, Japan will

make stable, long-term use of its operation activity in Djibouti.

h. To enable SDF and U.S. Forces in Japan to seamlessly and effectively conduct

activities on a daily basis, Japan will strive to gain understanding and cooperation from

local governments and residents around their facilities. Japan will actively engage in

public relations activities regarding the policies and activities of the MOD/SDF and

also the role of U.S. Forces in Japan on a regular basis, and coordinate to accommodate

the requests and situations of local communities, while fulfilling accountability. At the

same time, Japan will continue to promote measures to improve the living environment

of areas around defense facilities including those against noise from the perspective of

promoting cooperation to the defense of Japan.

In addition, in light of the fact that the transportation of emergency patients by SDF

units and their very existence contribute greatly to the maintenance and revitalization

of local communities in some regions, Japan will give due consideration to the

characteristics of the regions and the contribution to the local economy in order to gain

understanding of the local governments and residents upon reorganization of units as

well as placement and operation of SDF camps and bases.

2 Joint deterrence and response by the Japan-U.S. Alliance

The second approach is to further strengthen the Japan-U.S. Alliance. The Alliance with

the United States is a key pillar of Japan’s security policy, and fundamental reinforcement of

Japan’s defense capabilities will lead to more effective employment of U.S. capabilities and

will further strengthen deterrence and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance. By

representing such joint resolve and capabilities, Japan and the United States will prevent

escalation of emergencies from gray-zone situations to conventionally-armed invasion and

eventually the use of nuclear weapons, and deter unilateral changes to the status quo by force

and such attempts. In addition, if an invasion against Japan occurs, Japan-U.S. joint response

will disrupt the invasion. To this end, both Japan and the United States constantly modernize

the Alliance and strengthen joint capabilities by aligning strategies and prioritizing goals

together. In doing so, building upon the fundamental reinforcement of Japan’s own defense

capabilities, Japan will play a larger role for the defense of Japan and the peace and stability

of the region under the Japan-U.S. Alliance. Specifically, Japan will work on the following

measures:

(1) Strengthening Japan and U.S. joint deterrence and response capabilities

Japan’s NDS and the United States’ National Defense Strategy are well aligned in

18


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

prioritizing the prevention of unilateral changes to the status quo by force through

integrating all approaches and means. Accordingly, from the viewpoint of reinforcing

readiness and resiliency, imposing cost on opponents and deterring invasion of Japan, Japan

will further deepen discussion with the United States on their roles, missions and

capabilities and further reinforce joint deterrence capabilities of both countries in an

integrated manner.

Specifically, Japan will further deepen cooperation with the United States to smoothly

implement combined cross-domain operations including space, cyber and electromagnetic

spectrum and measures to improve interoperability. At the same time, regarding Japan’s

counterstrike capabilities, Japan and the United States will jointly establish a cooperative

posture including relevant information gathering to employ the capability more effectively.

Furthermore, Japan intends to reinforce collaboration in such areas as air-defense, anti
surface warfare, anti-submarine warfare, mine-warfare, amphibious operations, airborne

operations, intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance and targeting (ISRT), protection of

assets and facilities, and logistic support. Also, in order to effectively realize the division

of roles and missions between Japan and the United States in light of the fundamental

reinforcement of Japan's defense capabilities, Japan will ensure close operational

coordination with the United States through Japan-U.S. bilateral planning. In addition,

Japan will improve its response capabilities, including the readiness and interoperability of

the Alliance, through more advanced and practical exercises and training.

In addition, in order to ensure that U.S. extended deterrence with nuclear deterrence at

its core remains credible and resilient, Japan will further actively engage in and deepen

bilateral discussions on extended deterrence including those at the ministerial level.

As joint measures from peacetime to deter unilateral changes to the status quo by force

and such attempts as well as various situations, Japan will further expand and evolve

operations including joint FDO and ISR. In order to effectively conduct those operations,

Japan will proactively make such efforts as gaining participation of like-minded countries

and others and protecting assets, namely U.S. vessels and aircraft, by SDF.

Furthermore, as part of efforts to strengthen the deterrence and response capabilities of

Japan and the United States in a unified manner, Japan will on a regular basis increase

joint/shared use of Japanese and U.S. facilities, and promote mutual deployment of both

units to their respective facilities for training or other purposes.

(2) Reinforcing alliance coordination functions

To conduct aligned joint response of Japan and the United States in any situation, Japan

will further develop coordination functions centered on the Alliance Coordination

Mechanism (ACM).

In addition, in order to reinforce collaboration with like-minded countries and others

19


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

with the Japan-U.S. Alliance as its core, Japan will promote closer operational coordination

by utilizing the coordination functions including the ACM.

(3) Reinforcing joint response infrastructure

Japan will reinforce the infrastructure to support effective joint responses in all phases.

First, in order to further reinforce information sharing at all levels, Japan will

fundamentally reinforce efforts related to information security and cybersecurity so that

Japan and the United States can fully employ their capabilities. Also, in order to ensure the

Alliance's technological edge, interoperability, readiness, and persistent warfare

capabilities, Japan will further reinforce defense equipment and technology cooperation

through joint analysis and joint research in cutting-edge technology, joint development and

production of defense equipment, improvement in mutual interchangeability, shared use

and reinforcement of various networks, expansion of production and maintenance

capability of U.S. military equipment in Japan and reinforcement of supply-chain.

(4) Measures to support stationing of U.S. Forces in Japan

Japan will promote various measures to provide stable support for the stationing of the

U.S. Forces in Japan, such as steady implementation of the realignment of the U.S. Forces

in Japan and the initiatives to reinforce the readiness and resiliency of the U.S. Forces in

Japan, while optimizing the bilateral joint posture to respond to the severe security

environment.

Particularly, in Okinawa, located in an area critically important for the security of Japan,

while dealing with the increasingly severe security environment, Japan will continue to

work to mitigate impact by steadily implementing such measures as realignment,

consolidation and reduction of facilities and areas of U.S. Forces in Okinawa including the

relocation of Marine Corps Air Station Futenma as well as the relocation of units and

training.

In order to smoothly and effectively conduct aforementioned Japan-U.S. joint measures,

it is essential to gain understanding of Japanese nationals; therefore, Japan will reinforce

measures including proactively publicizing their significance and requirements.

3 Collaboration with like-minded countries and others

The third approach is to enhance the collaboration with like-minded countries and others.

In order to counter unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts and to

ensure Japan’s security, it is extremely important to reinforce collaboration with not only our

ally but also as many countries as possible. From such perspective, Japan will promote efforts

to contribute to realizing the vision of a FOIP.

First of all, Japan will, while placing the Japan-U.S. Alliance as an essential cornerstone,

20


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

proactively promote multilateral and multilayered defense cooperation and exchanges, taking

into account characteristics of the region as well as situation of each country. In doing so,

Japan will further promote institutional frameworks such as Reciprocal Access Agreement

(RAA), Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement (ACSA), and Agreement concerning the

Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology.

With Australia, which is the “Special Strategic Partnership” in the Indo-Pacific region and

guided by the renewed “Japan-Australia Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation”, Japan

will build the closest cooperative relationship second only to the Japan-U.S. defense

cooperation and deepen consultations at all levels including the Foreign and Defense

Ministerial Consultations (“2+2”), bilateral/multilateral training and exercises, defense

equipment and technology cooperation. In addition, in light of developments such as the RAA,

Japan will pursue actions such as exercises and rotational deployment in Australia. Given the

prospect of cooperation among Japan, U.S. and Australia, in the event of contingencies, Japan

will mutually consult and collaborate with Australia, focusing on logistics support and

information sharing. From the viewpoint of ensuring effective responses to contingencies,

Japan will promote discussions on the scope, objectives and forms of operational cooperation

on a regular basis.

With India, Japan has established the Special Strategic and Global Partnership. In order to

reinforce strategic collaboration, while utilizing frameworks such as “2+2,” Japan will further

deepen bilateral and multilateral defense exchanges including service-to-service exchanges

in a broad range of fields including maritime security and cybersecurity, while promoting

training and exercises as well as defense equipment and technology cooperation.

With partners like the United Kingdom, France, Germany and Italy, Japan will mutually

reinforce involvement in global security issues as well as challenges in Europe and Indo
Pacific. Accordingly, Japan will build close cooperation with them by placing their alliance

with the United States built through such arrangements as the North Atlantic Treaty

Organization (NATO) as a cornerstone, and implement consultations such as “2+2,”

bilateral/multilateral training and exercises, defense equipment and technology cooperation

including the joint development of the next-generation fighter aircraft, and mutual dispatch

of vessels and aircraft. In doing so, Japan will reinforce cooperation through jointly

monitoring illicit ship-to-ship transfers by North Korea and the counter-piracy operations off

the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden.

With NATO and the European Union (EU), based on the bilateral relations with above
mentioned European countries, Japan will reinforce collaboration with regard to international

rule-makings and involvement to the security of the Indo-Pacific region.

With the Republic of Korea (ROK), in response to the nuclear and missile threats posed by

North Korea and considering the importance to strengthen the deterrence and response

capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance and the U.S.-ROK Alliance, Japan will reinforce the

21


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

collaboration among Japan, the United States and the ROK through measures including

trilateral training and exercises.

With Canada and New Zealand, Japan will promote measures including consultation at

each level, bilateral/multilateral training and exercises, and bilateral cooperation with third

parties, in a bilaterally coordinated manner in order to make further collaborate on working

the challenges in the Indo-Pacific region.

Japan will reinforce collaboration with Nordic-Baltic states, which are facing unilateral

changes to the status quo by force and such attempts, including Russia’s aggression against

Ukraine, and are working on cutting-edge initiatives such as information warfare,

cybersecurity, strategic communication and hybrid warfare. Japan will also reinforce

collaboration with Central and Eastern European countries, including the Czech Republic and

Poland, countries that show interest in strengthening their relationships with Japan.

With regards to Southeast Asian countries, Japan will support their efforts to reinforce

centrality and unity of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) through such

means as the East Asia Summit, the ASEAN Regional Forum, the ASEAN Defense Ministers'

Meeting-Plus, and the ASEAN-Japan Defense Ministers' Informal Meeting. Furthermore,

from the perspective of stabilizing the security of the Indo-Pacific region, Japan will

implement consultations at all levels, including "2+2," strategic port calls and air visits, and

bilateral/multilateral training and exercises depending on the situation of each country. In

addition, with the aim of stabilizing the region, Japan will implement transfer of defense

equipment and capacity building, which contribute to reinforcing defense capabilities of the

region.

With Mongolia, in light of its strategic importance as a democratic country geographically

located between China and Russia, Japan will promote defense equipment and technology

collaboration to elevate cooperation in the political and security fields to a new dimension,

in addition to implementing defense exchange at all levels, capacity building and multilateral

exercises.

With Central Asian countries, with which Japan has had few achievements in defense

exchanges despite the fact that these countries are located in a geopolitically important region

between Asia and Europe, Japan will accumulate defense exchanges including capacity

building in areas of mutual interest.

With Pacific Island countries, Japan, as an important partner country, will engage in

cooperation including capacity building through collaboration with countries including its

ally and like-minded countries. In doing so, Japan will also consider cooperation with

organizations other than military forces such as coast guard.

With Coastal States of the Indian Ocean and Middle Eastern countries, Japan will promote

defense cooperation, based on the importance of stable use of sea lane and an energy and

economic perspective. At the same time, Japan will also develop defense cooperation with

22


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

countries including African countries in terms of responding to global challenges. In

particular, Japan will strengthen cooperation with Djibouti and secure the long-term and

stable use of the SDF operation facility there in order to reinforce our operational base in the

region, for activities including counter-piracy and rescue and transportation of Japanese

nationals and others overseas.

While promoting collaboration with like-minded countries and others, Japan will pay

attention to communication with China and Russia.

With China, in order to build a “constructive and stable relationship,” Japan will promote

multilayered dialogues and exchanges including Japan-China security dialogue. In doing so,

Japan will continue to encourage China to play a responsible and constructive role for peace

and stability in the Indo-Pacific region, comply with international code of conduct, and

improve transparency regarding its strengthening of military capabilities buildup and its

defense policies, while also conveying the concerns Japan has in a candid manner. Japan will

also make use of the Maritime and Aerial Communication Mechanism between the Defense

Authorities of Japan-China including the hotline, in order to avoid unexpected contingencies

between the two countries.

With regard to Russia, based on the stance that unilateral changes to status quo by force

are unacceptable, Japan condemns the aggression against Ukraine to the maximum extent

possible, and will closely cooperate with the international community including G7 in taking

appropriate measures. At the same time, Japan will maintain necessary communication with

Russia, which is our neighboring country, in order not to incur unexpected contingencies and

unnecessary friction.

IV Key Capabilities for Fundamental Reinforcement of Defense Capabilities

The following are the basic concepts and contents of the seven functions and capabilities

necessary for the defense of Japan, which are derived from the comprehensive operation

concept in line with the basic policies set forth in the Strategies.

1 Stand-Off Defense Capabilities

In order to protect Japan's territory, which stretches approximately 3,000 km along the both

north-south and east-west axes: Japan will fundamentally reinforce its stand-off defense

capabilities to deal with vessels and landing forces invading Japan, including its remote

islands, from locations outside of threat zones.

First of all, Japan will possess necessary and sufficient capability in a multilayered manner

across the country to be able to disrupt and defeat these vessels and landing forces invading

Japan in multilayered manner and from various locations in Japan. Also, Japan will reinforce

capabilities that can be launched from various platforms with such diverse capabilities as

hyper velocity glides and hypersonic glides which are difficult to intercept.

23


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

To this end, by FY2027, Japan will reinforce capability to enable operation of stand-off

missiles including surface-launched and ship-launched models. In doing so, to secure

sufficient capability in prior to the establishment of increased production of domestic stand
off missile, Japan will promptly procure stand-off missiles manufactured overseas.

In the future, by approximately ten years from now, Japan will reinforce capability to

enable operation of aircraft-launched stand-off missiles and will acquire capability to operate

hyper velocity gliding missiles with irregular trajectories, hypersonic guided missiles, and

other stand-off missiles.

In addition, Japan will have the capability to persistently gather accurate target information

regarding vessels and landing forces, which is essential for stand-off defense capability, and

possess command and control-related capability to transmit the information in real time.

Japan will also possess information analysis capabilities including the evaluation of results

after a response, as well as the resiliency and redundancy of information networks.

2 Integrated Air and Missile Defense Capabilities

As a country surrounded by sea, it is extremely important for Japan to respond to airborne

threats. In recent years, along with the improvement of the capabilities of ballistic missiles,

cruise missiles, and aircraft, the emergence of anti-ship ballistic missiles, hypersonic

weapons, and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) has diversified, complicated, and advanced

this airborne threat.

To this end, Japan will fundamentally reinforce detecting, tracking and intercepting

capabilities, and establish a system to enable unified and optimized operation of various

sensors and shooters through networks to reinforce integrated air and missile defense

capabilities.

As a response to the missile attacks from opponent’s country to Japan, Japan will first

intercept missiles flying to Japan over the high seas and Japan’s territorial airspace with its

missile defense system. Subsequently, as a measure for self-defense to the minimum required

level to prevent missile attacks including ballistic missiles, Japan will utilize capabilities

including stand-off defense capabilities to enable Japan to conduct effective counterstrike in

the opponent’s territory. By having capability to conduct effective counterstrike and facilitate

interception by missile defense, Japan will restrict opponent’s missile launches and thereby

deter missile attacks from happening.

To this end, by FY2027, Japan will reinforce the capabilities of warning and control radar

and surface-to-air missile and procure Aegis System Equipped Vessels. Japan will also

reinforce the capability to respond to small UAVs with weapons including directed-energy

weapons.

By approximately ten years from now, Japan will reinforce its integrated air and missile

defense capabilities by further introducing research on capability to respond to hypersonic

24


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

weapons in the gliding phase and interception by non-kinetic means to deal with assets such

as small UAVs.

3 Unmanned Defense Capabilities

Unmanned assets are often relatively affordable compared to manned equipment and have

the great advantage of being able to minimize human loss and operate continuously for a

long period of time. Furthermore, by combining these unmanned assets with AI and manned

equipment, it can be a game-changer that fundamentally transform force structure and way

of warfare, enabling Japan to gain asymmetrical advantages in the air, sea, and underwater

domains. For this reason, these unmanned assets will be effectively utilized not only for

information gathering and surveillance, but also for a wide range of missions including

combat support. Japan will also promote initiatives to optimize the equipment system and

organization of SDF by automation and labor-saving through the mission replacement of

manned assets.

To this end, SDF will acquire practical capabilities in a wide range of missions by

introducing unmanned assets through early production and deployment or leasing by FY2027.

In particular, Japan will promote the early production and deployment of Unmanned

Underwater Vehicles (UUV) to acquire and maintain underwater superiority.

By approximately ten years from now, Japan will further materialize the style of warfare

using unmanned assets, accelerate the development and introduction of equipment based on

the geographical characteristics of Japan, and expand full-scale operation. Furthermore, SDF

will reinforce the ability to simultaneously control multiple unmanned assets using system

such as AI.

4 Cross-Domain Capabilities

It has become increasingly important for Japan to overcome inferiority in individual

domains by conducting cross-domain operations which organically fuse capabilities in all

domains including space, cyber, electromagnetic spectrum, land, sea, and airspace to

generate synergy and amplify the overall strength, and thereby ensuring Japan’s national

defense.

(1) In the space domain, MOD/SDF will reinforce it operational capabilities in the land,

sea, and air domains by proactively integrating novel form of space use including satellite

constellation, and by receiving information gathering, communication, and positioning etc.

from space. Also, in order to respond to threats to the stable use of space, MOD/SDF will

develop ground and space-based surveillance capabilities, build-up a Space Domain

Awareness (SDA) structure, and bolster the resiliency of our space assets to enable the

continuation of missions in response to various situations.

25


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

By FY2027, MOD/SDF will utilize space to develop essential infrastructure for unit

operations and enhance our SDA capability.

By approximately ten years from now, MOD/SDF will further enhance our space

operation capabilities by increasing multi-layering and redundancy in space use and also

by acquiring new space capabilities.

(2) In the cyber domain, MOD/SDF will cooperate with whole-of-government initiatives

in the field of cybersecurity, including active cyber defense. MOD/SDF will realize

advanced cybersecurity posture by shifting to a posture that is able to conduct continuous

risk management primarily on critical information systems, by significantly increasing the

number of cyber personnel particularly by utilizing external human resources who have

advanced cyber skills. MOD/SDF will protect itself from every cyber threat with these

advanced cybersecurity capabilities and will utilize these capabilities to the initiatives to

reinforce cybersecurity as a whole country.

To this end, by FY2027, MOD/SDF will establish a cybersecurity posture to secure

command and control capabilities and high-priority equipment systems even under

cyberattacks and to support cyber defense of the defense industry.

By approximately ten years from now, MOD/SDF will establish a cybersecurity posture

to secure command and control capabilities, force projection capabilities and operational

bases to perform its missions even under cyberattacks, while reinforcing its posture to

support cybersecurity of entities other than the SDF.

(3) In the electromagnetic spectrum domain, MOD/SDF will effectively function its

electronic warfare capabilities and its support capabilities while impairing opponent’s

capabilities of accomplishing missions even under a severe electromagnetic environment

including communication jamming by the opponent. Also, MOD/SDF will reinforce

electromagnetic spectrum management function for the entire SDF to utilize

electromagnetic spectrum more effectively.

(4) MOD/SDF will expand capabilities necessary to disrupt or neutralize the opponent’s

use of space, cyber, and electromagnetic spectrum domains.

(5) Regarding ground, maritime, and air defense capabilities, which are the basis of the

cross-domain operations, Japan will fundamentally reinforce these capabilities by steadily

procuring naval vessels and fighter aircrafts to maintain and enhance maritime and air

superiority, and proactively utilizing advanced technologies to promote the introduction of

a new destroyer and the development of next generation fighter aircraft, while bearing in

mind the collaboration with unmanned assets.

5 Command and Control / Intelligence-related Functions

In future, in order to win in a situation where combat is more rapid and complex, it is

necessary to ensure superiority of the decision-making process by having the commanding

26


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

officers make appropriate decisions promptly and more accurately than the opponent. For this

purpose, Japan will build networks with real-time capabilities, resiliency, and flexibility,

including the introduction of AI, and enhance command and control and intelligence-related

functions from cross-domain perspectives including the rapid and concrete realization of

ISRT.

By FY2027, Japan will develop intelligence capabilities capable of responding to hybrid

warfare and integrated information warfare with special regard to the cognitive dimension.

Japan will also develop near-real-time information gathering capabilities by utilizing assets

such as satellite constellations, etc.

By approximately ten years from now, Japan will further enhance information gathering

and analysis capabilities by utilizing various means including AI to the greatest extent. Japan

will also establish a system to share information in real time through further reinforcement

of information gathering assets.

In addition, the necessity to continuously and accurately grasp the intentions and

capabilities of Japan’s neighboring countries is more crucial than ever. To this end, Japan will

reinforce the capabilities of the Defense Intelligence Headquarters (DIH) based on functions

such as signal, imagery, human, and open-source intelligence (SIGINT, IMINT, HUMINT,

and OSINT), and fundamentally reinforce comprehensive analysis capabilities including the

utilization of geospatial intelligence (GEOINT) to effectively collect, arrange, analyze, share

and protect information, from operational intelligence to strategic intelligence. At the same

time, Japan will promote cooperation and collaboration with relevant domestic intelligence
related organizations and take necessary measures to more effectively utilize the intelligence

collected through information gathering satellites for SDF's activities.

Moreover, in order to effectively respond to integrated information warfare, including the

spread of disinformation, Japan will fundamentally reinforce the organization and functions

of MOD/SDF, and conduct information sharing and bilateral/multilateral exercises with its

ally and like-minded countries.

6 Mobile Deployment Capabilities / Civil Protection

In response to an invasion of Japan including its remote islands, Japan needs to ensure that

deployed units are always operational, and that necessary units are swiftly maneuvered and

deployed according to situations to secure maritime and air superiority and disrupt the

access/landing of units invading Japan. For this purpose, Japan will make maximum use of

civilian transportations including Private Finance Initiatives (PFI), while reinforcing

maritime and air transport capabilities of SDF.

In addition, in order to enable smooth and effective transportation and replenishment of

units through these initiatives, Japan will reinforce the logistic posture through integrations,

expansion of airport and seaport facilities usage capacity in the southwestern region, where

27


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

remote islands are particularly concentrated, and conduct improvement of logistics

capabilities, while proactively promoting the modernization of logistics bases located

throughout the country.

SDF will not only defeat the infringements upon remote islands but also carry out civil

protection missions by utilizing its reinforced mobile deployment capabilities for evacuating

residents.

To this end, by FY2027, Japan will reinforce its transportation capabilities by measures

such as expanding the use of PFI vessels, thereby acquiring the ability to quickly build up

defense posture in the southwestern region and working to expedite the evacuation of

residents.

By approximately ten years from now, Japan will have further reinforced its transport

capabilities and accelerated transport and replenishment through the improvement of supply

bases.

7 Sustainability and Resiliency

(1) In order to defend Japan in the future, the current warfighting sustainability of SDF is

not necessarily sufficient in the form of ammunitions and fuel, and the number of

operationally available equipment. It is necessary to squarely address these realities and

strive to ensure and maintain sufficient war sustainability so that SDF can continue

persistent activities in contingencies, which serves as an effective deterrent. Therefore,

Japan will improve ammunition production capacity, secure ammunition storage

commensurate with the amount of ammunition produced, promptly acquire necessary,

sufficient ammunition, promptly ensure necessary and sufficient amount of fuel required,

and establish a system to enable operation of all equipment except those under planned

maintenance.

To this end, by FY2027, Japan will resolve the situation of shortage of ammunition. Also,

Japan will reinforce its production posture for high-priority ammunition and install more

ammunition storage facilities. Furthermore, Japan will resolve parts shortages and ensure

that all equipment except those under planned maintenance are operationally available.

By approximately ten years from now, Japan will maintain appropriate inventory of

ammunition and parts and complete the installation of further ammunition storage facilities.

Regarding defense equipment, Japan will maintain appropriate stock of parts including

those for new equipment.

(2) Furthermore, in order to ensure the safety of SDF personnel on a daily basis and

preventing an easy loss of operational capabilities even in a contingency, Japan will

promote measures such as making major command headquarters underground and

reinforcing their structures, relocate and consolidate facilities ensuring stand-off distance,

and steady construct barracks and housing and maintain aging buildings. Moreover, Japan

28


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

will conceal and deceive equipment to improve resiliency.

In addition, the issue of climate change, including responses to future energy shifts, will

inevitably further impact future MOD/SDF operations, including various plans, facilities,

defense equipment and security environment surrounding Japan, which demand Japan to

deal with a variety of issues related to these matters.

To this end, by FY2027, Japan will promote measures to construct underground

command headquarters, and relocating and consolidating facilities in major bases and

camps to improve resiliency of respective facilities. In addition, Japan will promote

reinforcement of facilities and infrastructure against disasters such as tsunamis, starting

from bases and camps that are anticipated to be damaged significantly and are important

for operations.

By approximately ten years from now, Japan will have further improved resiliency of

defense facilities.

(3) In order to save the lives of SDF personnel and mitigate risks to their person, and

thereby enabling them to respond to an invasion of Japan for a longer period of time and

with greater strength, Japan will reinforce emergency relief capabilities and transform

medical functions by developing a seamless medical care and transportation system from

the frontlines to the final rear destination, increasing the chances of survival for each

personnel.

V The Future of Self-Defense Forces

1 Role of SDF in the seven key fields

In the seven fields of key capabilities for fundamental reinforcement of defense

capabilities, Ground, Maritime and Air Self-Defense Force (GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF) will

fulfill the following roles.

Regarding stand-off defense capabilities, GSDF, MSDF and ASDF will build required and

sufficient number of launching stand-off missiles from vehicle, ship and aircraft capable of

diverse responses from outside of the threat envelope and against vessels and landing forces

invading Japan.

Regarding integrated air and missile defense capabilities, as a basic role, MSDF destroyers

will assume interception in the upper layer and GSDF and ASDF will assume interception by

surface-to-air missiles in the lower layer, and Japan will reinforce capabilities to respond to

future airborne threats such as hypersonic weapons. Also, each SDF services will utilize

capabilities such as stand-off defense capabilities etc. as counterstrike capabilities.

Regarding unmanned defense capabilities, GSDF, MSDF and ASDF will significantly

reinforce their defense capabilities in unmanned aerial, maritime, underwater and ground

assets in accordance with their respective division of roles, concurrent to their review of

existing units.

29


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

Regarding cross-domain operations, in the space domain, ASDF will reinforce various

functions including space situational awareness. In the cyber domain, MOD/SDF as a whole

will reinforce its capabilities to contribute to the reinforcement of cybersecurity of the entire

country; and in particular, GSDF will play a core role to expand foundations such as for

human resource development. In the electromagnetic spectrum domain, GSDF, MSDF and

ASDF will acquire and reinforce defense equipment for the electromagnetic warfare and also

promote introduction of equipment for deception utilizing electromagnetic spectrum. Also,

in light of the rapid buildup of conventional forces of neighboring countries, Japan will

continue to enhance the quality and quantity of ground, maritime and air defense equipment

for conducting cross-domain operations in cooperation with the capabilities in the above
mentioned domains.

Regarding command and control and intelligence-related functions, Japan will reinforce

the information gathering capabilities of GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF, accelerate decision
making based on gathered information, and develop a network that enables definite command

and control. Also, Japan will fundamentally reinforce the intelligence functions of the DIH,

including the ISRT required for the operation of stand-off missiles, and reinforce

collaboration with the command and control function.

Regarding mobile deployment capabilities and civil protection, Japan will reinforce SDF’s

mobile deployment capabilities by securing medium-sized and small vessels by GSDF,

transport vessels by MSDF, and transport aircraft by ASDF to rapidly deploy units to remote

islands, when an invasion against Japan is predicted. Additionally, GSDF will reinforce its

architecture including unit reinforcement for the protection of civilians in Okinawa.

Regarding sustainability and resiliency, GSDF, MSDF and ASDF will secure the necessary

amount of ammunitions, fuel and mobile equipment on a daily basis, to allow for SDF’s

continuous operation, and improve the resiliency of defense facilities, which serve as the

foundation for exercising capabilities.

2 Concept of developing SDF architecture

Based on the roles in seven fields as mentioned above, development of joint operational

architecture as well as development of architectures of GSDF, MSDF, ASDF and DIH will

be conducted in following basic concepts.

In order to reinforce effectiveness of joint operational posture, Japan will establish a

permanent Joint Headquarters which can unify command of GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF by

reviewing the existing organization. Furthermore, Japan will promote defense equipment

system benefitting joint operation.

GSDF will develop a system to reinforce cross-domain operation capabilities and disrupt

invading forces from a distance by reinforcing surface-launched stand-off defense capability,

which has many advantages, maintain sustainability and resiliency, reinforce rapid maneuver

30


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

and disperse deployment capabilities to islands located in Southwestern areas, introduce

unmanned assets, improving integrated air and missile defense capabilities including

response to drones, and place importance in command and control and intelligence-related

functions, including necessary for disperse deployed units.

In light of increasing missile threats in recent years, MSDF will develop a system to

reinforce air-defense capability, promote labor-saving and automation measures, reinforce

integrated information warfare capability, ensure superiority underwater, reinforce stand-off

defense capabilities and surface rear support capability, and enable persistent unit operation

that require high level of speed and activity. In particular, MSDF will develop a system which

will allow acquiring and sustaining superiority in underwater which is an important factor in

cross-domain operations.

In order to persistently execute tasks through resilient and flexible operations under a high
threat environment, ASDF will develop a system which can reinforce quality and quantity of

air defense capability, maintain effective stand-off defense capabilities, ensure effective

missile and air-defense posture, and introduce various unmanned assets. Also, ASDF will be

renewed as the Air and Space Self-Defense Force, reinforcing its space operation capability

and developing a system to ensure superiority in use of space.

In addition to collecting and analyzing SIGINT, IMINT, HUMINT, OSINT, etc., DIH will

assume the central role of responding to integrated information warfare concerning the

defense of Japan and fundamentally reinforce the capability to grasp military activities of

other countries in a persistent, continuous and accurate manner and analyzing and

disseminating them. Furthermore, in line with the reinforcement of cross-domain operation

capabilities and stand-off defense capabilities, DIH will reinforce existing capabilities and

ensure seamless cooperation and collaboration with other relevant organizations.

MOD/SDF will fundamentally reinforce its architecture to contribute to the cybersecurity

of Japan as a whole country, in line with the Government's initiatives in the field of

cybersecurity including active cyber defense.

3 Reinforcing policy-making function

For SDF to fully exert its capabilities and respond to the increasingly severe, complex, and

rapid-paced strategic environment, strategic and agile defense policy planning and making

are required, including in domains such as space, cyber and electromagnetic spectrum, and

MOD/SDF will fundamentally reinforce its functions. In this regard, MOD/SDF will

establish a consultation framework to obtain policy advice from experts. Furthermore,

MOD/SDF will strengthen its posture to comprehensively advance future ways of warfare

for SDF and utilize and nurture cutting-edge technologies and apply those technologies to

defense equipment necessary for future SDF operations from a strategic perspective, while

closely cooperating with relevant ministries and agencies, private research institutions, and

31


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

private companies particularly defense industry as their core. Furthermore, in order to

promote such efforts and support the formulation of policies, Japan will review and reinforce

the research system of MOD/SDF led by the National Institute for Defense Studies and

reinforce its functions as an intellectual base.

VI Protection of Life, Person and Property of Japanese Nationals / Measures for International

Security Cooperation

1 Measures for protection of life, person and property of Japanese nationals

Situations that Japan must be prepared for are not limited to unilateral changes to the status

quo by force and such attempts and an invasion of Japan. Large-scale terrorist attacks and

related attacks on critical infrastructures including nuclear power plants, large-scale disasters

such as earthquakes and typhoons, and infectious disease crisis caused by COVID-19 are

serious threats to the life, person and property of Japanese nationals, and Japan must respond

to them with its utmost efforts.

As such, MOD/SDF, in close cooperation with relevant organization such as the police,

Japan Coast Guard, firefighting services, and local governments, will respond to large-scale

terrorist attacks and attacks against critical infrastructures by utilizing fundamentally

reinforced defense capabilities, and in the event of a large-scale disaster, will protect lives,

conduct emergency recovery, and provide livelihood support. Furthermore, in the event of

natural disasters or civil disturbances overseas, MOD/SDF will work closely with the

diplomatic authorities to promptly and accurately rescue and transport Japanese nationals.

In order to utilize defense capabilities and smoothly implement such response, it is

essential to establish a collaborative framework with relevant organizations from peacetime.

Japan will conduct comprehensive training with relevant local governments and

infrastructure business enterprises in order to ensure the effectiveness of response plans.

Japan will also leverage such coordination to facilitate initiatives for civil protection,

including evacuation guidance for residents, when an invasion of Japan is predicted.

2 Measures for international security cooperation

Peace, stability, and prosperity of the international community must be ensured for the

peace and security of Japan. For this reason, it is necessary for MOD/SDF to utilize

fundamentally reinforced defense capabilities, and, from the perspective of proactive

contribution to peace bound to international cooperation, Japan must make proactive efforts

towards resolving conflicts and confrontations around the world and responding to global

challenges such as humanitarian assistance and disaster relief in the event of large-scale

international disasters caused by climate change, non-proliferation of weapons of mass

destruction and others.

Regarding International Peace Cooperation Activities including International

32


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

Peacekeeping Cooperation Assignments such as UN Peacekeeping Operations (PKO) and

International Disaster Relief Activities, in line with the Legislation for Peace and Security,

Japan will conduct activities with a focus on the areas where Japan has advantages such as

engineering and medicine, while collecting detailed information using intelligence-related

functions even in remote areas, and swiftly transferring the necessary units using mobile

deployment capabilities as necessary. Furthermore, Japan will continue to dispatch SDF

personnel to local mission headquarters, taking advantage of the characteristics of Japan's

SDF personnel with high levels of expertise. In addition, Japan will make the best use of

accumulated experience and will provide capacity building.

From the perspective of improving the security environment surrounding Japan, Japan will

also promote initiatives for arms control, disarmament, and non-proliferation of weapons of

mass destruction such as nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons in cooperation with

relevant countries and international organizations. In doing so, Japan will utilize the

knowledge of MOD/SDF to improve the effectiveness of international organizations and

multilateral export control regimes.

VII Defense Production and Technology Bases as Virtually Integral Part of Defense Capability

Defense production and technology bases are indispensable foundation for a country to

secure the research, development, production and procurement of defense equipment in a stable

manner on its own and to incorporate the cutting-edge technology necessary for new ways of

warfare into defense equipment; it is virtually defense capability itself, and its reinforcement is

essential. Therefore, Japan will promote initiatives such as building a strong and sustainable

defense industry necessary for a new way of warfighting, dealing with various risks, and

expanding sales channels. Regarding whole-of-government initiatives such as protecting the

supply-chain for general-purpose products, and managing the security of sensitive technologies

and information security for civilian cutting-edge fields, MOD will implement measures

necessary for defense purposes and will also collaborate with the initiatives of relevant

ministries and agencies.

1 Reinforcing defense production base

Japan's defense industry is important, considered as a partner responsible for national

defense along with MOD/SDF in terms of securing equipment for SDF to carry out its

missions, and it is necessary to maintain and reinforce the capability to produce high

performance equipment and secure high operational rates. To this end, in the defense industry,

Japan will secure not only advanced technological capabilities and quality control capabilities

through reinforcing the defense technology base, but also the production, sustainment,

maintenance, repair, and capacity improvement of defense equipment.

In order to ensure that the defense industry can play this significant role, Japan will

33


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

reinforce the bases including the entire supply chain. In doing so, Japan aims to make business

attractive by introducing a new profit margin calculation method to appropriately evaluate

the cost management and quality control of the defense industry to secure appropriate profits,

while promoting measures to maintain and reinforce existing supply chains and promote the

entry of new suppliers.

Additionally, Japan will place more emphasis on the viewpoint of maintaining and

strengthening the domestic base in acquiring defense equipment, and strive for technological,

qualitative, and production-time improvements while ensuring predictability for companies,

and if there are no other means available even after taking these measures, Japan will consider

the owning manufacturing facilities and others itself.

Furthermore, Japan will deal with supply chain risks in the defense industry, while

reinforcing industrial security including cybersecurity based on international standards, as

well as strengthening the security of sensitive technologies. From these perspectives, Japan

will work with the defense authorities of the ally, like-minded countries and others to engage

in initiatives such as supply chain protection and sensitive technology security relating to the

defense industry.

2 Reinforcing technology bases

In order to acquire defense equipment required for the new way of warfare, the use of our

domestic technologies is extremely important. Therefore, MOD/SDF scrutinizes proposals

made by the defense-related companies to see technological potential for the new way of

warfare. MOD/SDF will proactively promote initiatives to accelerate efforts to achieve

operational capability of future defense equipment technologies solely used for defense

equipment, their in-house research results, as well as dual-use technologies from non-defense

industries. For projects which are particularly urgent and significant from a policy perspective,

MOD/SDF will further accelerate R&D, and operationalize R&D results, by being willing to

take risks under the assumption of expected outcomes.

In addition, MOD/SDF will reinforce initiatives to deploy necessary equipment by

improving specifications while operating prototype units.

Furthermore, from the defense technology base perspective, Japan will promote

cooperation and collaboration with its ally, like-minded countries and others by leading

international joint development as means to acquire equipment which will benefit the defense

of Japan.

Moreover, MOD/SDF will establish a framework for actively exploiting cutting-edge

civilian technologies developed by start-up companies, domestic research institutions, and

academia, and will utilize a whole-of-government mechanism for comprehensively

strengthening defense architecture.

Through the scrap-and-build of Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Agency (ATLA’s)

34


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

research and development related organization, Japan will establish a new research institution

in MOD to find multi-use cutting-edge technologies that contribute to defense equipment

development, and to produce equipment that leads to defense innovation; Japan will also

expand and enhance systems to comprehensively consider and promote the utilization of

cutting-edge technology in terms of policy, operation and technology. In order to increase

predictability under this system, Japan will, based on new ways of warfare, strategically

publicize information on the technology fields that Japan will focus on and its outlook for

research and development.

3 Promoting transfer of defense equipment and technology

Transfer of defense equipment and technology overseas is a key policy instrument to

ensure peace and stability, especially in the Indo-Pacific region, to deter unilateral changes

to the status quo by force, to create a desirable security environment for Japan, and to provide

assistance to countries that are subject to aggression in violation of international law, use of

force, or threat of force. From this perspective, the Three Principles on Transfer of Defense

Equipment and Technology, its Implementation Guidelines, and other systems are to be

considered for revisions in order to promote smooth transfer of defense equipment and

technology of high security significance and international joint development in a broad array

of fields. In doing so, the necessity, requirements, and transparency of the related procedures

for transfer of defense equipment and technology will be under adequate consideration, while

maintaining the three principles themselves. In addition, Japan will carry forward with the

transfer of defense equipment and technology in the joint public and private efforts by

establishing a fund, and implementing measures including providing corporate assistance as

necessary to smoothly promote such transfers.

VIII Reinforcing Foundation for SDF Personnel, the Core Element of Defense Capability, to

Demonstrate their Abilities

1 Reinforcing human resource base

The core element of defense capability is SDF personnel. In order to realize fundamental

reinforcement of defense capability, MOD/SDF will secure necessary SDF personnel without

increasing capacity. MOD/SDF must create an environment that enables all SDF personnel

to demonstrate their own abilities while maintaining high morale and pride, in light of the

fact that SDF personnel are required to have more knowledge, skills and experience than

before and are required to be well-grounded so as to not to be deceived by disinformation,

etc. MOD/SDF will continue to work on improving living and work environments, improving

treatment, promoting measures concerning honors and privileges, expanding support for

families including collaboration with the families of SDF personnel and related organizations,

fostering an environment in which female SDF personnel can play a more active role through

35


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

flexible personnel management, promoting work-life balance, and enhancing re-employment

support for uniformed SDF personnel who retire at a younger age, etc. In particular, it is

necessary to give a certain level of consideration to SDF personnel who work in demanding

environments in which high readiness and long-term missions are required and are socially

isolated. In addition, each SDF personnel must recognize anew that harassment shakes the

foundation of SDF, a human organization, and develops an organizational environment of

zero tolerance for any harassment. These initiatives are important not only for preventing the

decline of warfighting capabilities due to mid-career retirement but also for securing qualified

human resources.

Regarding recruitment, MOD/SDF will further reinforce SDF recruitment capabilities to

secure the necessary number of high-quality human resources. At the same time, MOD/SDF

will further raise the retirement age and expand the re-enrollment of retired uniformed SDF

personnel to effectively utilize experienced skills, while considering the maintenance of

military strength. Furthermore, MOD/SDF will promote flexible human resource utilization

and secure human resources from a wide range of areas, including personnel in the private

sector with specialized knowledge and skills such as in the cyber domain. In particular,

MOD/SDF will implement comprehensive measures that contribute to securing human

resources, such as crew members with low sufficiency rates in naval vessels and radar site

surveillance personnel. Regarding SDF Reserve Personnel and others, which supplement

active SDF personnel, MOD/SDF will review its system and reinforce its architecture to

drastically increase recruitment including in the cyber domain. In addition, MOD/SDF will

reinforce cooperation with retired SDF personnel and others.

With regard to the development of the human resources that SDF has recruited, MOD/SDF

will reskill SDF personnel and reinforce the educational infrastructure such as the National

Defense Academy and respective SDF educational institutions. In this regard, MOD/SDF will

focus on the cyber domain and other fields requiring high expertise as well as reinforcing

education and research on joint operations in particular, and implement measures to

effectively utilize personnel with scarce and valuable expertise. Furthermore, MOD civilian

officials and others play an important role not only in supporting the activities of SDF as an

element of defense capability but also in fundamentally reinforcing defense capability,

designing policies associated with the fundamental reinforcement, and providing operational

support to units. Therefore, MOD/SDF will work to reinforce the human resource base by

securing the civilian officials, technical and engineering officials, and others necessary for

this purpose and by further considering necessary systems.

In this way, MOD/SDF will implement bold measures focusing on the entire life cycle of

SDF personnel, while considering the creation of an organizational environment that enables

SDF personnel to demonstrate their abilities even when they are in the middle of various life

events including childbirth, childcare, and nursing care.

36


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

2 Transformation of medical function

Regarding SDF medical force, MOD/SDF has been placing importance on sustaining

health of SDF personnel, but from the perspective of sustainability and resiliency, MOD/SDF

will transform SDF medical force into an organization that saves the lives of SDF personnel

who carry out their missions in a contingency in spite of danger.

For the purpose, MOD/SDF will develop a joint operations capability by unifying medical

roles and functions common to all SDF services so that SDF can respond to various situations

and undertake diverse missions both in Japan and abroad and build a posture to mobilize the

full strength of SDF's medical force including the National Defense Medical College, and

promote fundamental reforms to improve the combat trauma care capabilities.

In this regard, MOD/SDF will establish a seamless posture for medical care and evacuation

from the frontlines to the destination hospital, while clarifying the role of each medical

establishment from the frontlines of southwestern region to the hospitals in Honshu and other

islands, and standardize medical equipment and materials for transportation, and develop a

system to share medical information necessary for medical care and transportation across the

country including in the frontlines. In addition, MOD/SDF will reinforce SDF units' first aid

capabilities, secure medical equipment and materials including blood and oxygen that are

essential for combat trauma care, and develop a medical base in the southwestern region.

Furthermore, MOD/SDF will reinforce education and research on combat trauma care in

the National Defense Medical College and improve management necessary to further

enhance the clinical experience of medical and nursing officers. In addition, MOD/SDF will

complement the clinical experience of medical and nursing officers through active external

training. Based on this, MOD/SDF will enhance the common knowledge and skills of

respective components of SDF through integrated education and training on combat trauma

care.

IX Points of Attention

1. This Strategy, under the National Security Strategy, will be implemented in alignment with

strategies in other fields. The National Security Council regularly and systematically will

evaluate whether the approach and means to achieve defense objectives are taken

appropriately, especially whether the strengthening of the defense architecture of the whole

country is surely implemented. In addition, Japan will constantly evaluate the capabilities

necessary for building defense capabilities that can effectively deal with changes in the

security environment, particularly focusing on opponent’s capabilities, based on joint

operational concepts.

2. The fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities based on the strategy must be

37


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 28, 2022]

maintained and reinforced in the future. To this end, Japan will continuously consider how to

fundamentally reinforce defense capabilities from a mid- to long-term perspective.

3. The strategy will be executed approximately over the coming decade; should Japan expect

any significant changes including in international situation and trends in technological level,

it will make necessary revisions.

38


-----

