Provisional Translation

**National Security Strategy of Japan**

December, 2022

**I Purpose**

The international community is facing changes defining an era. We are reminded once
again that globalization and interdependence alone cannot serve as a guarantor for peace
and development across the globe. The free, open, and stable international order, which
expanded worldwide in the post-Cold War era, is now at stake with serious challenges
amidst historical changes in power balances and intensifying geopolitical competitions.
Meanwhile, a host of issues such as climate change and infectious disease crises are
emerging, requiring cross-border cooperation among nations. Today, we are in an era
where confrontation and cooperation are intricately intertwined in international relations.

To date, advanced democratic countries, including Japan, have devoted themselves to
upholding universal values such as freedom, democracy, respect for fundamental human
rights, and the rule of law, and to spearheading the effort to shape the international society
of coexistence and coprosperity. Numerous countries around the world, including
developing countries, have also enjoyed the fruits of international peace, stability, and
economic development in this globalized world rooted in such order.
At the same time, however, dissatisfaction stemming from widening economic
disparities and other factors are generating renewed feelings of tensions at the domestic
level and even in inter-state relations. Guided by their own historical views and values,
some nations, not sharing universal values, are making attempts to revise the existing

international order. In the course of almost a century, humanity has invested itself in
defining a fundamental international principle of the general prohibition of the use of
force. Yet, a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council (hereinafter
referred to as the "UN Security Council"), which has the primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security, has overtly trampled on this very principle.
This is coupled with ongoing unilateral changes to the status quo and such attempts at sea.
In addition, some states, not sharing universal values, are exploiting unique approaches
to rapidly develop their economies and science technologies, and then, in some areas, are
gaining superiorities over those states that have defended academic freedom and marketeconomy principles. These moves challenge the existing international order, thereby
intensifying geopolitical competitions in international relations. In the face of that, many
developing and other nations are striving to avoid embroiling themselves in geopolitical
competitions. We are even observing that some states are now following the lead of those

1


-----

Provisional Translation

not sharing universal values.
At a time when geopolitical competition is intensifying, issues are arising elsewhere in
the world which call for global cooperation at large. We live in an era where there is a
greater imperative than ever before for the international community to rally together in
cooperation beyond differences in values, conflicts of interest, and others for the sake of
taking on those global challenges that transcend national borders and put the very
existence of humankind at risk such as climate change and infectious disease crises.
Turning our eyes to the neighboring region, Japan’s security environment is as severe

and complex as it has ever been since the end of World War II. Russia's aggression against
Ukraine has easily breached the very foundation of the rules that shape the international
order. The possibility cannot be precluded that a similar serious situation may arise in the
future in the Indo-Pacific region, especially in East Asia. Across the globe, historical
changes in power balances, particularly in the Indo-Pacific region, are occurring. In
addition, in the vicinity of Japan, military buildups, including of nuclear weapons and
missiles, are rapidly advancing, coupled with mounting pressures by unilaterally
changing the status quo by force. Moreover, grey zone situations over territories, crossborder cyberattacks on critical civilian infrastructures, and information warfare through
spread of disinformation, are constantly taking place, thereby further blurring the
boundary between contingency and peacetime. Furthermore, the scope of national
security has expanded to include those fields previously considered non-military such as
economic, technological and others, and thus the boundary between military and nonmilitary fields is no longer clear-cut either.
Japan also faces difficult domestic challenges such as a declining and aging population

with a low fertility rate and a severe fiscal condition. With a view to resolving these
challenging economic and social agendas at home and to bringing about economic growth,
Japan must ensure an international environment that is conducive to facilitating crossborder economic and social activities such as trade of goods, energy, and food which are
essential for industries, and the movement of people.
We live in the world of a historical inflection point and in the face of the most severe
and complex security environment since the end of WWII. Against this backdrop, Japan
must protect its own national interests, including the peace, security and prosperity of
Japan, the safety of its people, and the coexistence and coprosperity of the international
community by steadfastly preparing for the worst-case scenario, including fundamental
reinforcement of its defense capabilities. To this end, we will strive to proactively foster
a desirable security environment for Japan by carrying out vigorous diplomacy. In
addition, possessing defense capabilities, which enable Japan to firmly defend itself on

2


-----

Provisional Translation

its own, will indeed bolster the solid footing of Japan's diplomacy.
To achieve these objectives, Japan needs a strategy that integrates its national responses
at a higher level by taking a panoramic view of the diverse dimensions of international
relations as a whole, where confrontation and cooperation are intricately intertwined,
including geopolitical competition and responses to global-scale challenges, and then by
taking full advantage of comprehensive national power, including diplomatic, defense,
economic, technological, and intelligence capabilities. From this standpoint, the
Government of Japan hereby sets forth the National Security Strategy as its supreme

national security policy document. The Strategy provides strategic guidance for Japan’s
national security policy areas, including diplomacy, defense, economic security,
technology, cyber, maritime, space, intelligence, official development assistance (ODA),
and energy.
Japan’s first-ever National Security Strategy (decided by the National Security Council
and approved by the Cabinet Decision on December 17, 2013) was formulated in 2013.
Guided by the policy of Proactive Contribution to Peace based on the principle of the
international cooperation, the Legislation for Peace and Security was enacted. By so
doing, the Government has put arrangements in place where Japan can seamlessly
respond to situations concerning security. While maintaining the fundamental principles
of the Japanese national security, grounded in these arrangements, the strategic guidance
and policies under this Strategy will dramatically transform Japan’s national security
policy after the end of WWII from the aspect of its execution.
Meanwhile, the exercise of power as a nation begins with the determination of its
people. In order to steadily execute the Strategy, which encompasses a broad range of

fields beyond the traditional boundaries of diplomacy and defense, it is essential for the
Government to gain the understanding and cooperation of its people regarding the content
and execution of the Strategy and to foster an environment in which they can voluntarily
and proactively participate in Japan's security policy.
The Strategy consists of the following:
The Strategy first outlines Japan's national interests, which should serve as the starting
point in defining a national security strategy. Then, based on these national interests, the
Strategy lays out basic principles concerning Japan's national security that have been
nurtured over the course of the postwar security history and experiences as well as by the
choices of the Japanese people. Additionally, it presents the current security environment
surrounding Japan and its security challenges. On this basis, it sets out national security
objectives that Japan should achieve, and identifies ways and means, namely through
strategic approaches, by which it can deliver on the objectives through capitalizing on the

3


-----

Provisional Translation

Japanese comprehensive national power. Then, the Strategy puts forward various
foundations of Japan, which sustain the execution of the strategic approaches.

**Ⅱ Japan’s National Interests**
Japan’s national interests to be preserved and developed are listed below:
1. Japan will maintain its sovereignty and independence, defend its territorial integrity,
and secure the safety of life, person, and properties of its nationals. Japan will ensure
its survival while maintaining its own peace and security grounded in freedom and

democracy and preserving its rich culture and traditions. Furthermore, Japan and its
nationals will continue to strive so that Japan and its nationals are respected and
favorably regarded around the world.
2. Japan will achieve the prosperity of Japan and its nationals through economic growth,
thereby consolidating its own peace and security. And, while working to realize
Japan's economic prosperity, Japan will maintain and strengthen an open and stable
international economic order and achieve an international environment in which
Japan and other countries can coexist and prosper together.
3. Japan will maintain and protect universal values, such as freedom, democracy,
respect for fundamental human rights and the rule of law, and international order
based on international law. In particular, Japan will maintain and develop a free and
open international order, especially in the Indo-Pacific region where Japan is situated.

**III Fundamental Principles Concerning Japan's National Security**
As a prerequisite for the execution of Japan’s national security policy in pursuit of
protecting its national interests, the following are the fundamental principles concerning
Japan’s national security.
1. Japan will maintain the policy of “Proactive Contribution to Peace” based on
international cooperation. In order to further embody this principle in the
international community and to protect our own national interests in the time ahead,
and based on the recognition that the primary responsibility for defending Japan lies
with itself, Japan will squarely face the ever-changing security environment by
decisively taking on necessary reforms and reinforcing our national security
capabilities and roles.
2. Japan will execute its security policy in a manner that maintains and upholds
universal values such as freedom, democracy, respect for fundamental human rights,
and the rule of law. As one of the most mature and stable advanced democratic
countries in the world, even amidst a complex and severe security environment,
Japan will strive to maintain and uphold universal values and principles in

4


-----

Provisional Translation

cooperation with other countries, and lead the international community by example.
3. As a peace-loving nation, Japan will adhere to the basic policy of maintaining an
exclusively national defense-oriented policy, not becoming a military power that
poses a threat to other countries, and observing the Three Non-Nuclear Principles.
4. The Japan-U.S. Alliance, including the provision of extended deterrence, will remain
the cornerstone of Japan's national security policy.
5. Japan will attach importance to coexistence and coprosperity alongside other
countries, cooperation with like-minded countries, and multilateral cooperation.

**IV Security Environment Surrounding Japan and Japan’s National Security**
**Challenges**
In defining its national security objectives, the security environment surrounding Japan
and its national security challenges are listed below.

**1.** **Global Security Environment and Challenges**
(1) Since the formation of the previous National Security Strategy in 2013, the
international community has consistently gone through rapid changes, in
conjunction with the center of gravity of global power shifting to the IndoPacific region, where Japan is situated. These changes are likely to carry on
over the medium-to-long term and to have historical consequences that will
transform the nature of the international community.
(2) Many opportunities and benefits are presented worldwide such as economic
development, technological innovation, people-to-people exchanges, and the

creation of new cultures. At the same time, however, it is becoming
increasingly difficult for the United States, Japan's ally with the world's
greatest comprehensive power, and international frameworks such as the G7
to manage risks in the international community and to maintain and develop
a free and open international order. The United Nations, which should
embody the will of the international community at large, has experienced a
round of confrontation and thus has not fully lived up to fulfilling its functions.
This is largely due to the fact that nations, not sharing universal values, or
political and economic systems based on such values in common, are
expanding their influences, thereby manifesting risks around the globe.
Specifically, some states, which do not exclude the policy of increasing their
own national interests at the expense of others, are expanding their influence
through both military and non-military means, attempting to unilaterally

5


-----

Provisional Translation

change the status quo, and accelerating actions to challenge the international
order. Such moves have sharpened competition and confrontation among
states in wide-ranging areas, including military, diplomatic, economic, and
technological fields, and have shaken the foundation of the international order.
As a result, the current international security environment has become
complex and severe, one where inter-state relations and interests of each and
every nation are intertwined with each other in a mosaic-like manner.

(3) The following are prominent examples of the complexity and severity of the

current international security environment.
(i) Unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts against the
territorial sovereignty and others of other nations are taking place, combined
with military and non-military means. In particular, Russia's aggression against
Ukraine constitutes a serious violation of international law prohibiting the use of
force, and shakes the very foundation of the international order.
(ii) In cyber, maritime, space, and electromagnetic domains, and other areas, the
risks that impede free access to and utilization of these areas are becoming
increasingly serious. In particular, the threat of cyberattacks, in which the risk of
exposure is relatively low and attackers have an advantage, is growing rapidly.
Cyberattacks have been used constantly to disable or destroy critical
infrastructures, interfere in foreign elections, demand ransoms, and steal
sensitive information, even in the form of state-sponsored cyberattacks. It is
highly likely that hybrid warfare, combining military and non-military means to
achieve military objectives such as information warfare which utilizes the spread

of disinformation prior to an armed attack, will be conducted in an even more
sophisticated form in the time ahead.
(iii) Addressing those issues not necessarily deemed as security targets in the past,
such as supply chain vulnerabilities, increasing threats to critical infrastructures,
and leadership struggles over advanced technologies, has also become a major
security challenge. As a result, the scope of security has expanded to include the
economic sector, making economic measures even more necessary to ensure
security.
(iv) In the field of international trade and economic cooperation, which in principle
should be mutually beneficial, some nations are trying to expand their own
influence by economically coercing other nations through such means as
restricting the exports of mineral resources, food, and industrial and medical
supplies, as well as providing loans to other nations in a manner that ignores their

6


-----

Provisional Translation

debt sustainability.
(v) As major nations increase competition in advanced technology research and the
use of its outcomes for security and other purposes, some nations are illegally
stealing information related to advanced technologies developed by private
companies, universities, and other organizations in other countries and using it
for their own military purposes.
(vi) Due to the changing power balances and diversifying values around the world,
strong leadership is being lost in the global governance structure at large. As a

result, the international community is presented with greater difficulties to rally
together in taking on common challenges such as climate change, free trade,
arms control, disarmament, non-proliferation, terrorism, global health including
measures against infectious diseases, and food and energy issues. In addition,
vulnerable countries in the Middle East, Africa, and the Pacific Islands are
disproportionally suffering large damages from extreme weather and reduction
of land area due to climate change, the global spread of infectious diseases, and
shortages of food and energy.

**2.** **Security Environment and Challenges in the Indo-Pacific Region**
The global security environment and challenges articulated above are particularly
prominent in the Indo-Pacific region, where Japan is situated, and its severity may be on
the rise in the future. In this regard, the security environment and challenges in the IndoPacific region, including notable trends of countries and regions in particular, are as
follows.

**(1) Overview of Security in the Indo-Pacific Region**
The Indo-Pacific region is the core of global vitality, home to more than half of
the world's population. The dynamism of the intersection of the Pacific and the
Indian Oceans is a growth engine for the global economy. Japan, situated in this
region, is well positioned to benefit from this.
At the same time, the Indo-Pacific region faces a host of security challenges. For
example, several nations and regions that possess large military forces, including
nuclear weapons, do not share universal values, nor political and economic systems
based on such universal values. There exists a complex intertwining of diplomatic
and other relations based on historical backgrounds. In addition, Japan faces threats
and challenges of various types and intensities, such as unilateral changes to the status
quo and such attempts in the East and South China Seas and other areas, piracy,
terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and natural disasters.

7


-----

Provisional Translation

Guided by the vision of a Free and Open Indo-Pacific (hereinafter referred to as
"FOIP"), in the Indo-Pacific region, Japan has the vital importance of striving to
realize a free and open international order based on the rule of law and securing
regional peace and stability in cooperation with its ally, like-minded countries and
others.

**(2) China’s Activities in the Area of Security**
China has set clear goals to achieve "the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation,"
the full completion of "building China into a great modern socialist country" by the

middle of this century, and the prompt buildup of the People's Liberation Army to be
elevated to "world-class standards." Under these national goals, China has been
increasing its defense expenditures at a continuously high level and extensively and
rapidly enhancing its military power, including its nuclear and missile capabilities,
without sufficient transparency.
In addition, China has intensified its attempts to unilaterally change the status quo
by force in the maritime and air domains including in the East and South China Seas,
such as its intrusions into the territorial waters and airspace around the Senkaku
Islands, and has expanded and intensified its military activities that affect Japan’s
national security in the Sea of Japan, the Pacific Ocean, and other areas as well.
Furthermore, China is strengthening its strategic ties with Russia and attempting to
challenge the international order.
The international community strongly urges China, the second largest economy in
the world and one of the major countries leading today’s global economy, to make
further efforts to address global issues, including climate change, in a manner

befitting its international influence. Yet, China does not participate in international
frameworks in which other major official creditor nations take part in together, and
its development finance and other related activities lack adequate transparency. In
addition, China is redoubling its strategic efforts to establish its security in the
economic field, and there have been instances of China taking advantage of other
countries' dependence on China to exert economic pressure on other countries.
While maintaining its policy of peaceful reunification of Taiwan, China has not
denied the possibility of using military force. In addition, China has been intensifying
its military activities in the sea and airspace surrounding Taiwan, including the launch
of ballistic missiles into the waters around Japan. Regarding peace and stability
across the Taiwan Strait, concerns are mounting rapidly, not only in the Indo-Pacific
region including Japan, but also in the entire international community.
It is expected that China contributes, together with Japan, to the peace and stability

8


-----

Provisional Translation

of the international community including the Indo-Pacific region, through building
constructive relations with the international community via communications at
various levels including at the summit level as well as repeating dialogue and
cooperation with the international community, including Japan.
However, China's current external stance, military activities, and other activities
have become a matter of serious concern for Japan and the international community,
and present an unprecedented and the greatest strategic challenge in ensuring the
peace and security of Japan and the peace and stability of the international community,

as well as in strengthening the international order based on the rule of law, to which
Japan should respond with its comprehensive national power and in cooperation with
its ally, like-minded countries and others.

**(3) North Korea’s Activities in the Area of Security**
In the Korean Peninsula, the large-scale military forces of the Republic of Korea
(ROK) and North Korea are in confrontation with one another. North Korea has not
carried out the dismantlement of all weapons of mass destruction and ballistic
missiles of all ranges in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner, in accordance
with a series of relevant UN Security Council resolutions. While facing serious
economic difficulties without any improvement in its human rights situation to date,
North Korea continues to heavily allocate its resources to military affairs.
In recent years, North Korea has repeatedly launched ballistic missiles with an
unprecedented frequency and in new ways, rapidly enhancing its capabilities. In
particular, North Korea is making rapid progress in its missile-related technologies
and operational capabilities, exemplified by its launching of Intercontinental

Ballistic Missile (ICBM)-class ballistic missiles with a range covering the U.S.
mainland, launching missiles in new ways including missiles flying with irregular
trajectories, and launching missiles from various platforms such as TransporterErector-Launcher (TEL), submarines, and trains.
Furthermore, North Korea intends to bolster its nuclear capabilities both in quality
and in quantity at the maximum speed. When considered together with its rapid
development of missile-related technologies, North Korea's military activities pose
an even more grave and imminent threat to Japan's national security than ever before.
The issue of abductions by North Korea is a critical issue concerning the
sovereignty of Japan and the lives and safety of Japanese citizens. It is an urgent
issue for the Government to resolve under its responsibility. It is also a universal
issue for the international community to take on as a violation of basic human rights.

**(4) Russia’s Activities in the Area of Security**

9


-----

Provisional Translation

Russia's aggression against Ukraine and its other actions clearly demonstrate that
it does not hesitate to resort to military forces to achieve its own security objectives.
In addition, Russia continues to repeat words and actions that could be interpreted as
threats to use of nuclear weapons.
Russia is accelerating its military activities in the vicinity of Japan. Russia is also
strengthening its armaments in the Northern Territories, which is an inherent territory
of Japan. This is presumably due to the background that the Sea of Okhotsk plays as
an area of activity for strategic nuclear submarines, an important part in Russia's

strategic nuclear forces.
Furthermore, Russia has been doubling down on strategic coordination with China.
In particular, in recent years, these two countries have ramped up their military
coordination by continuing to conduct joint exercises and drills, such as joint
navigation by their naval vessels and joint flights of their bombers in the vicinity of
Japan.
By its recent aggression against Ukraine and others, Russia's external and military
activities and others have shaken the very foundation of the international order, and
are perceived as the most significant and direct threat to security in the European
region. In addition, Russia's external and military activities and others in the IndoPacific region, including Japan, together with its strategic coordination with China,
are of strong security concern.

**V National Security Objectives of Japan**
The following are the national security objectives of Japan to ensure its national

interests in the face of the above-mentioned national security challenges. These objectives
are grounded in the fundamental principles of Japan’s national security as outlined in III.

1. Japan will continue to be a nation capable of protecting its sovereignty and
independence, autonomously determining its domestic and foreign policies, and
defending its territory and the safety of life, person, and the properties of its nationals.
To this end, Japan will reinforce its own capabilities and roles, and together with its
ally, the United States, and like-minded countries and others, deter contingencies and
attempts to unilaterally change the status quo in Japan and its vicinity. If by any
chance a threat should reach Japan, Japan will disrupt and defeat the threat and
minimize the damage caused, and bring it to an end in a manner favorable to
protecting its national interests.
2. Japan will proactively ensure, through executing its security policy, an international

10


-----

Provisional Translation

environment in which its own economy can grow. By doing so, Japan will work to
achieve a virtuous cycle of security and economic growth, in which economic growth
promotes the improvement of the security environment surrounding Japan.
Concurrently, Japan will ensure the self-reliance of its economic structure, as well as
advantages over other countries and ultimately the indispensability of its
technologies.
3. As a major global actor, Japan will join together with its ally, like-minded countries
and others to achieve a new balance in international relations, especially in the Indo
Pacific region. In so doing, Japan will prevent the emergence of situations in which
any one state can unilaterally change the status quo easily, and redouble efforts to
secure a stable, predictable, free and open international order based on the rule of law.
4. Japan will work on multilateral cooperation in the fields of international economy,
response to global issues such as climate change and infectious diseases, and the
formation of international rules and regulations, and then generate an environment in
which the international community can coexist and coprosper.

**VI Strategic Approaches Prioritized by Japan**
Japan will implement strategic approaches to achieve its national security objectives,
harnessing its comprehensive national power as an integrated and efficient means.

**1.** **Main Elements of Comprehensive National Power for Japan’s National**
**Security**
(1) First is diplomatic capabilities. The basis of national security is to proactively

create a peaceful, stable, and highly predictable international environment based
on the rule of law and to prevent the emergence of threats. Over the years, Japan
has devoted itself to diplomatic undertakings and international cooperation to
promote peace, stability, and prosperity worldwide. Rooted in these traditions and
experiences, and guided by significantly enhanced diplomatic implementation
architecture, Japan will continue to nurture relations of trust with many countries,
engage in diplomatic efforts to gain understanding and support for its country's
position, and carry forward international cooperation with the aim of pursuing
coexistence and coprosperity with other countries.
(2) Second is defense capabilities. These capabilities are the last guarantee of Japan’s
national security and embody the will and ability to resolutely defend our nation.
In light of the current reality of the world, this function cannot be replaced by any
other means. By means of defense capabilities, Japan will deter threats from

11


-----

Provisional Translation

reaching it, and if threats are indeed posed to Japan, it will disrupt and defeat them.
In addition, fundamentally reinforced defense capabilities will bolster the solid
footing of our diplomacy for proactively fostering a desirable security
environment for Japan.
(3) Third is economic capabilities. Economic capabilities are the foundation of
policies to achieve a peaceful and stable security environment. As the world's third
largest economy and a major player in shouldering an open and stable international
economic order, Japan will undertake free and fair trade and investment activities.

In addition, Japan will provide high value-added goods and services that are
indispensable to the global supply chain to accomplish its economic growth.
(4) Fourth is technological capabilities. The creation of science, technology, and
innovation is the source of Japan’s own economic and social development. In
addition, the appropriate use of technological capabilities plays a crucial role in
improving Japan’s national security environment and is also indispensable in
addressing global issues such as climate change. Japan will actively capitalize on
its advanced technological capabilities, developed over the years in the public and
private sectors in the field of national security,, without being bound by its
conventional way of thinking.
(5) Fifth is intelligence capabilities. In a rapidly and complexly changing security
environment, the collection and analysis of high-quality and timely information is
essential for the Government to make accurate decisions. To this end, under close
cooperation between the policy and intelligence departments, and through
comprehensive analyses utilizing all means of collection and sources of

information possessed by the Government, information on national security
should be obtained as early and accurately as possible, and shared and utilized
within and outside the Government. In addition, the Government and the private
sector will work on information security to prevent leakage of critical information
on its national security.

**2.** **Strategic Approaches and Major Ways and Means**
**(1)** **Develop Efforts Centered on Diplomacy to Prevent Crises, Proactively Create**
**a Peaceful and Stable International Environment, and Strengthen a Free and**
**Open International Order**
**(i) Strengthen the Japan-U.S. Alliance**
The Japan-U.S. Alliance, with the Japan-U.S. security arrangements at its core,
plays an indispensable role not only for the security of Japan but also for the realization
of peace and stability in the international community, including in the Indo-Pacific

12


-----

Provisional Translation

region. In particular, for the U.S. commitment to the region to be maintained and
strengthened, deepened cooperation between Japan and the U.S. at a concrete level in
the Indo-Pacific region is of vital importance. Bearing these considerations in mind,
Japan, while ensuring the bilateral coordination at its strategic levels, will work in
coordination with the United States to strengthen the Japan-U.S. Alliance in all areas,
including diplomacy, defense, and economy.

**(ii) Maintain and Develop a Free and Open International Order and Strengthen**
**Ties with its Ally, Like-minded Countries and Others**
As a nation in the Indo-Pacific region, Japan will further promote efforts to realize a
FOIP by deepening cooperation with like-minded countries through the Japan-U.S.
Alliance as a cornerstone and through efforts such as the Japan-U.S.-Australia-India
(Quad) partnership. To this end, Japan will strive to make the vision of a FOIP more
universal around the world, create rules to expand the free and fair economic zone,
improve connectivity, empower governance of countries and international
organizations, and expand efforts to ensure maritime security.
Japan will also further enhance diplomatic engagement with developing countries,
which are economically growing and becoming more influential in the international
arena. By doing so, Japan, together with as many countries as possible, will strengthen
a free and open international order based on the rule of law.
Furthermore, Japan will build a multilayered network among its ally and like-minded
countries, expand it, and strengthen deterrence. Thus, while utilizing frameworks such
as the Japan-U.S.-ROK, and Japan-U.S.-Australia, Japan will enhance security
cooperation with Australia, India, the ROK, European countries, ASEAN countries,

Canada, NATO, EU, and others. Specifically, Japan will promote enhanced engagement
with like-minded countries and others in the Indo-Pacific region through bilateral and
multilateral dialogues, bilateral training and exercises, conclusions of information
protection agreements, Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement (ACSA),
Reciprocal Access Agreement (RAA), joint development of defense equipment,
transfer of defense equipment and technology, capacity building support, strategic
communication, and Flexible Deterrent Options (FDO).

**(iii) Strengthen Diplomacy with Japan's Neighboring Countries and Regions as**
**well as Efforts toward Resolution of Various Issues of Concern, including**
**Territorial Issues**
Both Japan and China have important responsibilities for the peace and prosperity of
the region and the international community. Japan will build a “constructive and stable
relationship” with China through communication at various levels, in which Japan

13


-----

Provisional Translation

asserts its position and calls for responsible actions, while continuing dialogue
including on issues of concern and cooperation on matters of common interests. This is
essential for peace and stability in the international community, including in the IndoPacific region.
Japan will strongly oppose China's growing attempts to unilaterally change the status
quo by force, demand it to not conduct such activities, and respond in a calm and
resolute manner. Additionally, with regard to China's rapid strengthening of its military
capabilities and expansion of military activities, Japan will strongly encourage China

to improve transparency and to cooperate constructively with international efforts for
arms control, disarmament and other such efforts, in cooperation with its ally, likeminded countries and others. Furthermore, in order to nurture a relationship of trust,
Japan will enhance communication with China in the security field. Japan will also
promote efforts, including the establishment of a framework for avoiding and
preventing the occurrence of unforeseen situations with China.
At the same time, based on the recognition that it is possible to cooperate with China
in the fields of economy and people-to-people exchange in a mutually beneficial way,
Japan will develop appropriate economic relations in a manner that contributes to
Japan’s economic development and economic security, and revitalize people to people
exchanges with China. In addition, in cooperation with its ally and like-minded
countries as well as with international organizations and others, Japan will cooperate
with China in areas that need to be tackled together such as global issues, while
encouraging China to comply with international rules and standards, increase its own
transparency and predictability, and play a responsible and constructive role

commensurate with its international influence.
Japan's relationship with Taiwan has been maintained as a non-governmental
working relationship based on the Japan-China Joint Communique in 1972. Japan’s
basic position regarding Taiwan remains unchanged. Taiwan is an extremely important
partner and a precious friend of Japan, with whom Japan shares fundamental values,
including democracy, and has close economic and personal ties. Peace and stability
across the Taiwan Strait is an indispensable element for the security and prosperity of
the international community, and Japan will continue to make various efforts based on
its position that the cross-strait issues are expected to be resolved peacefully.
The ROK is a highly important neighboring country to Japan both in a geopolitical
context and in regard to Japan's security. With the response to North Korea and other
issues in mind, Japan will enhance Japan-ROK and Japan-U.S.-ROK strategic
coordination, including in the area of security. To this end, Japan will communicate

14


-----

Provisional Translation

closely with the ROK in order to develop Japan-ROK relations based on the foundation
of the friendly and cooperative relations that have developed since the normalization of
diplomatic relations in 1965. Japan will also appropriately address issues of concern
between the two nations, based on its consistent positions. With regard to the issue over
the sovereignty of Takeshima, which is an inherent territory of Japan, Japan will make
persevering diplomatic efforts, based on the principle of peaceful resolution of conflicts
in accordance with international law, and responding firmly based on the consistent
position of Japan.

With regard to North Korea’s nuclear and missile development, Japan will urge
North Korea to take concrete actions toward its complete denuclearization, based on
the Joint Statement of the Six-Party Talks and relevant UN Security Council resolutions
through strengthening regional deterrence, fully implementing sanctions against North
Korea, including those based on UN Security Council resolutions, and pursuing
diplomatic efforts in close coordination with the U.S. and the ROK. Concerning JapanNorth Korea relations, Japan will endeavor to achieve a comprehensive resolution of
outstanding issues of concern, such as the abductions, nuclear and missile issues, in
accordance with the Japan-DPRK Pyongyang Declaration. In particular, it is the basic
recognition of Japan that normalization of relations with North Korea will not be
possible without resolving the abductions issue, a serious humanitarian issue with a
time constraint. Japan will make every effort to ensure the safety of all abductees and
realize their immediate return at the earliest possible date, investigate the truth
regarding the abductions, and transfer those who executed the abductions.
With regard to the relations with Russia, Japan will respond in a manner that protects

its own national interests in light of the severe security environment in the Indo-Pacific
region. In addition, Japan will prevent Russia from taking actions that undermine the
peace, stability, and prosperity of the international community, while cooperating with
its ally and like-minded countries and others. As for the Northern Territories issue,
which is the greatest concern regarding our diplomacy with Russia, Japan’s basic policy
of concluding a peace treaty through the resolution of the territorial issue remains
unchanged.

**(iv) Arms Control, Disarmament, and Non-proliferation**
Japan will further strengthen its efforts in arms control, disarmament, and nonproliferation, in order to improve its security environment and realize peace and
stability around the world by halting and reversing the trend of arms buildup, including
nuclear weapons, in the vicinity of Japan, and to prevent the occurrence of situations
such as threats of nuclear weapons. Specifically, Japan, as the only country to have ever

15


-----

Provisional Translation

suffered atomic bombings in war, will spearhead international efforts in realizing a
"world without nuclear weapons.” Taking into account regional non-proliferation issues
such as North Korea and Iran, Japan will maintain and strengthen the international
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime, with the Nuclear Non-proliferation
Treaty (NPT) at its cornerstone, and steadily promote practical and realistic efforts
while appropriately addressing present international security challenges.
In addition, Japan will undertake non-proliferation policy with a focus on preserving
and bolstering the international export control regime to prevent the proliferation of

weapons and related sensitive technologies, implementing appropriate nonproliferation measures domestically, and supporting capacity building of each country.
With regard to biological, chemical, and conventional weapons, Japan will actively
engage in multilateral efforts and rule-making, including on the Lethal Autonomous
Weapons Systems (LAWS).

**(v) International Counter-Terrorism**
Acts of terrorism are unjustifiable regardless of their motivation and must be firmly
condemned. Japan will take a firm position against them and take counter-terrorism
measures in coordination with the international community. In this regard, Japan will
promote measures against international terrorism and take thorough steps to ensure the
security of critical facilities for the livelihoods of its people such as nuclear power
plants in Japan. Furthermore, Japan will build arrangements to cooperate with others
such as foreign countries and corporate enterprises, including information sharing, to
ensure the safety of Japanese nationals and others overseas.
In addition, Japan will reinforce its mechanisms and capabilities for collecting and

analyzing information on the international terrorism situation.

**(vi) Climate Change Measures**
Climate change is a security issue that affects the very existence of humankind.
Extreme weather events due to climate change significantly impact Japan's national
security in various ways including through more frequent and severer natural disasters,
increased responses to disasters, more serious energy and food problems, a decrease in
national land area, and increased use of the Arctic sea routes.
Japan will lead the way in advancing efforts both at home and abroad with all
stakeholders, including its ally and like-minded countries. Specifically, Japan will
embark on initiatives toward the realization of a decarbonized society through structural
transformation of the energy and industrial sectors, including maximizing the use of
renewable and nuclear energies, and the creation of innovation through bold
investments in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 46% from FY 2013 in FY

16


-----

Provisional Translation

2030, and realize net-zero by 2050.
Japan will also stand at the forefront in galvanizing global efforts for minimizing
negative impacts of climate change upon the international security environment. As
part of these efforts, Japan will provide assistance to island nations and other
developing countries where climate change poses imminent threats so that sustainable
and resilient economies and societies can be built.

**(vii) Strategic Use of ODA and Other International Cooperation**
Guided by the vision of a FOIP, Japan will strategically utilize ODA to maintain and

develop a free and open international order and to realize coexistence and coprosperity
in the international community. Specifically, Japan will provide assistance to strengthen
connectivity through quality infrastructure and human resource development, maritime
security, the rule of law, and economic security, thereby strengthening relationships of
trust and cooperation with developing countries and others. Japan will also engage with
partners in the international community at large that support the vision of a FOIP.
Also, under the concept of "human security," Japan will lead international efforts to
solve global issues such as poverty reduction, health, climate change, environment, and
humanitarian assistance. In so doing, Japan will strengthen its support for overseas
operation of Japanese companies, and enhance collaboration between ODA, and other
non-ODA public funds. Japan will also continue to strengthen coordination with
various stakeholders including international organizations and NGOs.
For the purpose of deepening security cooperation with like-minded countries, apart
from ODA for the economic and social development of developing countries and other
purposes, a new cooperation framework for the benefit of armed forces and other

related organizations will be established. Japan will provide equipment and supplies as
well as assistance for the development of infrastructures to like-minded countries in
view of strengthening their security capacities and improving their deterrence
capabilities. This is part of the efforts to reinforce the comprehensive defense
architecture.

**(viii) Promotion of People-to-People Exchanges**
The promotion of mutual understanding among people and countries is the
foundation for mitigating inter-state tensions and creating peaceful and stable
international relations. With a view to promoting understanding of Japan abroad and
fostering an international environment in which Japan and its people are favorably
regarded, Japan will engage in people-to-people and cultural exchanges. Specifically,
Japan will promote exchanges at various levels and in various fields, including
exchanges with government officials, intellectuals, and cultural figures from countries

17


-----

Provisional Translation

and regions around the world, student exchanges, youth exchanges, sports exchanges,
and others. In addition, Japan will support those programs intended to introduce the
rich culture of Japan and to spread the Japanese language overseas.

**(2) Strengthening Japan's Defense Architecture**
**(i) Fundamentally Reinforcing Defense Capabilities as the Last Guarantee of**
**National Security**
Across the globe, unilateral attempts to change the status quo by force are constantly
taking place, and military buildups in the vicinity of Japan are rapidly expanding. The

possibilities are not precluded that serious situations shaking the foundation of the
international order, such as Russia's aggression against Ukraine, may occur especially
in East Asia in the future. In order to respond to this security environment, Japan will
fundamentally reinforce its defense capabilities.
It is difficult to accurately predict when an entity with powerful military capabilities
will come to have an intention to directly threaten other countries. Therefore, Japan
must pay attention to the capabilities of such actors and develop defense capabilities to
take all possible measures to ensure the security of Japan in peacetime. Moreover,
Japan's defense capabilities must be able to respond to new ways of warfare as a result
of advances in science and technology.
From this perspective, Japan will respond to situations in a multi-layered way by
cross domain operational capabilities that enhance the Japan Self-Defense Forces
(SDF) capabilities overall, through the synergy of organically integrated capabilities in
space, cyberspace, and electromagnetic domains as well as in ground, maritime and air,
and by stand-off defense capabilities and other capabilities that will enable us to

respond to invading forces from outside the sphere of threats. In addition to manned
assets, by reinforcing unmanned defense and other capabilities, Japan will establish
defense capabilities where various capabilities are integrated. Furthermore, in order to
maximize effective use of the current defense equipment, Japan will further enhance
the effectiveness of defense capabilities by improving mobility, securing ammunition
and fuel, and hardening major defense facilities as a top priority.
A key to deterring invasion against Japan is counterstrike capabilities that leverage
stand-off defense capability and other capabilities. In recent years, in Japan’s
surroundings, there have been dramatic advances in missile-related technologies,
including hypersonic weapons, and practical skills for missile operations, such as
saturation attack. Missile forces in the region have significantly improved in both
qualitative and quantitative terms, and missiles themselves have been repeatedly
launched. Missile attacks against Japan have become a palpable threat. Under these

18


-----

Provisional Translation

circumstances, Japan will continue its steadfast efforts to both qualitatively and
quantitatively enhance its missile defense capabilities by continuing to develop
technologies that bring the ability to deal with missiles with irregular trajectories.
Looking ahead, however, if Japan continues to rely solely upon ballistic missile
defenses, it will become increasingly difficult to fully address missile threats with the
existing missile defense network alone.
For this reason, we need counterstrike capabilities: capabilities which, in the case of
missile attacks by an opponent, enable Japan to mount effective counterstrikes against

the opponent to prevent further attacks while defending against incoming missiles by
means of the missile defense network.
Counterstrike capabilities are SDF’s capabilities that leverage stand-off defense
capability and other capabilities. In cases where armed attack against Japan has
occurred, and as part of that attack ballistic missiles and other means have been used,
counterstrike capabilities enable Japan to mount effective counterstrikes against the
opponent’s territory. Counterstrikes are done as a minimum necessary measure for selfdefense and in accordance with the Three New Conditions for Use of Force.
By possessing such capabilities to mount effective counterstrikes, Japan will deter
armed attack itself. If an opponent ever launches missiles, it will be able to prevent the
opponent’s further armed attacks by counterstrike capabilities, while protecting itself
against incoming missiles by the missile defense network, thereby defending the lives
and peaceful livelihoods of Japanese nationals.
Counterstrike capabilities are the capabilities on which the Government expressed
its view on February 29, 1956, which stated that, under the Constitution, “as long as it

is deemed that there are no other means to defend against attack by guided missiles and
others, to hit the bases of those guided missiles and others is legally within the purview
of self-defense and thus permissible.” These are also capabilities that the Government
has chosen not to acquire up to now as a matter of policy decision.
This Government view squarely applies to measures for self-defense taken under the
Three New Conditions for Use of Force, presented in the 2015 Legislation for Peace
and Security, and the capabilities that Japan has now decided to acquire can be used
when the above-mentioned Three Conditions are met in compliance with this view.
Counterstrike capabilities fall within the purview of Japan’s Constitution and
international law; they do not change Japan’s exclusively defense-oriented policy; and,
they will be used only when the above-mentioned Three New Conditions are fulfilled.
Needless to say, preemptive strikes, namely striking first at a stage when no armed
attack has occurred, remain impermissible.

19


-----

Provisional Translation

While the basic division of roles between Japan and the United States will remain
unchanged, as Japan will now possess counterstrike capabilities, the two nations will
cooperate in counterstrikes just as they do in defending against ballistic missiles and
others.
Furthermore, Japan will consistently strengthen coordination and cooperation
between the SDF and the Japan Coast Guard (JCG), including control over the Japan
Coast Guard (JCG) by the Minister of Defense in the event of a contingency.
Flexible Deterrent Options (FDO) utilizing SDF assets in the form of cross
governmental coordination will also be implemented.
In light of Japan’s current security environment, Japan will need to promptly realize
the fundamental reinforcement of its defense capabilities. Specifically, by FY 2027,
five years after the formulation of the Strategy, Japan will strengthen its defense
capabilities to the point at which Japan is able to take the primary responsibility for
dealing with invasions against its nation, and disrupt and defeat such threats while
gaining the support of its ally and others. Furthermore, by approximately ten years from
now, Japan will reinforce its defense capabilities to the point at which it will be possible
to disrupt and defeat invasions against its nation much earlier and at a further distance.
In addition, as a top priority in five years from now, Japan will maximize effective use
of its current equipment, while strengthening its core capabilities for the future of the
SDF.
The above measures related to the development of the SDF architecture and defense
policies will entail unprecedented undertakings in terms of size and content. The
fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities will not be achieved by a temporary

increase in spending, but rather, the Government will be required to maintain a certain
level of expenditure. Hence, these policies will be delivered in accordance with the
National Defense Strategy and the Defense Program based on this National Security
Strategy. Japan will also need to take appropriate measures for securing stable fiscal
resources.
In FY 2027, as per its own judgement, Japan will take the necessary measures to
make the level of its budget, for both the fundamental reinforcement of defense
capabilities and complementary initiatives, reach 2% of the current GDP, through
building on the contents of necessary defense capabilities, and by taking into account
indexes of international comparison, with a view to coordination with its ally, likeminded countries and others.

**(ii) Coordinating with Reinforced Comprehensive Defense Architecture.**
The core effort in addressing Japan's defense challenges will be to fundamentally

20


-----

Provisional Translation

reinforce its defense capabilities. However, because of wide-ranging security targets
and fields, Japan will utilize not only its defense capabilities but also its comprehensive
national power, including diplomatic and economic capabilities, to defend itself. With
this in mind, Japan will reinforce its comprehensive defense architecture by promoting
efforts in four areas that complement and are inseparable from the fundamental
reinforcement of defense capabilities under the frameworks of relevant ministries and
agencies, namely research and development, public infrastructure development, cyber
security, and international cooperation, to enhance deterrence capabilities of Japan and

like-minded countries.
In addition to this, Japan will promote cooperation with organizations inside and
outside the Government, including local public authorities, to develop its defense
architecture as a whole.

**(iii) Reinforcing Defense Production and Technology Base as Defense Capabilities**
**Themselves**
Japan's defense production and technology base is an indispensable foundation for
ensuring stable research and development, production, and procurement of defense
equipment in Japan. Therefore, Japan will advance defense production and technology
bases because they are characterized as defense capabilities themselves. Specifically,
in order to build a strong and sustainable defense industry, Japan will promote various
initiatives, including making business projects more attractive and actively leveraging
the outcomes of advanced technological research in the public and private sectors for
research and development of defense equipment. Japan will also reinforce the system
for research and development of new defense equipment and take other measures.

**(iv) Promoting Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology**
Transfer of defense equipment and technology overseas is a key policy instrument to
ensure peace and stability, especially in the Indo-Pacific region, to deter unilateral
changes to the status quo by force, to create a desirable security environment for Japan,
and to provide assistance to countries that are subject to aggression in violation of
international law, use of force, or threat of force. From this perspective, the Three
Principles on Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology, its Implementation
Guidelines, and other systems are to be considered for revisions in order to promote
smooth transfer of defense equipment and technology of high security significance and
international joint development in a broad array of fields. In doing so, the necessity,
requirements, and transparency of the related procedures for transfer of defense
equipment and technology will be under adequate consideration, while maintaining the
three principles themselves.

21


-----

Provisional Translation

In addition, Japan will carry forward with the transfer of defense equipment and
technology in the joint public and private efforts by implementing measures including
providing various forms of assistance to smoothly promote such transfers.

**(v) Strengthening the Foundation for SDF Personnel to Fulfill Abilities as Core of**
**Defense Capabilities**
Japan will solidify the human resource base for the SDF personnel, the core of its
defense capabilities, in order for the personnel to further fulfill their abilities. To this
end, Japan will work to secure diverse and talented SDF personnel from diverse

backgrounds. On top of this, Japan will set in place an organizational environment of
zero tolerance for harassment, and foster an environment so that female members can
play more active roles. Japan will also improve treatment of SDF personnel, and drive
efforts to foster an environment in which all SDF personnel can maintain high morale
and fully fulfill their abilities.

**(3) Deepening Security Cooperation with the United States**
Japan will fundamentally reinforce its defense capabilities and deepen security
cooperation with the United States. By undertaking such efforts, Japan will further
strengthen the deterrence and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance,
including extended deterrence by the U.S. that is backed by its full range of capabilities,
including nuclear. Particularly, based on constant examinations of the roles, missions,
and capabilities of Japan and the U.S., for the purpose of strengthening the Alliance’s
deterrence and response capabilities, Japan will undertake efforts to coordinate bilateral
operations including cross-domain operations and the use of Japan's counterstrike
capabilities, improve interoperability, deepen cooperation in the cyber, space and other

fields, advance equipment and technological cooperation that capitalizes on advanced
technologies, carry out more advanced and practical bilateral exercises, conduct joint
Flexible Deterrent Options (FDO), conduct joint intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance (ISR) operations, and increase joint/shared use of Japanese and U.S.
facilities, while further developing coordination functions of such framework as the
Alliance Coordination Mechanism (ACM). In doing so, Japan will strengthen the
foundations of information security and cybersecurity so that Japan and the U.S. can
fully employ their capabilities.
At the same time, while undertaking these efforts, Japan will steadily implement the
realignment of U.S. Forces in Japan, including the relocation of the Marine Corps Air
Station Futenma, from the viewpoint of mitigating impacts on local communities
including Okinawa.

**(4) Strengthening Efforts to Seamlessly Protect Japan in All Directions**

22


-----

Provisional Translation

In the current security environment, the boundaries between military and nonmilitary, peacetime and contingency, have become blurred. Hybrid warfare is taking
place, and gray zone situations are constantly arising. Japan will seamlessly protect its
national interests by promoting cross-governmental policies in diverse fields, including
cyber, maritime and space domains, technology, intelligence, and ensuring the safety
of its people at home and abroad.

**(i) Improving Response Capabilities in the Field of Cybersecurity**
In order to ensure secure and stable use of cyberspace, especially the security of the

nation and critical infrastructures, the response capabilities in the field of cybersecurity
should be strengthened equal to or surpassing the level of leading Western countries.
Specifically, in order to be able to respond to emerging cyber threats at any time,
Japan will first establish a mechanism to continuously assess the information systems
of government agencies, to improve measures against cyber threats as necessary, and
to constantly manage vulnerabilities of government agencies’ information systems. As
part of these efforts, the Government will continue to enhance defense throughout the
lifecycle of information systems of government agencies, including those used in the
fields of diplomacy, defense, and intelligence, from installation to disposal, while also
promoting the development and effective use of human resources inside and outside
the Government, by actively adopting cutting-edge concepts and technologies related
to cybersecurity at all times.
In addition, Japan will introduce active cyber defense for eliminating in advance the
possibility of serious cyberattacks that may cause national security concerns to the
Government and critical infrastructures and for preventing the spread of damage in case

of such attacks, even if they do not amount to an armed attack. For this purpose, the
Government will take further steps to develop information gathering and analysis
capabilities in the field of cybersecurity and establish systems to implement active
cyber defense. Therefore, the Government will advance efforts to consider to realize
necessary measures including the following (a) to (c):
(a) Japan will advance efforts on information sharing to the Government in case of
cyberattacks among the private sector including critical infrastructures, as well as
coordinating and supporting incident response activities for the private sector.
(b) Japan will take necessary actions to detect servers and others suspected of being
abused by attackers by utilizing information on communications services provided by
domestic telecommunications providers.
(c) For serious cyberattacks that pose security concerns against the Government, critical
infrastructures, and others, the Government will be given the necessary authorities that

23


-----

Provisional Translation

allow it to penetrate and neutralize attacker's servers and others in advance to the extent
possible.
In order to realize and promote these efforts, including active cyber defense, the
National center for Incident readiness and Strategy for Cybersecurity (NISC) will be
constructively restructured to establish a new organization which will comprehensively
coordinate policies in the field of cybersecurity, in a centralized manner. Then, the
Government will work on legislation and strengthen operations for the purpose of
materializing these new efforts in the field of cybersecurity. These measures will

contribute to the reinforcement of a comprehensive defense architecture.
In addition, the Government will improve coordination with other policies that
contribute to the enhancement of cybersecurity, such as economic security and the
enhancement of technical capabilities related to national security.
Furthermore, the Government will continue to work for the enhancement of
information gathering and analysis, attribution and its public announcement, as well as
formulation of international frameworks and rules in a coordinated manner with its ally,
like-minded countries and others.

**(ii) Promoting Maritime Security and Strengthen Maritime Law Enforcement**
**Capabilities**
As a maritime nation surrounded by the sea on all sides and blessed with one of the
world's most extensive jurisdictional waters, Japan will work with its ally, like-minded
countries, and others to promote efforts to ensure the freedoms of navigation and
overflight and to ensure safety, as well as maintain and develop the international
maritime order based on universal values, including the rule of law. Specifically, Japan

will advance multilateral maritime security cooperation by enhancing maritime
surveillance to respond to threats in sea lanes, active bilateral drills and exercises with
other countries, and overseas port calls. In addition, anti-piracy and intelligence
gathering activities will be conducted to ensure the safety of maritime traffic.
While undertaking international cooperation in these areas, Japan will ensure
freedoms of navigation and overflight in the South China Sea and other waters, promote
peaceful settlement of disputes based on international law, strengthen relations with
those coastal states along the sea lanes, and actively utilize the Arctic sea routes.
Furthermore, Japan will continue to actively utilize the SDF facility in Djibouti in order
to secure stable use of the sea lane.
The role played by the JCG, Japan’s maritime law enforcement agency, is essential
to its national security. In order to ensure the security of Japan's territory, including the
areas surrounding the Senkaku Islands, and to respond effectively in the event of

24


-----

Provisional Translation

multiple major incidents, Japan's maritime law enforcement capabilities will be
significantly reinforced, in conjunction with efforts to strengthen its organization.
Specifically, in accordance with the new policy on strengthening maritime law
enforcement capabilities, the JCG will promptly increase assets and introduce new
technologies, secure sufficient operational expenses, renew degraded vessels, and
secure and train personnel.
In addition, the coordination and cooperation between the JCG and the SDF will be
consistently strengthened, including the Minister of Defense's control over the JCG in

the event of an emergency.
Furthermore, international coordination and cooperation with maritime law
enforcement agencies in the United States, Southeast Asian countries, and other
countries will be carried forward.

**(iii) Reinforcing Comprehensive Efforts for Space Security**
To ensure safe and stable utilization of space, which is indispensable for economic
and social activities, Japan will strengthen its response capabilities in the field of space
security. Specifically, while promoting the use of the space domain by the SDF, JCG
and others, Japan will drive forward measures to capitalize on Japan's overall spacerelated capabilities in the field of security, such as strengthening cooperation between
the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) and the SDF.
In addition, Japan will set up a framework for the Government’s decision-making in
unforeseeable circumstances, strengthen mechanisms for understanding the space
domain, promote measures to address the issue of space debris, expand the
development of capabilities to hinder command and control as well as information and

communications at the other end, and Japan will enhance cooperation with its ally, likeminded countries, and others, including on the formulation of international codes of
conduct.
Furthermore, Japan will utilize its civilian space technology in its national defense
by supporting and fostering Japan's space industry, including the construction of
satellite constellations, thereby realizing a virtuous cycle to further encourage the
development of its space industry
In order to put the agenda and policies in the field of space security into practice,
Japan will put together the Government's concept and reflect it in the Basic Plan on
Space Policy and other relevant documents.

**(iv) Enhancing Public-private Partnerships for Improving Technical Capabilities**
**and Proactively Capitalizing on Outcomes of Research and Development in the**
**Security Field**

25


-----

Provisional Translation

Cutting-edge science and technology are advancing at an accelerated pace, and it has
become extremely difficult in practice to distinguish between technologies for civilian
use and for security purposes. Against this backdrop, in order to widely and actively
utilize Japan's advanced technological capabilities in the public and private sectors for
security purposes, Japan will strengthen the system to improve technological
capabilities of the public and private sectors that can be used for security purposes, to
utilize, in a whole-of-government manner, funds and information related to research
and development. Specifically, for the purpose of promoting research and development

of science and technology that contributes to the enhancement of the comprehensive
defense architecture, a whole-of-government mechanism will be established to match
research and development needs based on the views of the Ministry of Defense with
the appropriate technological seeds possessed by relevant ministries and agencies, in
addition to implementing these projects. On top of that, Japan will promote active
utilization of funds and outcomes related to government-wide R&D, including the Key
and Advanced Technology R&D through Cross Community Collaboration Program,
for the security sector.
Japan will also work to further strengthen assistance for gathering information,
development, and training in the area of cutting-edge and critical technologies and to
put in place arrangements.
In order to promote private-sector innovation and to actively utilize the results of
such innovation in the security field, Japan will promote the participation of a wide
range of leading-edge researchers including those in the academia, while obtaining
understanding and cooperation of all parties concerned. Japan will also work across the

Government to foster an environment in which the defense industry can fully harness
the opportunities offered by other private sector innovations.

**(v) Strengthening Intelligence Capacities for Japan’s National Security**
Japan will reinforce its arrangements and capabilities in the field of intelligence,
which is closely related to the maintenance of a sound democracy, smooth decisionmaking by the Government, and effective external communications. Specifically, in
order to strengthen Japan's ability to analyze global trends from a broad, accurate, and
multifaceted perspective across diplomatic, military, and economic spheres, Japan will
significantly enhance its information-gathering capabilities from various information
sources, including human intelligence, open source intelligence, signals intelligence,
and imagery intelligence. In particular, with regard to human intelligence, the structure
for collecting information will be enhanced and strengthened.
As for imagery intelligence, the functions of information gathering satellites will be

26


-----

Provisional Translation

expanded and enhanced, and collected information will be utilized more effectively by
strengthening the cooperation and coordination between the Cabinet Satellite
Intelligence Center and the Ministry of Defense as well as the SDF.
In addition, a mechanism will be established to aggregate information in an
integrated manner, and the coordination between the policy and intelligence
departments will be enhanced. At intelligence departments, intelligence analysis
capabilities will be strengthened to provide high-value-added analysis results to policy
making departments through comprehensive analysis (all-source analysis) utilizing all

of the intelligence means possessed by the Government, including the use of new
technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI).
Also, while taking into account the discussions on the establishment of a new
security clearance system in the economic security field, the arrangement for
information security will be further solidified.
In addition, from the perspective of bolstering the ability to respond to information
warfare in the cognitive domain, including spread of disinformation, a new structure
will be established within the Government to aggregate and analyze information on
disinformation and others originated abroad, to strengthen external communications,
and to enhance cooperation with non-governmental agencies. Furthermore, strategic
communication will be actively implemented in a coordinated manner within the
Government.
Japan will also promptly consider effective measures by both public and private
sectors to prevent the misuse of geospatial information in the security area.

**(vi) Reinforcing Response Capabilities within Japan with Contingencies in Mind**
In preparation for a direct threat to Japan, Japan will enhance response capabilities
in wide ranging areas at home. Specifically, as part of the reinforcement of the
comprehensive defense architecture, Japan will establish a cross-governmental
mechanism to develop and enhance the functions of public infrastructures such as
airports and seaports based on the needs of the SDF and the JCG for their smooth
utilization and deployment in response to protection of its nationals, peacetime training,
and deployment during contingencies. At the same time, rules will be established for
ordinary utilization of airports and seaports with a view to responding to contingencies.
These efforts will be promoted in cooperation with local municipalities and residents.
To ensure the smooth activities of the SDF and U.S. forces, and others, measures
will be taken to develop arrangements for transportation and storage of SDF
ammunition and fuel, coordinate with related parties and organizations regarding use
of civilian facilities by the SDF and U.S. forces, ensure secure and flexible use of radio

27


-----

Provisional Translation

waves, and ensure that SDF facilities and activities be not negatively impacted by
civilian facilities.
Regarding measures to secure critical infrastructures, which are closely linked to
sustaining the daily livelihoods, such as nuclear power plants, and measures against
illegal landing on remote border islands, Japan will make efforts to seamlessly respond
to crises in various forms and stages that do not amount to armed attacks, in addition to
armed attack situations. For that purpose, the SDF, Police, the JCG, and others will
establish a coordination framework and strengthen their response capabilities by

enhancing the equipment, systems, and training, in order to seamlessly respond to crises
in various forms and stages that do not amount to armed attacks, in addition to armed
attack situations.

**(vii) Reinforcing Mechanisms for the Protection of Japanese Nationals**
Japan will reinforce a mechanism for the protection of Japanese nationals through,
for instance, efforts to protect residents, in cooperation of the Government, local
municipalities, and designated public institutions. Specifically, for the purpose of
achieving prompt evacuation of residents, including those in the Southwest region well
in advance of an armed attack, Japan will take measures such as formulating a plan for
smooth evacuation as soon as possible, securing the means of transportation of the
public and private sectors, developing and coordinating the use of airports, seaports,
and other public infrastructures, securing various types of evacuation facilities, and
working with international organizations.
In order to enhance the efficacy of these efforts, Japan will also consider the
necessary policies, including structural arrangements through promoting coordination

among the Government, local municipalities, and designated public institutions, after
conducting and assessing drills for the evacuation of residents.
Furthermore, while consistently tackling the enhancement of the information
transmission function of J-ALERT, the Government will work to share information and
raise public awareness on evacuation activities in preparation for emergencies
concerning ballistic missiles.

**(viii) Reinforcing Architecture and Measures for the Protection of Japanese**
**Nationals and Others Overseas**
Japan will reinforce arrangements and measures to protect Japanese nationals and
others overseas from threats such as conflicts, natural disasters, infectious diseases and
terrorism. Specifically, efforts will be made to take measures, including for raising
awareness of Japanese nationals overseas on safety measures from peace time,
providing safety information in a timely manner, ensuring means of evacuation, and

28


-----

Provisional Translation

strengthening cooperation with related countries.
In this context, consular services at Japanese embassies and consulates, which serve
as the most critical hub for protection of Japanese nationals overseas, will be
strengthened in terms of structure and capabilities. At the same time, the SDF and other
assets will be promptly mobilized for evacuating Japanese nationals and others overseas,
when necessary and feasible. To this end, cooperation among relevant ministries and
agencies will be enhanced.
Furthermore, while gaining understanding from the Government of Djibouti, the

SDF facility there, which has been in operation for counter-piracy activities, will be
also utilized for the protection of Japanese nationals and others overseas.

**(viiii) Securing Resources Essential for Japan’s National Security including**
**Energy and Food**
From the perspective of ensuring smooth economic and social activities in Japan and
abroad, as well as the ability to sustainably respond in the event of an emergency, the
Government will promote policies to secure resources essential for Japan’s national
security, such as energy security and food security, which form the basis of its people's
lives and social and economic activities.
To ensure energy security, in addition to advancing ties with resource-rich countries,
diversifying supply sources, and enhancing procurement risk assessment and other
methods, Japan will maximize the use of energy sources that contribute to its energy
self-sufficiency, such as renewable energy and nuclear power, and will strategically
develop and solidify energy sources for this purpose. In cooperation with its ally, likeminded countries, and international organizations, Japan will drive forward measures

to improve Japan's energy self-sufficiency ratio and build a robust energy supply system
that can withstand contingencies.
With regard to food security, the situation surrounding the supply and demand of
food and trade worldwide is unstable and uncertain. As Japan depends largely on
imports of food and production materials from overseas, the risks associated with
Japan’s food security are manifesting themselves. Therefore, transforming the structure
of its food supply is key. Specifically, Japan will produce at home what can be produced
here in Japan to the extent possible and work to secure domestic production of items
and materials that highly dependent on foreign countries, in conjunction with
ensuring stable imports and appropriate supplying of national stockpiles. In pursuit of
this, Japan will expand the production of grains, ramp up the production of feed,
amplify the use of domestic resources such as compost, and then appropriately carry
out measures to ensure stable imports and the national stockpiles of items that are

29


-----

Provisional Translation

difficult to procure at home, so that Japan can ensure stable food supply to our people
and bolster Japan's food security.
With a view to responding to global food security crises, Japan will improve the
international environment for food supply, improve food production, and provide
support to vulnerable countries, in cooperation with its ally, like-minded countries, and
international organizations.

**(5) Promoting Economic Security Policies to Achieve Autonomous Economic**
**Prosperity**
Economic security is to ensure Japan's national interests, such as peace, security, and
economic prosperity, by carrying out economic measures. In the face of various threats
at hand through economic means, Japan will coordinate ideas on necessary economic
measures and execute these measures comprehensively, effectively and intensively to
enhance Japan's self-reliance and to secure the advantage and indispensability
concerning our technologies and others.
Specifically, Japan will reinforce its mechanisms for promoting economic security
policies, and work with its ally and like-minded countries, as well as in cooperation
with the private sector, to take measures including those indicated below. Japan will
consistently consider and revisit these measures, and in particular, continuously assess
the risks that exist in each industry, and implement other necessary security measures
in a whole-of-government manner.
(i) Japan will steadily implement and constantly review the Economic Security
Promotion Act (Law No. 43, 2022.hereinafter referred to as the "Promotion Act"),
and further reinforce efforts in this regard.

(ii) With regard to supply chain resilience, Japan will curb excessive dependence on
specific countries, carry forward next-generation semiconductor development and
manufacturing bases, secure stable supply for critical goods including rare earth,
and promote capital reinforcement of private enterprises with critical goods and
technologies, and strengthen the function of policy-based finance, in pursuit of
protecting and nurturing critical goods.
(iii) Japan will consider reviewing government procurement procedures, including
those by local municipalities, as well as expanding the scope of the prior screening
system under the Promotion Act, with regard to the critical infrastructure field.
(iv) With regard to data and information protection, Japan will carry out additional
measures to ensure more appropriate management of sensitive data and safety and
reliability of information and communication technology services. In addition,
keeping in mind information security practices of leading countries and needs of

30


-----

Provisional Translation

the industries, examinations will be made to bolster Japan's information security,
including security clearance.
(v) For the purpose of fostering and preserving technology and other purposes, Japan
will proceed with specific considerations in further stepping up support and
developing systems for information gathering, development, and fostering of
advanced critical technologies, taking on additional measures to enhance
investment screening and export control as well as response to forced technology
transfer, and further advancing research integrity and measures against talent drain.

(vi) Japan will promote effective efforts against economic coercion by foreign
countries.

**(6) Maintaining and Strengthening International Economic Order based on Free,**
**Fair, and Equitable Rules**
Japan will maintain and strengthen an open and stable international economic order
by preventing non-military pressure by certain states aimed at impeding independent
national foreign policy decision-making and sound economic development.
Specifically, while maintaining and strengthening the multilateral trading system with
the World Trade Organization (WTO) at its core, Japan will enhance its own measures
to counter against unfair trade practices and economic coercion, including through
working to solidify international norms in cooperation with its ally and like-minded
countries.
In addition, in order to achieve the development of economic order and sustainable
and inclusive economic growth in the Indo-Pacific region and extend the free and fair
economic order, we will maintain the high standards of the Comprehensive and

Progressive Agreement on Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), ensure the full
implementation of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP)
agreement, and materialize other economic partnership agreement negotiations and the
Indo-Pacific Economic Framework (IPEF).
Furthermore, Japan will pursue implementing mutually beneficial economic
cooperation as well as maintaining and strengthening international frameworks and
rules. To be specific, in order to avoid situations where recipient countries fall into "debt
traps" due to opaque forms of assistance to developing countries by some states and
others, Japan will spearhead global efforts to ensure that states and institutions comply
with international rules and standards and carry out development finance in a
transparent and fair manner.
In addition, Japan will provide capacity-building support for developing countries to
enhance their self-reliance and present attractive options for the economic development

31


-----

Provisional Translation

of developing countries, including support in coordination with its ally and like-minded
countries and development finance institutions.

**(7) Global Efforts for Coexistence and Coprosperity in the International**
**Community**
Japan's national security can only be fulfilled through the peace and stability of the
international community. In order to achieve coexistence and coprosperity with the
international community, Japan will cooperate with the international community in
ways commensurate with its international standing, economic capabilities, and

technological capabilities.

**(i) Promote Multilateral Cooperation and Strengthen Ties with International**
**Organizations and Frameworks**
Japan has built relationships of trust with many countries, regardless of differences
in political and economic systems, through various forms of cooperation. On this basis,
through multilateral diplomacy, Japan will strive to realize the goals it attaches
importance to and cooperate with the international community for coexistence and
coprosperity by engaging in tailored communications with these countries and
strengthening cooperation with the United Nations and other international
organizations.
In particular, the UN plays a role in a wide range of fields, including conflict
management, humanitarian assistance, peacebuilding, protection and promotion of
human rights, climate change, food crisis, natural disasters, and refugee issues, and
Japan will strengthen cooperation with the UN and countries surrounding the UN to
further promote multilateral cooperation. At the same time, given that the UN Security

Council does not function adequately when a permanent member is a party to a dispute,
and that other inherent limitations of the UN are becoming apparent, we will lead efforts
to strengthen the functions of the UN, including reform of the UN Security Council.
In addition, Japan will advance efforts to enable Japanese nationals to play an even
more active role as staff in the UN and other international organizations.

**(ii) Efforts to Address Global Challenges**
The Sustainable Development Goals ("SDGs"), adopted by the UN in September
2015 are goals for the international community as a whole to address global challenges
in an integrated manner, including peace, the rule of law, and human rights, with no one
being left behind. Rather than addressing each goal individually, Japan will contribute
to the achievement of the SDGs by taking on and preventing complex interrelated risks
based on the concept of human security.
In addition, with regard to global issues such as climate change, infectious diseases,

32


-----

Provisional Translation

energy, food problems, and the environment, which have a direct or indirect impact on
Japan's national security, Japan will expand the circle of cooperation not only to include
its ally and like-minded countries, but also many other countries and organizations, and
then enhance international efforts.
Fully recognizing that global health, including measures against infectious diseases,
is an important issue for the international community, encompassing not only economic
and social risks but also major national security risks, Japan will cooperate with its ally
and like-minded countries as well as international organizations and other relevant

partners to take all possible measures to prevent, prepare for, and respond to future
infectious disease crises on a regular basis, based on its experience in responding to
COVID-19. In doing so, Japan, in cooperation with its ally and like-minded countries
as well as with international organizations and other relevant partners, will steadfastly
deliver medical care at home, and secure infectious disease control supplies including
medicines from the early stages of infection crises, and undertake efforts to advance
the ability to respond to infectious diseases based on scientific knowledge. The
Government will also work to reinforce its own function of serving as the control tower
in response to infectious disease crises. Furthermore, Japan will strive to advance health
systems and relevant international frameworks that contribute to the enhancement of
response capabilities of infectious diseases in developing countries.
In addition, the Government will actively promote global efforts in realizing more
resilient, equitable and sustainable universal health coverage (UHC).
Additionally, in order to appropriately respond to the rapidly growing needs for
humanitarian assistance around the world in recent years, Japan will step up efforts

necessary to provide humanitarian assistance promptly and on a sufficient scale.
Furthermore, Japan will actively accept displaced people due to war or natural disasters
in foreign countries.
The protection of human rights is the fundamental responsibility of each and every
country. Japan will raise its voice against serious human rights violations and continue
to build on dialogue and cooperation with various countries for the sake of the
protection and promotion of human rights.
Given the vulnerable position of women in conflict, Japan will spearhead
international efforts to promote the protection and redress of women's human rights.
Japan will also undertake efforts around the globe to achieve gender equality and
promote women's empowerment in all areas.
The international peace cooperation, including peacekeeping operations (PKO) that
Japan has long contributed in order to promote peace and stability in the international

33


-----

Provisional Translation

community, fosters cooperation with other Troop Contributing Countries (TCCs), and
helps to develop Japan's human resources. Therefore, Japan will continue to actively
engage in various forms of cooperation including dispatch of personnel and strategic
use of capacity building assistance.

**VII Domestic Base that should be Strengthened to Support Japan’s National**
**Security**
**1.** **Strengthening the Economic and Fiscal Bases**
Japan will achieve a virtuous cycle of security and economic growth, in which
economic growth promotes further improvements in Japan’s national security while
ensuring a security environment in which its economy can grow.
Japan will also ensure sustainable response capabilities in the event of contingencies
across a broad array of sectors. To this end, Japan will promote cooperation between the
public and private sectors to secure energy, food, and other resources, develop
infrastructure, and build stable supply chains for parts and other items essential for
security.
Furthermore, as Japan's economy is highly dependent on foreign countries, Japan has
critical importance in maintaining the confidence of international markets and having
adequate fiscal capacity to secure the necessary funds to meet a substantial increase in
fiscal demand associated with securing resources and defense equipment in the event of
contingency. Thus, Japan will work consistently to reinforce the economic, monetary, and
fiscal bases which serve as the foundation of Japan's national security. This is a premise
for Japan’s continuous and stable national security policy including fundamental

reinforcement of defense capabilities.

**2.** **Reinforcing the Social Base**
Japan will consistently engage in efforts to deepen the understanding of and
cooperation on national security among the people of Japan and organizations, inside and
outside the Government, including local municipalities and corporate enterprises. Japan
will also pay respect to other countries and their citizens, and foster love for its own
country and homeland. In addition, Japan will further promote efforts to ensure that
activities of the members of SDF and JCG, police officers, and others who dedicate
themselves to hazardous duties for the peace and security of Japan be appropriately
appreciated across its society. Furthermore, measures will be taken to ensure
understanding and cooperation of residents living near security-related facilities, which
form the basis for the activities of these personnel.

34


-----

Provisional Translation

In addition, Japan will redouble efforts to put forward information at home and abroad
on matters that concern both the public and private sectors, such as issues related to its
territory and sovereignty, protection of its nationals, and cyberattacks, and to broaden
understanding of the current activities of the SDF and U.S. Forces in Japan.
Furthermore, Japan will improve public and private sector mechanisms and response
capabilities in preparation for the next infectious disease crisis, and promote measures for
disaster prevention and mitigation in advance.

**3.** **Enhancing the Intellectual Base**
The importance of information and technology in the field of national security is on the
rise, and ensuring an intellectual base that generates such information and technology is
essential to improving security. From this perspective, Japan will promote measures to
foster practical cooperation among the Government, business community and academia
in the security field, to drive forward information sharing between the public and private
sectors for encouraging measured and accurate responses to national security issues, such
as the spread of disinformation and cyberattacks, and to step up cooperation between the
public and private sectors to facilitate effective communication of Japan's security policy
at home and abroad.

**VIII Duration, Evaluation, and Revision of the Strategy**
The National Security Strategy will fulfill its complete purpose only when its contents
are to be executed. Measures based on the Strategy will be strategically and sustainably
implemented in a timely and appropriate manner under the National Security Council

which serves as the control tower for national security. Furthermore, the National Security
Council will regularly and systematically evaluate the security environment and
execution of measures based on this document. The Strategy will be executed
approximately over the coming decade. Should Japan expect any significant changes
including in the security environments, it will make necessary revisions.

**IX Conclusion**
At this time of an inflection point in history, Japan is finding itself in the midst of the
most severe and complex security environment since the end of WWII. In no way can we
be optimistic about what the future of the international community will bring.
However, the world which we have built will continue to be able to nurture economic
prosperity thanks to vibrant trade and investment, innovation from global interactions of
diverse talents, and new and attractive cultures. We should hold on to these hopes.

35


-----

Provisional Translation

We are now standing at the crossroads of ushering in either a world of hope or a world
of adversity and distrust. This very choice will depend on the actions of the international
community in the time ahead, including Japan. Japan will ensure its security on the basis
of comprehensive national power in areas where the international community is in
confrontation. In areas where the international community should engage in cooperation,
by contrast, we will continue to fulfill a leading and constructive role in resolving a broad
array of issues. Japan’s action in this way worldwide will further enhance its presence
and credibility in the international arena and expand the circle of like-minded countries

and others, thereby leading to improve the security environment surrounding Japan.
Even standing at this crossroads between a world of hope and a world of adversity and
distrust amidst the most severe and complex post-war security environment, Japan,
blessed with a stable democracy, the established rule of law, a mature economy, and rich
culture, will advocate policies grounded in universal values and then lead the way in
undertaking efforts to reinforce the international order with steadfast resolve.

36


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

# NATIONAL DEFENSE STRATEGY

December 16, 2022

Table of Contents

I Objectives of National Defense Strategy

II Changes in the Strategic Environment and Defense Challenges

1 Changes in the strategic environment

2 Military trends of Japan’s neighboring countries and regions

3 Defense challenges

III Japan’s Basic Defense Policy

1 Strengthening Japan’s own architecture for national defense

(1) Fundamental reinforcement of Japan’s defense capabilities

(2) Reinforcing the defense architecture of the whole country

2 Joint deterrence and response by the Japan-U.S. Alliance

(1) Strengthening Japan-U.S. joint deterrence and response capabilities

(2) Reinforcing alliance coordination functions

(3) Reinforcing joint response infrastructure

(4) Measures to support the stationing of U.S. Forces in Japan

3 Collaboration with like-minded countries and others

IV Key Capabilities for Fundamental Reinforcement of Defense Capabilities

1 Stand-Off Defense Capabilities

2 Integrated Air and Missile Defense Capabilities

3 Unmanned Defense Capabilities

4 Cross-Domain Capabilities

5 Command and Control and Intelligence-related Functions

6 Mobile Deployment Capabilities / Civil Protection

7 Sustainability and Resiliency

V The Future of Self-Defense Forces (SDF)

1 Role of SDF in the seven key fields

2 Concept for developing SDF’s architecture

3 Reinforcing policy-making function

VI Protection of Life, Person and Property of Japanese Nationals Utilizing Defense Capability

and Measures for Global Security Cooperation

1 Measures for protection of life, person and property of Japanese nationals

2 Measures for security cooperation against global challenges

VII Defense Production and Technological Base as Virtually Integral Part of Defense Capability

1


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

1 Reinforcing defense production base

2 Reinforcing technological base

3 Promoting transfer of defense equipment and technology

VIII Reinforcing Foundation for SDF Personnel, the Core Element of Defense Capability, to

Exercise their Capabilities

1 Reinforcing human resource base

2 Transformation of medical function

IX Points of Attention

2


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

I Objectives of National Defense Strategy

It is the most consequential responsibility of the Government of Japan to resolutely defend

to the end the lives of Japanese nationals and their peaceful livelihood as well as Japan’s

territorial land, waters and airspace and it is the very heart of Japan’s national security.

Over the 77-year period since the end of World War II, Japan has, in the face of the Cold War

as well as the dramatic changes in the security environment that ensued its ending, preserved

peace and security by: enhancing its diplomatic strength and defense capability; and expanding

and deepening cooperation with other countries, with the Japan-U.S. Alliance being the key

pillar. In so doing, Japan under the Constitution has adhered to the basic percept of maintaining

the exclusively defense-oriented policy and not becoming a military power that poses threats to

other countries, ensured civilian control of the military, and observed the Three Non-Nuclear

Principles. Japan under these basic percepts will ever not change the course it has taken as a

peace-loving nation.

As Russia’s aggression against Ukraine attests, the international community of which Japan

is a member, is facing serious challenges and has plunged into a new crisis. China continues its

unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts in the East China Sea and South

China Sea. North Korea escalates its activities as it launches ballistic missiles at an

unprecedented high frequency and pursues further miniaturization of its nuclear weapons.

Russia has launched an aggression against Ukraine while its military activities in the Far East

have been trending upward. Given the foregoing, in future one cannot rule out the possibility

of serious events, that might shake the foundation of stable post-war international order in the

Indo-Pacific region, particularly in East Asia. As Japan is situated on the very frontlines of these

trends, it is no exaggeration to say the future shape of Japan’s security and defense policy has

a direct link to the peace and stability of the region and the international community.

The fact that Russia, a permanent member of the United Nation Security Council (hereinafter

referred to as the “UNSC”), has launched an aggression against Ukraine tells us that

maintaining Japan’s own sovereignty and independence can be achieved through its own

independent and voluntary efforts, and that it is important to expand the role Japan can play to

avoid inviting foreign aggression. In today’s circumstance, no country can now protect its own

security alone. As challenges to the post-war international order continue, it is critical for Japan

to deepen cooperation and collaboration with its ally and like-minded countries with whom

Japan shares universal values and strategic interests. In order for this cooperation and

collaboration to produce meaningful results, Japan needs to strengthen its own efforts even

more than before, and our ally, like-minded countries and others also expect Japan to play a

role commensurate to its national strength. Japan, its ally, like-minded countries and others are

required not to allow changes to the status quo by force and such attempts by exerting further

synergistic effects through common efforts.

Amid the most severe and complex security environment since the end of WWII, it is

3


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

necessary to face the severe reality and engage in fundamental reinforcement of defense

capabilities which focuses on opponent’s capability and new ways of warfare to protect the

lives and peaceful livelihood of Japanese nationals. Strengthening of Japan’s architecture for

national defense by integrating national power as well as fundamentally reinforcing Japan’s

defense capabilities in a unified manner with strategic intent is the very way to enhance

deterrence capabilities and further strengthen the Japan-U.S. Alliance, which will also be a

cornerstone for the security cooperation with like-minded countries and others.

The United States this year devised the new National Defense Strategy. It is therefore timely

for Japan and the United States to align their respective strategies and promote defense

cooperation in an integrated manner.

Based on these recognitions, as a substitute for the National Defense Program Guidelines

(hereinafter referred to as “NDPG,” Japan’s basic guideline for buildup, sustainment and

operation of defense capability with the Self-Defense Forces (SDF) as its core and formulated

six times since 1976), Japan has formulated the National Defense Strategy (hereinafter referred

to as “NDS”) to comprehensively demonstrate Japan’s defense objectives, approaches to

accomplish them and their means.

The policies of the fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities and the level of defense

buildup supporting them, which were decided by the Government through the NDS and

“Defense Buildup Program” (approved by the National Security Council and the Cabinet on

December 16, 2022), represent a major turning point for the post-war defense policy. By

formulating this Strategy, which provides mid- to long-term directions and contents of

reinforcement of defense capabilities, the Government will make efforts to deepen the

understanding of Japanese nationals in the significance of such a great turning point.

II Changes in the Strategic Environment and Defense Challenges

1 Changes in the strategic environment

Following the development of information society and the expansion of international

trades, while the interstate relationship concerning economy and culture further expands and

deepens, states that do not hold universal values nor political and economic systems based on

said values are expanding their influences. Furthermore, unilateral changes to the status quo

by force and such attempts are significant challenges to the free and open international order

based on the rule of law, and Russia’s aggression against Ukraine has revealed this in the

most severe manner. The international community is facing the greatest post-war trial yet,

and has entered into a new era of crisis.

In addition, the global power balance has significantly changed and interstate competitions

across the political, economy and military spheres are emerging. Such trends are especially

notable in the Indo-Pacific region, where China has been continuing and strengthening its

unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts. Not only China but also North

4


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

Korea and Russia have been intensifying their activities more than ever.

In particular, it is expected that the interstate competition between China and the United

States will continue to intensify in various fields, and the United States shows a recognition

that the next ten years will be the decisive decade for the competition with China.

Moreover, rapid advances in science and technology have fundamentally changed the

paradigm of security, and countries are developing cutting-edge technologies, what can be

called as game changers, to completely transform future warfare. Notably, China has been

rapidly promoting the acceleration of technological innovation and its application for military

purposes under the name of the "Military-Civil Fusion Development Strategy" and in

particular, accelerating the strengthening of military power on the premise of unmanned

assets employing artificial intelligence (AI). These trends have led to fundamental changes

to traditional military forces in terms of their force structure and way of warfare.

There are also challenges in global security including the increasing risks in domains such

as cyber, the expansion of information warfare including the spread of disinformation, and

climate change.

2 Military trends of Japan’s neighboring countries and regions

In the report to the National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party in 2017 (hereinafter

referred to as “NCCPC”) China sets the goals of "basically achieving modernization of

national defense and the military" by 2035 and building “a world-class military” by the

middle of the century, and in the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19[th] Communist Party of China

Central Committee in 2020, the achievement of “the centennial military building goal” by

2027 was added as a target. In a report to the NCCPC in 2022, it was newly stated that more

rapidly elevating the People’s Liberation Army to “world-class military” at an early stage is

a strategic task for building “a modern socialist country” in all respects, and under such goals,

China holds up a “new system concentrating nationwide effort and resources,” will continue

integrated development of “mechanization, informatization and intelligentization” and is

broadly and swiftly strengthening its military capability in both quality and quantity.

Moreover, it has stipulated that next five years will be the critical period to start the full-scale

construction of a “modern socialist country.”

China’s announced national defense budget first exceeded Japan’s defense-related

expenditures in FY1998 and has since increased at a rapid pace, reaching approximately 4.8

times of Japan’s defense-related expenditure in FY2022. China’s announced national defense

budget is just a portion of actual expenditures spent for military purposes, and backed by the

rapid increase in national defense expenditures, China now possesses more numerous modern

naval and air assets than those of Japan. Additionally, China has been strengthening its

capabilities in new domains including the space and cyber domains. Regarding nuclear forces,

it appears highly likely that China intends to possess at least 1,000 deliverable nuclear

5


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

warheads by the end of the 2020s. Regarding China’s missile forces, China, which is not

included in the framework of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, has

deployed numerous ground-launched intermediate-range missiles that were restricted by the

INF Treaty, while, at the same time, developing the capabilities of anti-ship ballistic missiles

and long-range land-attack cruise missiles, and developing and deploying hypersonic glide

vehicles (HGV) from the perspective of strengthening military capabilities to deny access

and deployment of the military forces from other countries to its surrounding areas and

impede military activities in the areas of concern (so-called anti-access/area-denial, or

“A2/AD” capability). Moreover, China is promoting development and deployment of

unmanned assets, and their increased activities have been confirmed in the areas surrounding

Japan.

Backed by these military capabilities, China has been intensifying its activities across the

entire region surrounding Japan, including the East China Sea, particularly the exterritorial

water around Senkaku Islands, the Sea of Japan, and the western Pacific Ocean including the

areas around the Izu and Ogasawara Islands, extending beyond the so-called First Island

Chain to the Second Island Chain, as well as increasing military pressure on Taiwan and

promoting its militarization in the South China Sea.

Especially, in the region surrounding Japan, Chinese naval vessels have attempted to

intensify maritime activities in the areas around the Senkaku Islands, and, under such

circumstance, ships belonging to the China Coast Guard have repeatedly intruded into

Japan’s territorial waters in the areas around the Senkaku Islands. Also, Chinese navy vessels

have been seen navigating in Japan's territorial waters and contiguous zones around the

Southwestern Islands.

Regarding Taiwan, the report to NCCPC in 2022 reiterated that China “will continue to

strive for peaceful reunification with the greatest sincerity and the utmost effort, but we will

never promise to renounce the use of force.” At the same time, the report also stated that “we

have thus maintained the initiative and the ability to steer in cross-Strait relations,” and

“complete reunification of our country must be realized, and it can, without doubt.” In recent

years, the overall military balance between China and Taiwan is rapidly tilting to China’s

favor and China has been intensifying military activities around Taiwan. It is believed that

through the series of activities around Taiwan, China seeks to create a fait accompli in the

situation where Chinese military is continuously operating, and improve its practical

capabilities. Moreover, China has launched nine ballistic missiles in August 4, 2022, five of

which landed within Japan’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). This was perceived as a threat

to local residents. China thus has intensified its coercive military activities around Taiwan,

and concerns about the peace and stability of the Taiwan Strait are rapidly growing not only

in the Indo-Pacific region but also in the entire international community.

Such China’s current external stance, military activities, and other activities have become

6


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

a matter of serious concern for Japan and the international community, and present an

unprecedented and the greatest strategic challenge in ensuring the peace and security of Japan

and the peace and stability of the international community, as well as in strengthening the

international order based on the rule of law, to which Japan should respond with its

comprehensive national power including defense capability and in cooperation and

collaboration with the ally, like-minded countries and others.

North Korea has concentrated on building up its weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)

and ballistic missiles in order to maintain its regime. Technologically, North Korea is

considered to already have the capability to launch an attack on Japan with a ballistic missile

which includes Japan in its range, fitted with a nuclear warhead. Regarding ballistic missiles,

which are the means to deliver WMDs, it is estimated that North Korea is rapidly improving

its related technologies and operational capabilities by diversifying modes of launch.

Particularly, in recent years, North Korea has been pursuing the operationalization of ballistic

missiles that can fly at low altitudes on irregular trajectories with the aim of making

identification of signs of launch, detection and interception difficult by launching them from

various platforms such as Transporter-Erector-Launchers (TEL), submarines and railway cars.

Furthermore, North Korea has prioritized the realization of a “hypersonic gliding flight

warheads” and “solid fuel-propelled intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM)” with a range

covering the U.S. mainland and seeks to promote its research and development, and future

technological advancements a concern. These nuclear and missile developments and others

by North Korea violate a series of UNSC resolutions and others, and significantly undermine

the peace, stability and security of the region and international community. Such North

Korea’s military activities pose an even more grave and imminent threat to Japan’s national

security than ever before.

Russia’s aggression against Ukraine has shaken the very foundation of the international

order and is perceived as the most significant and direct threat to defense in Europe. As for

the areas surrounding Japan, the Russian forces intensified their military activities including

through the deployment of newer-model equipment and implementation of large-scale

military exercises in the Far East region including the Northern Territories. In addition, in

recent years, Russia has strengthened collaboration with China in terms of military aspect by

conducting activities such as joint navigations with naval vessels and joint flights with

bombers. Such military activities in the Indo-Pacific region, including Japan, together with

its strategic coordination with China, are of strong concern from a defense perspective.

Moreover, in case these activities are conducted in a coordinated manner in the Indo
Pacific region, it is necessary to closely observe how much impact they will have in the region.

3 Defense challenges

Russia, a permanent member of the UNSC and a nuclear weapon state that bears primary

7


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

responsibility for maintaining international peace and stability, has openly launched an

aggression against Ukraine and repeatedly took actions and sent messages that could be

interpreted as threat of use of nuclear weapons, creating an unprecedented situation. This is

an issue that shakes the foundation of the international order that the international community

has built since the end of World War II. This kind of unilateral changes to the status quo by

force, this time happening in Europe, could also occur in the Indo-Pacific region.

The military background for Russia’s aggression against Ukraine was that Ukraine's

defense capability against Russia was insufficient, thus failed to discourage and deter Russian

aggression; Ukraine did not possess sufficient capabilities.

Also, while no country can defend its own security by itself alone, there is a renewed

recognition of the importance of cooperation with allies who have the intention and capability

to respond to invasion jointly in order to deter invasion from outside.

Moreover, it should be noted that a country with high military capability can have the

intention to launch an aggression at some point. A threat emerges when capability is

combined with intention, but it is difficult to accurately grasp the intention from outside.

When the decision-making process of the state is unclear, there is always a foundation for a

threat to be actualized.

To protect one’s own country from such states, it is necessary to have deterrence capability

thereby making them realize that unilateral changes to the status quo by force are difficult. It

is also important to build own capability, or defense capability focused on their capability in

order to prevent them from harboring the intention to launch an aggression.

The way of warfare has also been drastically changing. In addition to the traditional forms

of invasion through air, sea, and land, new ways of warfare have emerged with the

combination of massive missile strike by ballistic and cruise missiles with enhanced precision

strike capabilities, hybrid warfare including information warfare such as false-flag operations,

asymmetric attacks leveraging the space, cyber, and electromagnetic domains and with

unmanned assets, and actions and remarks that could be interpreted as threat of use of nuclear

weapons made publicly by nuclear powers. Whether or not to be able to respond to these new

ways of warfare has become a major challenge to building defense capabilities in the future.

Surrounded by the sea and with long coastlines, Japan possesses numerous islands remote

from the mainland and is blessed with vast EEZ, and continental shelves: spread widely

therein are life, person, and property of the Japanese nationals, as well as its territory,

territorial waters, airspace, and various natural resources, all of which Japan must defend to

the end. For Japan, a maritime nation that depends on overseas trade for the majority of its

resources and food, it is essential to reinforce the free and open maritime order as well as to

ensure the freedom and safety of navigation and overflight.

On the other hand, Japan has frequently suffered from natural disasters with significant

damage. Because while its industrial, population, and information centers are concentrated in

8


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

urban areas with a large number of critical facilities such as nuclear power plants located on

the coast, making it a challenge to protect the Japanese nationals and critical facilities from

various threats.

In addition, considering Japan's aging population with a declining birth rate and continued

severe fiscal conditions, it is essential to make more efficient use of budget and personnel

than ever before.

III Japan’s Basic Defense Policy

Defense capability is the ultimate guarantor for ensuring Japan’s security. It will deter

threats from extending to Japan, and in the case that a threat does reach Japan, it will be

disrupted and defeated, thereby demonstrating Japan’s resolve and capability to defend itself

to the end.

Since the end of World War II, Japan has committed to developing a moderate and efficient

defense capability. In particular, since the formulation of the NDPG in 1976 (approved by the

National Defense Council and the Cabinet on October 29, 1976), the objective of Japan

possessing its own defense capability was not to respond to a specific threat, but to avoid

Japan becoming a destabilizing factor in the region by creating a vacuum of power.

Since the end of the Cold War, SDF’s roles and missions have been expanded beyond the

defense of Japan to respond to various situations, respond to large-scale disaster in Japan and

abroad and International Peace Cooperation Activities. Additionally, 2010 NDPG (approved

by the Security Council of Japan and the Cabinet on December 17, 2010) called for refraining

from the reliance on the “Basic Defense Force Concept,” which places an importance on the

deterrence effect by the existence of defense capability itself, and moreover, 2013 NDPG

(approved by the National Security Council and the Cabinet on December 17, 2013) squarely

looked at the increasingly severe security environment as a reality, based on which Japan has

been strengthening the defense capability so as to build a truly effective defense force.

However, neighboring countries have drastically strengthened their military capabilities, and

have rapidly expanded and intensified missile launches and coercive military activities,

threatening the security of Japan and the region.

As these activities escalate, it is extremely difficult to predict when and how intentions will

change and unilateral changes to the status quo by force will occur. It has been clear since

Russia's aggression against Ukraine that a unilateral change to the status quo by force would

cause massive human and material damage, disrupt not only the regional economy but also

the global economy, finance, energy, maritime and air traffic, and have a significant impact

on people's daily lives.

Taking these into account, Japan’s future defense capability will focus on such opponent’s

capabilities and way of warfare and will be fundamentally reinforced to defend itself more

than ever. At the same time, Japan will promote its response to the new way of warfare and

9


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

must make clear its intention to never accept unilateral changes to the status quo by force and

such attempts at any time. These efforts cannot be achieved by Japan alone, and it will be

necessary to cooperate and collaborate closely with our ally, like-minded countries and others.

This strategy makes clear Japan’s defense objectives and lays out approaches and concrete

means to achieve them, whose implementation will require integrating all fields of effort.

 - Japan’s defense objectives are as follows:

The first objective is to shape a security environment not accepting unilateral changes to

the status quo by force;

The second objective is to deter unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such

attempts concerning Japan’s peace and security through cooperation with its ally, like
minded countries and others. Also, in case this occurred, Japan will rapidly respond in any

way and control the situation at an early stage to prevent further escalation into an invasion

of Japan;

The third objective is, if by any chance deterrence has failed and an invasion of Japan

occurs, to rapidly respond to it in a seamless manner in accordance with its modality and to

disrupt and defeat the invasion holding and receiving our primary responsibility and together

with support from its ally and others.

Furthermore, in dealing with the threat of nuclear weapons, U.S. extended deterrence, with

nuclear deterrence at its core, is essential and Japan will defend our own country to the end

from all situations through the combination of Japan’s own efforts to achieve the first,

second and third defense objectives and the extended deterrence and others provided by the

United States.

 - Approaches to realize Japan’s defense objectives are as follows and concrete means will be

presented in the respective approaches:

The first approach is, to strengthen Japan’s own architecture for national defense,

fundamentally reinforce Japan’s defense capabilities as its core and reinforce the defense

architecture of the whole country.

The second approach is to further reinforce joint deterrence and response capability of the

Japan-U.S. Alliance by further strengthening cooperation with our ally, the United States.

The third approach is to reinforce collaboration with like-minded countries and others that

cooperate in upholding and reinforcing a free and open international order.

1 Strengthening Japan’s own architecture for national defense

It goes without saying that the success of Japan’s national defense depends on its own

efforts. Only when a country musters strong will and efforts to defend itself, can it protect

and support each other with the ally and others in times of emergency. The first approach

10


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

therefore is to make renewed efforts to strengthen Japan's own architecture for national

defense that integrates all aspects of national power. At the core of such efforts is the

fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities.

(1) Fundamental reinforcement of Japan’s defense capabilities

Defense capability is the ultimate guarantor of Japan’s security. Japan has aimed to build

a defense capability that can respond to and deter a range of possible situations in a truly

effective manner. More specifically, in accordance with the “National Defense Program

Guidelines for FY2019 and beyond” (approved by the National Security Council and the

Cabinet on December 18, 2018), Japan, in order to operate seamlessly across all phases

from peacetime to armed contingencies, has strove to build the Multi-Domain Defense

Force, which organically fuses capabilities in space, cyber and the electromagnetic

spectrum with those in ground, maritime and air domains and is capable of sustained and

flexible activities through joint operations.

As the international community finds itself in the most challenging time since the end of

World War II, Japan has explored the shape of future defense capability, taking into account

the opponent’s capabilities as well as the new way of warfare, performing various analysis,

including capability assessment, regarding response to various possible situations. Building

upon these efforts, in order to continue to protect the lives and peaceful livelihood of

Japanese nationals from unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts,

Japan will fundamentally reinforce the current Multi-Domain Defense Force through

further accelerated efforts.

The basic thoughts that underpin our efforts to fundamental reinforcement of defense

capabilities are as follows:

a. First, with a fundamentally reinforced defense capability, Japan should be able to take

primary responsibility to disrupt and defeat an invasion of Japan. This means that Japan

will possess a capability that makes the opponent realize that the goal of invasion of

Japan is not achievable through military means, and that the damage the opponent will

incur will make the invasion not worth the cost. In addition, if Japan possesses a defense

capability to enable disrupting and defeating invasion, this capability, coupled with that

of the United States, Japan’s ally, will be able to deter not only invasion of Japan, but

also deter unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts in the Indo
Pacific region. This will help foster a security environment where such forcible actions

are unacceptable.

b. Second, a fundamentally reinforced defense capability should be able to deter invasion

of Japan through such activities as: persistent intelligence, surveillance and

reconnaissance (ISR); training and exercises conducted as flexible deterrent options

(FDO); and measures against aircraft intruding into Japan’s territorial airspace. Such a

11


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

defense capability should also be able to swiftly respond to and address a range of

situations in a seamless manner.

Such a defense capability must come with high readiness and response capability. We

need to prepare training infrastructures both inside and outside Japan; we also need a

flexible work environment so that SDF can, even in the face of ever-increasing volume

of peacetime operations, conduct sufficient volume of training and exercise necessary

for improving the ability of SDF personnel and the proficiency of SDF units.

c. Third, a fundamentally reinforced defense capability should be able to adapt to the

new way of warfare. It must operate with the U.S. forces and integrate a variety of

missions such as cross-domain operations, hybrid operations including information

operations, and missile interception and counterstrike. To this end, Japan first needs to

identify functions and capabilities necessary for national defense, in accordance with

the guidance in the National Security Strategy, NDS and Defense Buildup Program as

well as joint operational concepts aligned with the guidance, and then determine how

those capabilities should be distributed among the Ground, Maritime, and Air Self
Defense Forces.

d. As part of the functions and capabilities required for the defense of Japan described

above, Japan needs capabilities with which to disrupt and defeat invading forces over

long distances, thereby deterring invasion itself. Japan therefore will strengthen “stand
off defense capabilities” and “integrated air and missile defense capabilities.”

Should deterrence fail and invasion of Japan occur, Japan would need to ensure

asymmetric advantage by leveraging, in addition to these capabilities, manned as well

as unmanned assets and gain superiority across domains such as underwater, surface,

and air. To this end, Japan will strengthen “unmanned defense capabilities,” “cross
domain operation capabilities,” and “command and control/intelligence related

functions.”

Japan would also need to operate in a swift as well as persistent manner so as to force

the opponent to give up invasion. For this, Japan will strengthen “mobile deployment

capabilities,” and “sustainability/resiliency.”

e. Japan needs to promptly effect such fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities

as when and how unilateral changes to the status quo occurs is hard to predict:

More specifically, Japan will strengthen defense capability by 2027 with the goal of

becoming capable of, in case of invasion of Japan, to take primary responsibility to

counter it by disrupting and defeating the aggression while receiving support from the

ally and others. And by about ten years from now, Japan will make further efforts to

better attain this defense objective so that Japan would be able to disrupt and defeat

invasion at earlier timing and at locations further afield.

The top priorities for the next five years are twofold: first, in order to maximize the

12


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

performances of existing equipment, Japan will improve operational rates, secure

sufficient munitions and fuel, and accelerate investments in defense facilities for

improved resiliency; and second, Japan will reinforce the core capabilities of the future.

This defense capability development will be constantly reviewed in light of ever
evolving security environment surrounding Japan thereby adapting to changes therein.

f. This fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities entails significant costs and

commensurate increase in personnel strength. In a way that serves to realize

fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities, Japan will, while adhering to scrap
and-build approach, optimize SDF’s organization and authorized strength as well as

equipment. We will also further our ongoing, efforts toward more efficient procurement,

which have achieved significant cost reductions, while giving due consideration to the

defense production base. In addition, to account for population decrease and declining

birthrates/aging population, Japan will robustly promote automation, manpower-saving

and optimization.

g. The purposes of the above-mentioned fundamental reinforcement of defense

capabilities are none other than: not to allow unilateral changes to the status quo by

force and such attempts and to deter invasion of Japan.

Fundamentally reinforcing Japan’s own defense capabilities will further enhance

deterrence and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance and collaboration with

like-minded countries will be enhanced as well. By doing so, Japan will ensure that

opponent fully recognizes Japan’s intention and capability, do not underestimate Japan,

and do not overestimate its capability, thereby deterring invasion of Japan. This is the

purpose of Japan's fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities.

h. A key to deterring invasion against Japan is counterstrike capabilities that leverage

stand-off defense capability and other capabilities. In recent years, in Japan’s

surroundings, there have been dramatic advances in missile-related technologies,

including hypersonic weapons, and practical skills for missile operations, such as

saturation attack. Missile forces in the region have significantly improved in both

qualitative and quantitative terms, and missiles themselves have been repeatedly

launched. Missile attacks against Japan have become a palpable threat. Under these

circumstances, Japan will continue its steadfast efforts to both qualitatively and

quantitatively enhance its missile defense capabilities by continuing to develop

technologies that bring the ability to deal with missiles with irregular trajectories.

Looking ahead, however, if Japan continues to rely solely upon ballistic missile

defenses, it will become increasingly difficult to fully address missile threats with the

existing missile defense network alone.

For this reason, Japan needs counterstrike capabilities: capabilities which, in the case

of missile attacks by an opponent, enable Japan to mount effective counterstrikes

13


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

against the opponent to prevent further attacks while defending against incoming

missiles by means of the missile defense network.

Counterstrike capabilities are SDF’s capabilities that leverage stand-off defense

capability and other capabilities. In cases where armed attack against Japan has occurred,

and as part of that attack ballistic missiles and other means have been used, counterstrike

capabilities enable Japan to mount effective counterstrikes against the opponent’s

territory. Counterstrikes are done as a minimum necessary measure for self-defense and

in accordance with the Three New Conditions for Use of Force.

By possessing such capabilities to mount effective counterstrikes, Japan will deter

armed attack itself. If an opponent ever launches missiles, it will be able to prevent the

opponent’s further armed attacks by counterstrike capabilities, while protecting itself

against incoming missiles by the missile defense network, thereby defending the lives

and peaceful livelihoods of Japanese nationals.

Counterstrike capabilities are the capabilities on which the Government expressed its

view on February 29, 1956, which stated that, under the Constitution, “as long as it is

deemed that there are no other means to defend against attack by guided missiles and

others, to hit the bases of those guided missiles and others is legally within the purview

of self-defense and thus permissible.” These are also capabilities that the Government

has chosen not to acquire up to now as a matter of policy decision.

This Government view squarely applies to measures for self-defense taken under the

Three New Conditions for Use of Force, presented in the 2015 Legislation for Peace

and Security, and the capabilities that Japan has now decided to acquire can be used

when the above-mentioned Three Conditions are met in compliance with this view.

Counterstrike capabilities fall within the purview of Japan’s Constitution and

international law; they do not change Japan’s exclusively defense-oriented policy; and,

they will be used only when the above-mentioned Three New Conditions are fulfilled.

Needless to say, preemptive strikes, namely striking first at a stage when no armed

attack has occurred, remain impermissible.

While the basic division of roles between Japan and the United States will remain

unchanged, as Japan will now possess counterstrike capabilities, the two nations will

cooperate in counterstrikes just as they do in defending against ballistic missiles and

others.

(2) Reinforcing the defense architecture of the whole country

To defend Japan, SDF needs to be strong. Also self-evident is that national defense

cannot be achieved without whole-of-nation efforts. In addition to fundamentally

reinforcing defense capabilities, Japan will build an overall national defense architecture

by integrating Japan’s national power -- diplomatic, information, economic, and

14


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

technological -- as well as by systematically combining all policy means. To enhance the

whole-of-the-government undertaking, it is essential to break down sectionalism within the

Government. From such perspective, Japan will enhance the comprehensive defense

architecture that draws upon Japan’s national power. This undertaking is an indivisible part

of fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities. Japan will also promote cooperation

with local governments and private entities.

a. Diplomatic efforts underpinned by Japan’s enhanced defense architecture are

important for our efforts to prevent unilateral changes to the status quo by force and

such attempts. By promoting robust diplomatic efforts through the promotion such as

the vision of the Free and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP), Japan will: proactively create a

peaceful, stable, and predictable international environment; prevent unilateral changes

to the status quo by force; and ensure Japan’s peace and security and the peace, stability,

and prosperity of the region and the international community.

Combined with these diplomatic efforts, Ministry of Defense/Self-Defense Forces

(MOD/SDF) is to promote cooperation with our ally and multilayered collaboration

with like-minded countries and others to create a desirable security environment. Also,

in order to continue to demonstrate the intention and capability to deter unilateral

changes to the status quo by force and such attempts and influence opponent’s actions,

it is necessary to improve and reinforce training and exercises as FDO and Strategic

Communication (SC) by the whole of government and with our ally and like-minded

countries and others.

b. To detect indications of contingencies at early stages, relevant government agencies

should conduct persistent ISR and analysis in collaboration from peacetime. Also

important is swift government-level decision-making and inter-agency coordination

tailored to given situation. With respect to information warfare that involves the

cognitive domain, Japan will enhance fact-checking and counter-messaging to deal with

disinformation, thereby enhancing whole-of-the-government response during

contingency as well as peacetime.

c. It is important not to allow unilateral changes to the status quo by force through

conducting activities in a collaborative manner between relevant agencies based on the

whole-of-the-government decision-making. For this purpose, Japan will improve the

effectiveness of its response by conducting simulations and integrated training and

exercises while establishing coordination procedures from peacetime across the whole

government. In particular, for the protection of critical facilities such as nuclear power

plants the response to an infringements that does not amount to an armed attack in the

vicinity of remote islands from outside that are below the threshold as well as an armed

attack, SDF will conduct training and exercises with the police and Japan Coast Guard

on a routine basis in light of contingencies, and establish necessary collaboration

15


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

procedures, including the procedure to control Japan Coast Guard by the Minister of

Defense in an armed attack situation.

d. Since the domains of space, cyber, and electromagnetic spectrum are the basic

infrastructure for the people's daily lives as well as being vitally important for the

defense of Japan to carry out cross-domain operations, Japan will reinforce the

capabilities across the whole government.

Regarding the space domain, securing its stable use for information gathering,

communication, positioning, and other purposes is vitally important for both the lives

of the people and their defense, and Japan will reinforce cooperation and collaboration

including research and development between MOD/SDF and relevant agencies

including the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) and private companies. In

doing so, Japan will further apply civilian technologies into the defense field, facilitate

investment in technology development in the private sector and improve space

capabilities for Japan as a whole.

In the cyber domain, it is important to work together with other countries, relevant

ministries and agencies, and private companies to gather and share information at all

phases from peacetime to armed contingencies as well as to strengthen response

capability in the cybersecurity field across Japan. Considering government policies in

the cybersecurity field is to be coordinated comprehensively in a unified and whole-of
government manner, MOD/SDF will promote its efforts that contribute to reinforcing

cooperation with the relevant ministries and agencies, critical infrastructure operators,

and the defense industry, while improving its cybersecurity capabilities.

With regard to the electromagnetic spectrum domain, its range of application and use

have expanded to cover the ground, maritime, air, space, and cyber domains, making it

the frontlines of offense and defense in contemporary warfare. For this reason, ensuring

superiority in the electromagnetic spectrum domain is extremely important for

reinforcing deterrence and conducting cross-domain operations. MOD/SDF will work

closely with the relevant ministries and agencies to ensure SDF's stable and flexible use

of radio waves by enabling use of spectrum both for civilian purposes and that for SDF's

command and control and information gathering activities.

e. In an era where victory or defeat is determined by the new way of warfare supported

by advanced technologies, it has become critical to apply cutting-edge technologies for

defense purposes.

In this regard, under the whole-of-the-government mechanism for strengthening

comprehensive defense architecture, Japan will utilize the cutting-edge technology

research and development conducted by relevant government organizations for defense

purposes based on the needs of MOD/SDF. In addition, Japan will implement initiatives

to link the results of research and development conducted by start-ups and other

16


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

companies and various research institutions into early production and deployment of

defense equipment, while utilizing the defense industry.

f. National administrative agencies, local governments, public entities, and private

enterprises are required to make joint efforts in a cooperative and collaborative manner,

in order to respond to an invasion of Japan while protecting the lives of the Japanese

nationals and in order to respond to various contingencies including large-scale

disasters.

First, based on defense needs, under the inter-agency mechanism for strengthening

comprehensive defense architecture, the Government will undertake necessary

measures such as the establishment of a framework for coordination among the relevant

ministries and agencies in order to develop and strengthen airports and seaports, and

others, particularly in the southwestern region, and to enable SDF to use facilities such

as existing airports and seaports, as an operational base, including for the purpose of

training in peacetime.

Japan will also deepen collaboration with relevant organizations regarding the

expansion of the use of civilian vessels and aircraft for SDF's maneuver and deployment,

and coordinate and cooperate to systematically implement civil protection measures

employing such vessels and aircraft. In addition, MOD/SDF will promote various

measures such as reinforcing whole-of-the-government civil protection training for

armed attack situations, enhancement of the information transmission function of a

national early warning system (J-ALERT) in preparation for an attack by ballistic

missiles or other means.

Furthermore, Japan will establish an effective mechanism to balance defense

requirements with socioeconomic activities such as the installation of wind power

generation facilities so that the defense-related facilities can fully function through the

smooth use of sea, airspace and radio waves.

In addition, concerning the transportation and storing of SDF's ammunition and fuel,

Japan will reinforce collaboration with the relevant ministries and agencies and take

measures for further facilitation.

Japan will promote similar initiatives for smooth implementation of Japan-U.S.

bilateral responses to various contingencies.

g. For Japan, a maritime nation, reinforcing the maritime order and ensuring the freedom

and safety of navigation and overflight are extremely important for Japan's peace and

security. To this end, Japan will work to secure the national interest in Japan's territorial

waters and the stable use of its important sea lanes.

First of all, MOD/SDF will promote maritime security cooperation guided by the

vision of FOIP, with its ally and like-minded countries as well as coastal states in the

Indo-Pacific, while closely cooperating and collaborating with Japan Coast Guard,

17


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

which is responsible for maritime security in Japan.

In order to secure the stable use of sea lanes, Japan will make necessary efforts to

conduct counter-piracy operations and ensure the safety of Japan-related vessels in

cooperation and collaboration with relevant organizations. In this regard, Japan will

make stable, long-term use of its operation activity in Djibouti.

h. To enable SDF and U.S. Forces in Japan to seamlessly and effectively conduct

activities on a daily basis, Japan will gain understanding and cooperation from the local

governments and residents around their facilities more than ever. Japan will actively

engage in public relations activities regarding the policies and activities of the

MOD/SDF and also the role of U.S. Forces in Japan on a regular basis, and make

coordination to accommodate the requests and situations of the local communities,

while fulfilling accountability to them. At the same time, Japan will continue to promote

measures to improve the living environment of areas around defense facilities including

noise prevention from the perspective of promoting cooperation to the defense of Japan.

In addition, in light of the fact that the transportation of emergency patients by SDF

units and their very existence contribute greatly to the maintenance and revitalization

of local communities in some regions, Japan will give due consideration to the

characteristics of the regions and the contribution to the local economy in order to gain

understanding of the local governments and residents upon reorganization of units as

well as placement and operation of SDF camps and bases.

2 Joint deterrence and response by the Japan-U.S. Alliance

The second approach is to further strengthen the Japan-U.S. Alliance. The Alliance with

the United States is the cornerstone for Japan’s security policy and fundamental

reinforcement of Japan’s defense capabilities will lead to more effective employment of U.S.

capabilities and will further strengthen deterrence and response capabilities of the Japan-U.S.

Alliance. By representing such joint resolve and capabilities, Japan and the United States will

prevent escalation of emergencies from gray-zone situation to an invasion with conventional

force and eventually the use of nuclear weapons and deter unilateral changes to the status quo

by force and such attempts. In addition, if an invasion against Japan occurs, Japan-U.S. joint

response will disrupt the invasion. To this end, both Japan and the United States constantly

modernize the Alliance and strengthen joint capabilities by aligning strategies and prioritizing

goals together. In doing so, given the fundamental reinforcement of Japan’s own defense

capabilities, Japan will play a larger role for the defense of Japan and the peace and stability

of the region under the Japan-U.S. Alliance. Specifically, Japan will work on measures as

follows:

(1) Strengthening Japan and U.S. joint deterrence and response capabilities

18


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

Japan’s NDS and National Defense Strategy of the United States are well aligned in

prioritizing the prevention of the unilateral changes to the status quo by force through

integrating all the approaches and means. Accordingly, from the viewpoint of reinforcing

readiness and resiliency, imposing cost on an opponent and deterring an invasion of Japan,

Japan will further deepen discussion with the United States on roles, missions and

capabilities and further reinforce deterrence capabilities of both countries in an integrated

manner.

Specifically, Japan will further deepen cooperation with the United States to smoothly

implement combined cross-domain operations including space, cyber and electromagnetic

spectrum and measures to improve interoperability. At the same time, regarding Japan’s

counterstrike capabilities, Japan and the United States will jointly establish cooperative

posture including relevant information gathering to employ the capability more effectively.

Further, Japan intends to reinforce collaboration in such areas as air-defense, anti-surface

warfare, anti-submarine warfare, mine-warfare, amphibious operations, airborne

operations, intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance and targeting (ISRT), protection of

asset and facilities, and logistic support. Also, in order to effectively realize the division of

roles and missions between Japan and the United States in light of the fundamental

reinforcement of Japan's defense capabilities, Japan will ensure close operational

coordination with the United States through Japan-U.S. bilateral planning. In addition,

Japan will improve its response capabilities, including the readiness and interoperability of

the Alliance, through more advanced and realistic exercises and training.

In addition, in order to ensure that the U.S. extended deterrence with its nuclear

deterrence at its core remains credible and resilient, Japan will further intensify and deepen

bilateral discussions including those at the ministerial level.

As joint measures from peacetime to deter unilateral changes to the status quo by force

and such attempts as well as various situations, Japan will further expand and evolve

operations including joint FDO and ISR. In order to effectively conduct those operations,

Japan will proactively make such efforts as gaining participation of like-minded countries

and others and protecting assets, namely U.S. vessels and aircraft, by SDF.

Furthermore, as part of efforts to strengthen the deterrence and response capabilities of

Japan and the United States in a unified manner, Japan will on a regular basis increase

joint/shared use of Japanese and U.S. facilities, and promote the deployment of both units

to their respective facilities for training or other purposes.

(2) Reinforcing alliance coordination functions

To conduct aligned joint response of Japan and the United States in any situation, Japan

will further develop coordination functions centered on the Alliance Coordination

Mechanism (ACM).

19


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

In addition, in order to reinforce collaboration with like-minded countries and others

with the Japan-U.S. Alliance as its core, Japan will promote closer operational coordination

by utilizing the coordination functions including the ACM.

(3) Reinforcing joint response infrastructure

Japan will reinforce the infrastructure to support effective joint responses in all phases.

First, in order to further reinforce information sharing at all levels, Japan will

fundamentally reinforce measures related to information security and cybersecurity so that

Japan and United States can fully employ their capabilities. Also, in order to ensure the

Alliance's technological edges, interoperability, readiness, and persistent warfare

capabilities, Japan will further reinforce defense equipment and technology cooperation

through joint analysis and joint research in cutting-edge technology, joint development and

production of defense equipment, improvement in mutual interchangeability, shared use

and reinforcement of various networks, expansion of production and maintenance

capability of U.S. military equipment in Japan and reinforcement of supply-chain.

(4) Measures to support stationing of U.S. Forces in Japan

Japan will promote various measures to provide stable support for the stationing of the

U.S. Forces in Japan, such as the steady implementation of the realignment of the U.S.

Forces in Japan and the initiatives to reinforce the readiness and resiliency of the U.S.

Forces in Japan, while optimizing the bilateral posture to respond to the severe security

environment.

Particularly, in Okinawa, which is located in areas critically important for security, while

dealing with the increasingly severe security environment, Japan will continue to work to

mitigate impact by steadily implementing such measures as realignment, consolidation and

reduction of facilities and areas of U.S. Forces in Okinawa including the relocation of

Marine Corps Air Station Futenma as well as the relocation of units and exercises.

In order to smoothly and effectively conduct aforementioned Japan-U.S. joint measures,

it is essential to gain understanding of Japanese nationals; therefore, Japan will reinforce

measures including proactively publicizing its significance and necessity.

3 Collaboration with like-minded countries and others

The third approach is to enhance the collaboration with like-minded countries and others. In

order to counter unilateral changes to the status quo by force and such attempts and to ensure

Japan’s security, it is extremely important to reinforce collaboration with not only our ally but

also as many countries as possible. From such perspective, Japan will promote efforts to

contribute to realizing the vision of the FOIP.

First of all, while Japan placing the Japan-U.S. Alliance as an essential cornerstone, Japan

20


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

will proactively promote multilateral and multilayered defense cooperation and exchanges,

considering the characteristic of the region as well as situation of individual country. In doing

so, Japan will further promote institutional frameworks such as Reciprocal Access Agreement

(RAA), Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement (ACSA), and Agreement concerning the

Transfer of Defense Equipment and Technology.

With Australia, which is the “Special Strategic Partnership” in the Indo-Pacific region written

in the new “Japan-Australia Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation”, Japan will build the

closest cooperation next to the Japan-U.S. defense cooperation and deepen consultations in all

the levels including the Foreign and Defense Ministerial Consultations (“2+2”), joint training

and exercises, defense equipment and technology cooperation. In addition, in light of

developments such as the signing of the RAA, Japan will conduct activities such as exercises

and rotational deployment in Australia. In the event of a contingency, bearing in mind potential

cooperation among Japan, U.S., and Australia, Japan will mutually consult and collaborate

focusing on logistics support and information sharing. From the viewpoint of ensuring effective

responses to contingencies, Japan will promote discussion on the scope, objectives and forms

of operational cooperation on regular basis.

With India, Japan has established the Special Strategic and Global Partnership, and from the

viewpoint of reinforce strategic collaboration, while utilizing frameworks such as “2+2,” Japan

will further deepen bilateral and multilateral defense exchanges including service-to-service

exchanges in a broad range of field including maritime security and cybersecurity, while

promoting training and exercises as well as defense equipment and technology cooperation.

With partners like United Kingdom, France, Germany and Italy, Japan will mutually

reinforce involvement in global security issues as well as challenges in Europe and Indo-Pacific.

Accordingly, Japan will build close cooperation with them placing their alliance with the United

States through such arrangements as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) as a

cornerstone, and implement consultations in all levels including “2+2,” joint training and

exercises, defense equipment and technology cooperation including the joint development of

the next-generation fighter aircraft, and mutual dispatch of vessels and aircraft. In doing so,

Japan will reinforce cooperation through monitoring illicit ship-to-ship transfers by North

Korea and the counter-piracy operations off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden, which

will be conducted jointly.

With NATO and the European Union (EU), based on the bilateral relations with European

countries mentioned above, Japan will reinforce collaboration with regard to formulation of

international rules and involvement to the security of the Indo-Pacific region.

With the Republic of Korea (ROK), in response to the nuclear and missile threats posed by

North Korea and considering the importance to strengthen the deterrence and response

capabilities of the Japan-U.S. Alliance and the U.S.-ROK Alliance, Japan will reinforce the

collaboration among Japan, the United States and ROK through measures including trilateral

21


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

training and exercises.

With Canada and New Zealand, Japan will promote measures including consultation at each

level, joint training and exercises, and bilateral cooperation with third parties in order to make

further collaboration for the challenges in the Indo-Pacific region.

Japan will reinforce collaboration with Nordic-Baltic states, which are facing unilateral

changes to the status quo by force and such attempts, including Russia’s aggression against

Ukraine, and are working on cutting-edge initiatives such as information warfare, cybersecurity,

strategic communication and hybrid warfare. Japan will also reinforce collaboration with

Central and Eastern European countries, including Czech Republic and Poland, which show

interest in strengthening relationship with Japan. With regards to Southeast Asian countries,

Japan will support their efforts to reinforce the centrality and unity of the Association of

Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) through such means as the East Asia Summit, the ASEAN

Regional Forum, the ASEAN Defence Ministers' Meeting-Plus, and the ASEAN-Japan Defense

Ministers' Meeting. On top of that, from the perspective of stabilizing the security of the Indo
Pacific region, Japan will implement consultations at all levels, including "2+2," strategic port

calls and air visits, and training and exercises depending on the situation of each country. In

addition, with the aim of stabilizing the region, Japan will implement transfer of defense

equipment and capacity building assistance, which contribute to reinforcing defense capabilities

of the region.

With Mongolia, in light of its strategic importance as a democratic country geographically

located between China and Russia, Japan will promote defense equipment and technology

cooperation to elevate the cooperation in political and security field to new dimension, in

addition to means such as implementing defense exchange at all levels, capacity building

assistance and multilateral exercises.

With Central Asian countries, where there are few achievements in defense exchanges despite

the fact that they are located in a geopolitically important region between Asia and Europe,

Japan will continue to accumulate defense exchanges including providing capacity building

assistance in areas of mutual interest.

With Pacific Island countries, Japan, as an important partner country, will engage in

cooperation including capacity building through collaboration with countries including the ally

and like-minded countries. In doing so, consideration will be given to cover organizations other

than military forces such as coast guard.

With Coastal States of the Indian Ocean and countries in the Middle East, Japan will promote

defense cooperation, based on the importance of stable use of sea lane from an energy and

economic perspective. At the same time, Japan will also reinforce defense cooperation with

countries including African countries in terms of responding to global challenges. In particular,

Japan will strengthen cooperation with Djibouti and secure the long-term and stable use of SDF

operation facility there in order to reinforce our operational base in the region, for activities

22


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

including counter-piracy and protection and transportation of Japanese nationals and others

overseas.

While promoting collaboration with like-minded countries and others, Japan will pay

attention to the communication with China and Russia.

With China, in order to build “constructive and stable relationship,” Japan will promote

multilayered dialogues and exchanges including Japan-China security dialogue. In doing so,

Japan will continue to encourage China to play a responsible and constructive role for peace

and stability in the Indo-Pacific region, comply with international code of conduct, and improve

transparency regarding its strengthening of military capabilities buildup and its defense policies,

while also conveying the concerns Japan has in a candid manner. Japan will also make use of

the Maritime and Aerial Communication Mechanism between the Defense Authorities of Japan
China including the hotline, in order to avoid unexpected contingencies between the two

countries.

With regard to Russia, under the idea that unilateral changes to status quo by force are

unacceptable, Japan condemns the aggression against Ukraine to the maximum extent possible,

and will closely cooperate with the international community including G7 in taking appropriate

measures to Russia. At the same time, Japan will maintain necessary communication with

Russia, which is our neighboring country, not to incur unexpected contingencies and

unnecessary friction.

IV Key Capabilities for Fundamental Reinforcement of Defense Capabilities

The following are the basic concepts and contents of the seven functions and capabilities

necessary for the defense of Japan, which are derived from the comprehensive operation

concept in line with the basic policies set forth in the Strategies.

1 Stand-Off Defense Capabilities

In order to protect Japan's territory, which covers approximately 3,000 km in all directions,

Japan will fundamentally reinforce its stand-off defense capabilities to deal with vessels and

landing forces invading Japan, including its remote islands, from locations outside of threat

zones.

First of all, Japan will possess necessary and sufficient capability in a multilayered manner

across the country to be able to disrupt and defeat these vessels and landing forces. Also,

Japan will reinforce capabilities that can be launched from various platforms with such

diverse capabilities as hyper velocity glides and hypersonic glides which are difficult to

intercept.

To this end, by FY2027, Japan will reinforce capability to enable operation of stand-off

missiles including surface-launched and ship-launched models. In doing so, to secure

sufficient capability in prior to the establishment of increased production of domestic stand
23


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

off missile, Japan will promptly procure stand-off missiles manufactured overseas.

In the future, by about ten years from now, Japan will reinforce capability to enable

operation of aircraft-launched stand-off missiles and will acquire capability to operate hyper

velocity gliding missiles with irregular trajectories, hypersonic guided missiles, and other

stand-off missiles.

In addition, Japan will have the capability to persistently gather accurate target information

regarding vessels and landing forces, which is essential for stand-off defense capability, and

possess command and control-related capability to transmit the information in real time.

Japan will also possess information analysis capabilities including the evaluation of results

after a response, as well as the resiliency and redundancy of information networks.

2 Integrated Air and Missile Defense Capabilities

As a country surrounded by sea, it is extremely important for Japan to respond to airborne

threats. In recent years, along with the improvement of the capabilities of ballistic missiles,

cruise missiles, and aircraft, the emergence of anti-ship ballistic missiles, hypersonic

weapons, and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) has diversified, complicated, and advanced

this airborne threat.

To this end, Japan will fundamentally reinforce detecting, tracking and intercepting

capabilities, and also establish a system to enable unified and optimized operation of various

sensors and shooters through networks to reinforce integrated air and missile defense

capabilities.

As a response to the missile attacks from opponent’s country to Japan, Japan will first

intercept missiles flying to Japan over the high seas and Japan’s territorial airspace using a

missile defense system. Subsequently, as a measure for self-defense to the minimum required

level to prevent missile attacks including ballistic missiles, Japan will utilize capabilities

including stand-off defense capabilities to enable Japan to conduct effective counterstrike in

opponent’s area. By having capability to conduct effective counterstrike and facilitate

interception by missile defense, Japan will restrict opponent’s missile launches and thereby

deter missile attacks from happening.

To this end, by FY2027, Japan will reinforce the capabilities of warning and control radar

and surface-to-air missile and procure Aegis System Equipped Vessels. Japan will also

reinforce the capability to respond to small UAVs with weapons including directed-energy

weapons.

In about ten years, Japan will reinforce its integrated air and missile defense capabilities

by further introducing research on capability to respond to hypersonic weapons in the gliding

phase and interception by non-kinetic means to deal with assets such as small UAVs.

3 Unmanned Defense Capabilities

24


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

Unmanned assets are often relatively affordable compared to manned equipment and have

the great advantage of being able to minimize human loss and operate continuously for a

long period of time. Furthermore, by combining these unmanned assets with AI and manned

equipment, it can be a game-changer that fundamentally transform force structure and way

of warfare methods, enabling Japan to gain asymmetrical advantages in the air, sea, and

underwater domains. For this reason, these unmanned assets will be effectively utilized not

only for information gathering and surveillance, but also for a wide range of missions

including combat support. Japan will also promote initiatives to optimize the equipment

system and organization of SDF by automation and manpower saving through the mission

replacement of manned assets.

To this end, SDF will acquire practical capabilities in a wide range of missions by

introducing unmanned assets through early production and deployment or leasing by FY2027.

In particular, Japan will promote the early production and deployment of Unmanned

Underwater Vehicles (UUV) to acquire and maintain underwater superiority.

In about ten years, Japan will further materialize the style of warfare using unmanned

assets, accelerate the development and introduction of equipment based on the geographical

characteristics of Japan, and expand full-scale operation. Furthermore, SDF will reinforce the

ability to simultaneously control multiple unmanned assets using system such as AI.

4 Cross-Domain Operation Capabilities

It has become increasingly important for Japan to overcome inferiority in individual

domains by conducting cross-domain operations which organically fuse capabilities in all

domains including space, cyber, electromagnetic spectrum, land, sea, and airspace to

generate synergy and amplify the overall strength, and thereby ensuring Japan’s national

defense.

(1) In the space domain, by proactively introducing new form of space use including

satellite constellation and by receiving functions such as information gathering,

communication, and positioning from space, Japan will reinforce its operational

capabilities in the land, sea, and air domains. At the same time, in order to respond to threats

to the stable use of outer space, Japan will develop ground-based and satellite-based

surveillance capabilities, establish a Space Domain Awareness (SDA) system, and

reinforce the resiliency of space assets to enable the continuation of missions in response

to various situations.

To this end, by FY2027, Japan will utilize space to develop the essential infrastructure

for unit operations and enhance the SDA capability.

Japan will further enhance its space operation capabilities in approximately 10 years

from now through the multi-layered and redundant use of space and the acquisition of new

25


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

capabilities.

(2) In the cyber domain, MOD/SDF will cooperate with whole-of-government initiatives

in the field of cybersecurity, including active cyber defense. MOD/SDF will realize

advanced cybersecurity posture by shifting to a posture that is able to conduct continuous

risk management primarily on critical information systems, by significantly increasing the

number of cyber personnel to respond particularly by utilizing external human resources

who have advanced cyber skills. MOD/SDF will protect itself from every cyber threat with

these advanced cybersecurity capabilities and utilize these capabilities to initiatives to

reinforce cybersecurity throughout Japan.

To this end, by FY2027, MOD/SDF will establish a cybersecurity posture to secure

command and control capabilities and high-priority equipment systems even under

cyberattacks and to support the cyber defense of the defense industry.

By about ten years, MOD/SDF will establish its cybersecurity posture to secure

command and control, force projection and operational bases to enable maintaining mission

capabilities even under cyberattacks, while reinforcing its posture to support cybersecurity

of entities other than SDF.

(3) In the electromagnetic spectrum domain, MOD/SDF will effectively function its

electronic warfare capabilities and its support capabilities to degrade opponent’s capability

of accomplishing missions even under severe electromagnetic environment including

communication disruption by the opponent. Also, MOD/SDF will reinforce

electromagnetic spectrum management function for the entire SDF to utilize

electromagnetic spectrum more effectively.

(4) Japan will expand capabilities including those necessary to interfere or neutralize the

use of space, cyber, and electromagnetic spectrum domains by an opponent.

(5) Regarding ground, maritime, and air defense capabilities, which are the basis of the

cross-domain operation, Japan will fundamentally reinforce those capabilities by steadily

procuring naval vessels and fighter aircrafts to maintain and enhance maritime and air

superiority, and proactively utilizing advanced technologies to promote the introduction of

new destroyer and the development of next generation fighter aircraft, while bearing in

mind the collaboration with unmanned assets.

5 Command and Control / Intelligence-related Functions

In future, in order to win in a situation where combat becomes more rapid and complex, it

is necessary to ensure the superiority of the decision-making process by having the

commanding officers make appropriate decision promptly and accurately than the opponent.

For this purpose, Japan will build networks with real-time capabilities, resiliency, and

flexibility, including the introduction of AI, and enhance command and control and

intelligence-related functions from cross-domain perspectives including the rapid and

26


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

concrete realization of ISRT.

To this end, by FY2027, Japan will develop information capabilities capable of responding

to information warfare including hybrid warfare and in the cognitive dimension. Japan will

also develop near-real-time information gathering capabilities through assets such as satellite

constellations.

In approximately ten years, Japan will further enhance information gathering and analysis

capabilities by utilizing various means including AI to the greatest extent. Japan will also

establish a system to share information in real time through further reinforcement of

information gathering assets.

In addition, the necessity to continuously and accurately grasp the intentions and

capabilities of Japan’s neighboring countries is more crucial than ever. To this end, Japan will

reinforce the capabilities of the Defense Intelligence Headquarters (DIH) based on functions

such as signal, image, human, and open-source intelligence (SIGINT, IMINT, HUMINT, and

OSINT), and fundamentally reinforce comprehensive analysis capabilities including the

utilization of geospatial information (GEOINT) to effectively implement the collect, organize,

analyze share information, and preserve its security from operational intelligence to strategic

information. At the same time, Japan will promote cooperation and collaboration with

relevant domestic intelligence-related organizations and take necessary measures to more

effectively utilize the information collected through information gathering satellites for SDF's

activities.

Moreover, in order to effectively respond to information warfare, including the spread of

disinformation, Japan will fundamentally reinforce the organization and functions of

MOD/SDF, and conduct information sharing and bilateral/multilateral exercises with the

allies and like-minded countries.

6 Mobile Deployment Capabilities / Civil Protection

In response to an invasion of Japan including our remote islands, Japan needs to ensure

that the deployed units are always operational and that necessary units are

mobilized/deployed according to the situation to secure maritime and air superiority and

disrupt the access/landing of units invading Japan. For this purpose, Japan will make

maximum use of civilian transportations including Private Finance Initiatives (PFI), while

reinforcing maritime and air transport capabilities of SDF.

In addition, in order to enable smooth and effective transportation and replenishment of

units through these initiatives, Japan will reinforce the logistic posture through integrations,

expansion of airport and seaport facilities usage capacity in the southwestern region, where

remote islands are particularly concentrated, and conduct improvement of logistics

capabilities, while proactively promoting the modernization of logistics bases located

throughout the country.

27


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

SDF will not only defeat the infringements upon its remote islands but also carry out civil

protection missions by utilizing its reinforced maneuver and deployment capabilities for

evacuating residents.

To this end, by FY2027, Japan will reinforce its transportation capabilities by measures

such as expanding the use of PFI vessels, thereby acquiring the ability to quickly build up

defense posture in the southwestern region and working to expedite the evacuation of

residents.

In approximately ten years, Japan will further reinforce its transport capabilities and further

accelerate transport and replenishment through the improvement of supply bases.

7 Sustainability and Resiliency

(1) In order to defend Japan in the future, current warfighting sustainability of SDF is not

necessarily sufficient in the form of ammunitions and fuel, and the number of operationally

available equipment. It is necessary to squarely address these realities and strive to ensure

and maintain sufficient war sustainability so that SDF can continue persistent activities in

contingencies, which serves as an effective deterrent. Therefore, Japan will improve the

ammunition production capacity, secure ammunition storage commensurate with the

amount of ammunition produced, promptly possess necessary, sufficient ammunition and

missiles, promptly ensure necessary and sufficient amount of fuel required, and establish a

system to enable operation of all equipment except those under planned maintenance.

To this end, by FY2027, Japan will resolve the situation of shortage of ammunition and

guided missiles. Also, Japan will reinforce its production posture for high-priority

ammunition and guided missiles and install more ammunition storage facilities.

Furthermore, Japan will resolve parts shortages and ensure that all equipment except those

under planned maintenance are operationally available.

By approximately ten years, Japan will maintain appropriate inventory of ammunition

and parts and complete the installation of further ammunition storage facilities. Regarding

defense equipment, Japan will maintain appropriate stock of parts including those for new

equipment.

(2) Furthermore, in order to ensure the safety of SDF personnel on a daily basis and

preventing an easy loss of operational capabilities even in a contingency, Japan will

promote measures to construct major command headquarters underground and reinforce

their structures, relocate and consolidate facilities ensuring stand-off distance, and steady

construct quarters and accommodations and maintain ageing buildings. Moreover, Japan

will conceal and deceive equipment to improve resiliency.

In addition, the issues of climate change, including responses to future energy shifts, will

inevitably make further impact on future MOD/SDF operations, including various plans,

facilities, defense equipment and security environment surrounding Japan, which demands

28


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

Japan to deal with variety of issues related to these matters.

To this end, by FY2027, Japan will promote measures to construct underground

command headquarters, and relocating and consolidating facilities in major bases and

camps to improve resiliency of respective facilities. In addition, Japan will promote

reinforcement of facilities and infrastructure against disasters such as tsunamis, starting

from bases and camps that are anticipated to be damaged significantly and are important

for operations.

In approximately ten years, Japan will further improve resiliency of defense facilities.

(3) In order to save the lives of SDF personnel and mitigate risks to their person, and

thereby enabling them to respond to an invasion of Japan for a longer period of time and

with greater strength, Japan will reinforce emergency relief capabilities and transform

medical functions by developing a seamless medical care and transportation system from

the frontlines to the final rear destination thereby increasing the chances of survival for

each personnel.

V The Future of Self-Defense Forces

1 Role of SDF in the seven key fields

In the seven fields of key capabilities for fundamental reinforcement of defense

capabilities, Ground, Maritime and Air Self-Defense Force (GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF) will

fulfill the following roles.

Regarding stand-off defense capabilities, GSDF, MSDF and ASDF will build required and

sufficient number of launching stand-off missiles from vehicle, ship and aircraft capable of

diverse responses from outside of the threat envelope and against vessels and landing forces

invading Japan.

Regarding integrated air and missile defense capabilities, as a basic role, MSDF destroyers

will assume interception in the upper layer and GSDF and ASDF assume interception by

surface-to-air missiles in the lower layer, and Japan will reinforce capabilities to respond to

future airborne threats such as hypersonic weapons. Also, each SDF services will utilize

capabilities such as stand-off defense capabilities etc. as counterstrike capabilities.

Regarding unmanned defense capabilities, GSDF, MSDF and ASDF will significantly

reinforce their defense capabilities in unmanned aerial, maritime, underwater and ground

assets in accordance with their respective division of roles, concurrent to their review of

existing units.

Regarding cross-domain operations, in the space domain, ASDF will reinforce various

function including space situational awareness. In cyber domain, MOD/SDF as a whole will

reinforce its capabilities to contribute to the reinforcement of cybersecurity for the whole

country, and in particular, GSDF will play the core role in the expansion of human resource

base development. In electromagnetic spectrum domain, GSDF, MSDF and ASDF will

29


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

acquire and reinforce defense equipment for electromagnetic warfare and also promote

introduction of equipment for deception utilizing electromagnetic spectrum. Also, in light of

the rapid buildup of conventional forces of neighboring countries, Japan will continue to

enhance the quality and quantity of ground, maritime and air defense equipment that conducts

cross-domain operations in cooperation with the capabilities in the above-mentioned domains.

Regarding command and control and intelligence-related functions, Japan will reinforce

the information gathering capabilities of GSDF, MSDF, and ASDF, accelerate decision
making based on gathered information, and develop a network that enables definite command

and control. Also, Japan will fundamentally reinforce the information functions of the DIH,

including the ISRT required for the operation of stand-off missiles, and reinforce

collaboration with command and control function.

Regarding mobile deployment capabilities and civil protection, Japan will reinforce SDF’s

mobile deployment capabilities by securing medium-sized and small vessels by GSDF,

transport vessels by MSDF, and transport aircraft by ASDF to rapidly deploy units to remote

islands, when invasion of Japan is predicted. Also, GSDF will reinforce its architecture

including unit reinforcement for the protection of civilians in Okinawa.

Regarding sustainability and resiliency, GSDF, MSDF and ASDF will secure the necessary

amount of ammunitions, fuel and mobile equipment on a daily basis, and reinforce the

resiliency of defense facilities, which serve as the foundation for exercising capabilities.

2 Concept of developing SDF architecture

Based on the roles in seven fields as mentioned above, development of joint operational

architecture as well as development of architectures of GSDF, MSDF, ASDF and DIH will

be conducted in following basic concepts.

In order to reinforce effectiveness of joint operational posture, Japan will establish

Permanent Joint Headquarters which is capable of unified command of GSDF, MSDF, and

ASDF by reviewing the existing organization. Also, Japan will promote defense equipment

system benefitting to joint operation.

GSDF will develop a system to reinforce cross-domain operation capabilities and disrupt

invading forces from a distance by reinforcing surface-launched stand-off defense capability,

which have many advantages, maintain sustainability and resiliency, reinforce rapid

maneuver and disperse deployment capabilities to islands located in Southwestern area,

introduce unmanned assets, improving integrated air and missile defense capabilities

including response to drones, and put importance in command and control and intelligence
related functions, including necessary for disperse deployed units.

In light of increasing missile threats in recent years, MSDF will develop a system to

reinforce air-defense capability, promote manpower saving and automation measures,

reinforce information warfare capability, ensure superiority in underwater, reinforce stand
30


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

off defense capabilities and surface rear support capability, and enable persistent unit

operation that require high level of speed and activity. In particular, MSDF will develop a

system which will allow acquiring and sustaining superiority in underwater which is an

important factor in cross-domain operations.

In order to persistently execute tasks through resilient and flexible operations under high
threat environment, ASDF will develop a system which can reinforce quality and quantity of

air defense capability, maintain effective stand-off defense capabilities, ensure effective

missile and air-defense posture, and introduce various unmanned assets. Also, ASDF will be

renewed as Air and Space Self-Defense Force by reinforcing space operation capability and

developing system to ensure superiority in use of space.

In addition to collecting and analyzing SIGINT, IMINT, HUMINT, OSINT, etc., DIH will

assume the central role of responding to integrated information warfare with special regard

to the cognitive dimension concerning the defense of Japan and fundamentally reinforce the

capability to grasp military activities of other countries in a persistent, continuous and

accurate manner and analyzing/dispatching them. Furthermore, in line with the reinforcement

of cross-domain operation capabilities and stand-off defense capabilities, DIH will reinforce

the existing capabilities and ensure a seamless cooperation and collaboration with other

relevant organizations.

MOD/SDF will fundamentally reinforce its posture to contribute to the cybersecurity of

Japan as a whole, while considering the Government's initiatives in the field of cybersecurity

including active cyber defense.

3 Reinforcing policy-making function

In order for SDF to fully exert its capabilities and response to the increasingly severe,

complex, and rapid-paced strategic environment, strategic and agile defense policy planning

and making are required including such domains as space, cyber and electromagnetic

spectrum domains and MOD/SDF will fundamentally reinforce its functions. In this regard,

Japan will establish a consultation framework to obtain policy advice from experts. Also,

Japan will strengthen its posture to comprehensively advence future way of “warfare” for

SDF and how to utilize, develop and equip cutting-edge technologies necessary for this from

a strategic perspective, while closely cooperating with relevant ministries and agencies,

public research institutions, and private companies particularly defense industry as their core.

Furthermore, in order to promote such efforts and support the formulation of policies, Japan

will review and reinforce the research system of MOD/SDF led by the National Institute for

Defense Studies and reinforce its functions as an intellectual base.

VI Protection of Life, Person and Property of Japanese Nationals / Measures for International

Security Cooperation

31


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

1 Measures for protection of life, person and property of Japanese nationals

Situations that Japan should be prepared are not limited to unilateral changes to the status

quo by force and such attempts and an invasion of Japan. Large-scale terrorist attacks and

related attacks on critical infrastructure including nuclear power plants, large-scale disasters

such as earthquakes and typhoons, and infectious disease crisis caused by COVID-19 are

serious threats to the life, person and property of Japanese nationals, and Japan needs to

respond to them with its utmost efforts.

As such, MOD/SDF, in close cooperation with relevant organization such as the police,

Japan Coast Guard, firefighting services, and local governments, will effectively respond to

large-scale terrorist attacks and attacks against critical infrastructure by utilizing

fundamentally reinforced defense capabilities, and in the event of a large-scale disaster, will

save lives, conduct emergency recovery, and provide livelihood support. Furthermore, in the

event of a natural disaster or civil disturbances overseas, MOD/SDF will work closely with

the diplomatic authorities to promptly and accurately protect and transport Japanese nationals.

In order to utilize defense capabilities and smoothly implement such response, it is

essential to establish a collaborative framework with relevant organizations from peacetime.

Japan will conduct comprehensive training with relevant local governments and

infrastructure business operators in order to ensure the effectiveness of response plans. Japan

will also leverage such coordination to facilitate initiatives for civil protection, including

evacuation guidance for residents, when an aggression against Japan is predicted.

2 Measures for international security cooperation

Peace, stability, and prosperity of the international community must be ensured for the

peace and security of Japan. For this reason, it is necessary for MOD/SDF to utilize

fundamentally reinforced defense capabilities, and, from the perspective of proactive

contribution to peace bound to international cooperation, Japan must make proactive efforts

towards resolving conflicts and confrontations around the world and responding to

international issues such as humanitarian assistance and disaster relief in the event of a large
scale international disaster caused by climate change and others.

Regarding International Peace Cooperation activities including International Peacekeeping

Cooperation Assignment such as UN Peacekeeping Operation (PKO) and International Peace

Cooperation Activities including Japan Disaster Relief Activities, Japan will, in light of the

Legislation for Peace and Security, conduct activities with a focus on the areas where Japan

has advantage such as engineering and medicine, while collecting detailed information using

intelligence-related functions even in remote areas, and swiftly transferring the necessary

units using maneuver and deployment capabilities as necessary. Also, Japan will continue to

dispatch SDF personnel to local mission headquarters, taking advantage of the characteristics

of Japan's SDF personnel with a high level of expertise. In addition, Japan will make the best

32


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

use of accumulated experience and will provide capacity building.

From the perspective of improving the security environment surrounding Japan, Japan will

also promote initiatives for arms control, disarmament, and non-proliferation of weapons of

mass destruction such as nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons in cooperation with

relevant countries and international organizations. In doing so, Japan will utilize the

knowledge of MOD/SDF to improve the effectiveness of international organizations and

international export control regimes.

VII Defense Production and Technology Bases as Virtually Integral Part of Defense Capability

Defense production and technology bases are an indispensable foundation for a country to

secure the research, development, production and procurement of defense equipment in a stable

manner on its own and to incorporate the cutting-edge technology necessary for a new way of

warfare into defense equipment; thus virtually integral part of defense capability itself, and

making its reinforcement essential. Therefore, Japan will promote initiatives such as building a

strong and sustainable defense industry necessary for a new way of warfighting, dealing with

various risks, and expanding sales channels. Regarding the whole-of-the-government initiatives

such as protecting the supply-chain for general-purpose products, and managing the security of

sensitive technologies and the information security for civilian cutting-edge fields, MOD will

implement measures necessary from a defense purposes and will also collaborate with

initiatives of relevant ministries and agencies.

1 Reinforcing defense production base

Japan's defense industry is important, considered as a partner responsible for national

defense along with MOD/SDF in terms of securing equipment for SDF to carry out its

missions, and it is necessary to maintain and reinforce the capability to produce high

performance equipment and secure high operational rates. To this end, in the defense industry,

Japan will secure not only advanced technological capabilities and quality control capabilities

through reinforcing the defense technology base, but also the production, sustainment,

maintenance, repair, and capacity improvement of defense equipment.

In order to make sure that the defense industry will play such a significant role, Japan will

reinforce the bases including the entire supply chain. In doing so, Japan aims to make the

business attractive by introducing a new profit margin calculation method to appropriately

evaluate the cost management and quality control of the defense industry to secure

appropriate profits, while promoting measures to maintain and reinforce existing supply

chains and promote the entry of new suppliers.

Also, Japan will place more importance on the viewpoint of maintaining and strengthening

the domestic base in acquiring defense equipment, and strive for technological, qualitative,

and production-time improvements while ensuring the predictability of the company, and if

33


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

there is no other means available even after taking these measures, Japan will consider the

form of owning manufacturing facilities and others itself.

Furthermore, Japan will deal with supply chain risks in the defense industry, while

reinforcing industrial security including cybersecurity based on international standards, as

well as strengthening the security of sensitive technologies.

From these perspectives, Japan will work with the defense authorities of the ally, like
minded countries and others to engage in the initiatives such as supply chain protection and

sensitive technology security relating to the defense industry.

2 Reinforcing technology base

In order to procure defense equipment required for the new way of warfare, how to utilize

our indigenous technologies is extremely important. Therefore, receiving proposals from

companies related to defense, and considering that if those proposals would be applied to the

new way of warfare, MOD will proactively promote initiatives to achieve early production

and deployment of defense equipment by exploiting technologies solely used for defense

equipment possessed by the defense-related companies and their in-house research results as

well as, technologies from non-defense industries that can be incorporated into defense

equipment. In particular, for projects of high political urgency and significance, Japan will

realize even earlier research and development and deployment by accepting risks of research

and development and considering expected outcomes.

In addition, Japan will reinforce initiatives to deploy necessary equipment by improving

specifications while operating prototype units.

Also, from the defense technology base perspective, Japan will promote cooperation and

collaboration with its ally, like-minded countries and others by leading international joint

development as means to acquire equipment which will benefit the defense of Japan.

In addition, Japan will establish a framework for actively exploiting cutting-edge civilian

technologies developed by start-up companies, domestic research institutions, and academia,

and will utilize a whole of the government mechanism for comprehensively strengthening

defense architecture.

Through scrap-and-build of Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Agency (ATLA’s)

research and development related organization, Japan will establish a new research institution

in MOD to find multi-use cutting-edge technologies that contribute to defense equipment

development, and to produce equipment that leads to defense innovation, and also Japan will

expand and enhance systems to comprehensively consider and promote the utilization of

cutting-edge technology in terms of policy, operation and technology. Under such systems,

with a view to increase predictability, based on new way of warfare, Japan will strategically

publicize information regarding the technology fields that Japan will focus on and an outlook

for research and development.

34


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

3 Promoting transfer of defense equipment and technology

Transfer of defense equipment and technology overseas is a key policy instrument for

ensuring peace and stability, especially in the Indo-Pacific region, to deter unilateral changes

to the status quo by force, to create a desirable security environment for Japan, and to provide

assistance to countries that are subject to aggression in violation of international law, use of

force, or threat of force. From this perspective, revisions of the Three Principles on Transfer

of Defense Equipment and Technology, its Implementation Guidelines, and other systems

will be considered in order to promote smooth transfer of defense equipment and technology

of high security significance and international joint development in a broad array of fields. In

doing so, adequate consideration will be made on necessity, requirements, and transparency

of related procedures for transfer of defense equipment and technology, while maintaining

the Three Principles themselves.

In addition, Japan will carry forward transfer of defense equipment and technology in the

joint public and private efforts by establishing a fund, and implementing measures including

providing corporate assistance as necessary so as to smoothly promote such transfers.

VIII Reinforcing Foundation for SDF Personnel, the Core Element of Defense Capability, to

Exercise their Capabilities

1. Reinforcing human resource base

The core element of defense capability is SDF personnel. In order to realize fundamental

reinforcement of defense capability, MOD/SDF will secure the necessary SDF personnel

without increasing capacity and MOD/SDF needs to create an environment that enables all

SDF personnel to demonstrate their individual capabilities while maintaining high morale

and pride, in light of the fact that SDF personnel are required to have more knowledge, skills

and experience than before and are required to be well-grounded not to be deceived by

disinformation, etc. MOD/SDF will continue to work on improving living and work

environments, improving treatments, promoting measures concerning honors and privileges,

expanding support for families including collaboration with the families of SDF personnel

and related organizations, fostering an environment in which female SDF personnel can play

a more active role through flexible personnel management, promoting work-life balance, and

enhancing re-employment support for uniformed SDF personnel who retire at a younger age,

etc. In particular, it is necessary to give a certain level of consideration to SDF personnel who

work in demanding environments in which high readiness and long-term missions are

required and socially isolated. In addition, each SDF personnel should recognizes anew that

harassment shakes the foundation of SDF, a human organization, and develops an

organizational environment of zero tolerance to any harassment. These initiatives are

important not only for preventing the decline of warfighting capabilities due to mid-career

35


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

retirement but also for securing qualified human resources.

Regarding recruitment, MOD/SDF will further reinforce SDF recruitment capabilities to

secure the necessary number of high-quality human resources. At the same time, MOD/SDF

will further raise the retirement age and expand the re-enrollment of retired uniformed SDF

personnel to effectively utilize experienced skills, while considering the maintenance of

military strength. Furthermore, MOD/SDF will promote flexible human resource utilization

and secure human resources from a wide range of areas, including personnel in the private

sector with specialized knowledge and skills such as in the cyber domain. In particular,

MOD/SDF will implement comprehensive measures that contribute to securing human

resources, such as crew members with low sufficiency rates in naval vessels and radar site

surveillance personnel. Regarding SDF reserve personnel and others, which supplement

regular SDF personnel, MOD/SDF will review and reinforce the system to drastically

increase the recruitment including in the cyber domain. In addition, MOD/SDF will reinforce

cooperation with retired SDF personnel and others.

With regard to the development of the human resources that SDF has recruited, MOD/SDF

will reskill SDF personnel and reinforce the educational infrastructure for them such as

National Defense Academy, and respective SDF educational institutions. In this regard,

MOD/SDF will focus on the cyber domain and other fields with high expertise as well as

reinforcing joint operations education and research in particular, and implement measures to

effectively utilize scares human resources possess expertise. Also, MOD civilian officials and

others play an important role not only in supporting the activities of SDF as an element of

defense capability but also in fundamentally reinforcing defense capability, designing

policies associated with the fundamental reinforcement, and providing operational support to

units. Therefore, MOD/SDF will work to reinforce the human resource base by securing the

civilian officials, technical and engineering officials, and others, necessary for this purpose

and by further considering necessary systems.

In this way, MOD/SDF will implement bold measures focusing on the entire life cycle of

SDF personnel, while considering the creation of an organizational environment that enables

SDF personnel to exert their capabilities even when they are in the middle of various life

events including childbirth, childcare, and nursing care.

2 Transformation of medical function

Regarding SDF medical force, MOD/SDF has been placing importance on sustaining

health of SDF personnel, but from the perspective of sustainability and resilience, MOD/SDF

will transform SDF medical force into an organization that saves the lives of SDF personnel

who carry out their missions in a contingency in spite of the danger.

For the purpose, MOD/SDF will develop an integrated operational capability by unifying

medical roles and functions common to all SDF services so that SDF can respond to various

36


-----

[Provisional Translation as of December 16, 2022]

situations and undertake diverse missions both in Japan and abroad and build a posture to

mobilize the full strength of SDF's medical force including the National Defense Medical

College, and promote fundamental reforms to improve the combat trauma care capabilities.

In this regard, MOD/SDF will establish a seamless medical care and evacuation posture

from the frontlines to the destination hospital, while clarifying the role of each medical

establishment from the frontlines of southwestern region to the hospitals, in Honshu and other

islands, and standardize medical equipment and materials for transportation, and to develop

a system to share medical information necessary for medical care and transportation across

the country including in the frontlines. In addition, MOD/SDF will reinforce SDF units' first

aid capabilities, secure medical equipment and materials including blood and oxygen that are

essential for combat trauma care, and develop a medical base in the southwestern region.

Furthermore, MOD/SDF will reinforce education and research on combat trauma care in

the National Defense Medical College and improve management necessary to further

enhance the clinical experience of medical and nursing officers. In addition, MOD/SDF will

complement the clinical experience of medical and nursing officers through active external

training. Based on this, MOD/SDF will enhance the common knowledge and skills of

respective components of SDF through integrated education and training on combat trauma

care.

IX Points of Attention

1. This Strategy, under the National Security Strategy, is implemented in alignment with

strategies in other fields. The National Security Council regularly and systematically

evaluates whether the approach and means to achieve defense objectives are taken

appropriately, especially whether the strengthening of the defense architecture of the whole

country is surely implemented. In addition, Japan will constantly evaluate the capabilities

necessary for building defense capabilities that can effectively deal with changes in the

security environment, particularly focusing on opponent’s capability, based on joint

operational concepts.

2. The fundamental reinforcement of defense capabilities based on the strategy needs to be

maintained and reinforced in the future. To this end, Japan will continuously consider how to

fundamentally reinforce defense capabilities from a mid- to long-term perspective.

3. The Strategy envisions approximately ten year ahead, and will be amended as necessary

when major changes are anticipated, such areas as in international situation and trends in

technological level.

37


-----

