# THE STATE DEFENCE CONCEPT 

Riga, 2023


-----

CONTENT

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................................... 3

1 SECURITY ENVIRONMENT DESCRIPTION ............................................................................ 4

Global Processes ................................................................................................................................. 4

Threat Posed by Russia ....................................................................................................................... 4

Threat Scenarios .................................................................................................................................. 5

2 STRATEGIC GOALS AND BASIC PRINCIPLES OF DEFENCE .............................................. 6

3 RESILIENCE, CAPACITY TO ACT, WILL ................................................................................ 8

Individual Involvement ....................................................................................................................... 8

Involvement of Non-governmental Organizations and the Church .................................................... 9

Involvement of the Private Sector ....................................................................................................... 9

Involvement of Local Governments .................................................................................................. 10

Involvement of State Administration Institutions ............................................................................. 10

Information Space Protection ............................................................................................................ 10

Cybersecurity and Cyber Defence ..................................................................................................... 11

Resilience and Development of the Defence Industry ...................................................................... 11

4 DETERRENCE AND DEFENCE ................................................................................................ 12

National Tasks and the NAF Development ....................................................................................... 12

NATO’s Collective Defence ............................................................................................................. 13

Strategic Partnerships ........................................................................................................................ 14

Contribution to International Security ............................................................................................... 15

5 STATE DEFENCE RESOURCES ............................................................................................... 17

Financial Resources .......................................................................................................................... 17

Personnel Resources .......................................................................................................................... 17

Infrastructure ..................................................................................................................................... 18

CONCLUDING TASKS ....................................................................................................................... 19


-----

**INTRODUCTION**

1 The State Defence Concept is a document drawn up on the basis of Military Threat Analysis

that determines the basic strategic principles, priorities, and measures for the State military
defence during peacetime, threat to national security and a time of war.

2 The State Defence Concept is prepared in accordance with Section 29 of the National

Security Law, and it is based on Military Threat Analysis. Current geopolitical trends,
Latvia’s foreign policy and security policy interests and commitments in the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (hereinafter – NATO), European Union (hereinafter – EU), as well as
in other international organizations and cooperation formats are taken into account in the
development of the Concept.

3 The State Defence Concept determines the implementation of the State defence policy and

planning of political and operational measures for State defence, as well as the required
resources. The State Defence Concept serves as the basis for the development of the
National Armed Forces (hereinafter – NAF), as well as for the actions of state authority and
administration institutions, local governments, and natural and legal persons during
peacetime, threat to national security and a time of war.

4 The State Defence Concept has been developed during Russia’s ongoing full-scale war in

Ukraine.

5 The State Defence Concept ensures continuity from the previous Concept.


-----

**1** **SECURITY ENVIRONMENT DESCRIPTION**

**Global Processes**

6 The significance of military and power politics in international relations is growing.

Utilizing a broad spectrum of hybrid, cyber, conventional, and nuclear threats, authoritarian
states threaten international security and the democratic values of Western countries.
Authoritarian states disregard widely accepted principles and norms of international law,
pursuing aggressive and opaque policies. Strategic rivals continuously test the resilience
and unity of Western countries both directly and through intermediaries.

7 Russia's full-scale war in Ukraine has fundamentally altered the security landscape in
Europe. The changes will persist in the long term, and the outcome of the war will
determine the future European security architecture. By waging this war, Russia has once
again demonstrated its readiness to use military force to achieve its geopolitical goals.

8 Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations is considered the most direct asymmetrical
threat to international peace and prosperity. Although the level of terrorism threats in
Latvia remains low, risks arising from various global processes must be taken into account.

9 One of the increasingly significant challenges to international security is posed by China's
growing global ambitions. China actively employs various political and economic means,
confrontational rhetoric, information and communication technologies, and cyber-attacks
to strengthen its global and regional influence. China seeks to gain control over Western
technological and industrial sectors, critical infrastructure, and supply chains, posing a
threat to the freedom of action of Western countries.

10 Challenges to NATO’s, including Latvia's, security arise from China's strategic

competition with the United States as well as the deepening strategic cooperation between
China and Russia, especially in the military domain.

**Threats Posed by Russia**

11 Russia aims to divide the world into spheres of influence and expand its territory. In order

to achieve this, Russia undermines the existing security architecture, rewrites history and
cultivates propaganda narratives about Russia's historical lands. Russia demands that
NATO returns to the borders of 1997 and refrains from enlarging to the east also calling
for the United States to reduce its presence in Europe.

12 Russia does not consider international treaties and conventions, as well as generally

accepted principles and norms of international law, binding upon itself. Russia's brutal
warfare, violence against civilians, and other war crimes in Ukraine clearly demonstrate
that Russia will use similar tactics in other military conflicts.

13 Nuclear weapons are an integral part of Russia's aggressive policy, serving as a tool of

influence and the main guarantor of the regime's security and existence. Russia will
continue to threaten with the possibility of using nuclear weapons to influence the decisionmaking of leaders of NATO’s member states.

14 Belarus has become a satellite state of Russia and is politically entirely dependent on

Russia, serving as support for achieving Russia's geopolitical interests in its western
strategic direction. Russia has unrestricted access to the Belarusian territory, and has
solidified its long-term influence and military presence in Belarus.

15 Russia's authoritarian regime is transforming into a totalitarian system. To ensure its

stability and security, the regime uses repression against any expression of opposition,


-----

controls mass media, and restricts freedom of speech and expression. To maintain public
support for the regime, Kremlin propaganda falsely portrays Russia's war against Ukraine
as fighting against the "collective West" and the "new Great Patriotic War." A convincing
majority of the Russian society supports Kremlin’s policies  and believes that the country
is developing in the right direction.

16 The potential for democratic reforms in Russia remains low. Russian society displays

indifference and apathy towards the possibilities of influencing political processes in the
country. It is unlikely that Russian society will show a desire for change, and any changes
in the leadership of the regime will likely be purely decorative. To ensure the stability of
the ruling regime, the level of social control in Russia will continue to increase. Societal
consolidation and support will enable the regime to pursue its aggressive foreign policy.

17 Russia will continue to be an undemocratic, hostile, and opportunistic state. Russia poses

the main long-term existential threat to Latvia's security. During the implementation of the
Concept, the level of threat posed by Russia to Latvia's security will not decrease, and,
depending on changes in political and military circumstances, the level of threat may
increase.

**Threat Scenarios**

18 In the short term, Russia will use hybrid warfare instruments to weaken Western countries

and undermine their unity. The information war directed against Western countries,
including Latvia, will persist, and there will be an increase in the frequency and intensity
of cyberattacks. Attempts to sabotage critical infrastructure of Western countries will
continue to threaten their security. To build up political and economic pressure, Russia will
use energy, migration, and other increasingly innovative means of hybrid warfare as
potential weapons against Western countries. Hybrid threats against Western countries
may also be posed from Belarus.

19 The threat to Latvia's security could arise from a sudden military attack by Russia to seize

a certain territory that may be followed by threats to use nuclear weapons, aiming to deter
involvement of NATO reinforcements.

20 In the event of any attack, Russia would employ an overwhelming superiority characterized

by a massive infantry offensive, new and inexpensive technologies, especially drones, and
artillery firepower. Extensive resources that can be easily replenished compensate for the
lack of quality in Russia’s armed forces.

21 Despite the losses suffered in the war in Ukraine, Russia will maintain a significant military

dominance in the region and sufficient reserves of military resources.

22 If Russia launches an attack, Belarus will provide support, thereby creating additional

challenges for NATO's response. Although the potential deployment of Russia's nuclear
weapons in the territory of Belarus does not significantly alter the balance of power, hybrid
warfare scenarios related to these weapons cannot be ruled out.

23 It is assessed that the recovery of Russian armed forces deployed near the border in their

pre-war levels could occur within the next five years. Russia will learn from the mistakes
made in the war in Ukraine and reform its armed forces. Latvia must use this time period
to strengthen its own and allied deterrence and defence capabilities to the maximum extent
possible.


-----

**2** **STRATEGIC GOALS AND BASIC PRINCIPLES OF DEFENCE**

24 The fundamental task of Latvia's state defence is the defence of its entire territory and all

its residents. The war in Ukraine demonstrates that even a brief loss of territory in the event
of an attack leads to massive civilian casualties and the destruction of civil and critical
infrastructure.

25 The defence of Latvia's territory and state independence also safeguards democracy, a

unified system of values, Latvia's cultural heritage, and a way of life centred on the wellbeing of individuals and the common good of society. This way of life upholds principles
such as freedom, equality, solidarity, and justice, fostering the development of a civic
society.

26 The future development and security of Latvia are closely linked to the unity of society and

reliance on a shared set of values that shape the national identity. Central to this is Latvia
as an independent state, its historical development and achievements, culture, language,
and the willingness and active involvement of citizens in defending the space where our
shared values exist.

27 The defence and preservation of Latvia's statehood and independence are a collective

responsibility of the entire society, implemented throughout from individual to national
level. This collective responsibility is carried out through a Comprehensive National
Defence model, encompassing a wide range of measures to strengthen Latvia's deterrence
and defence capabilities and promote societal resilience.

28 The foundation of deterrence and defence is the NATO’s collective defence system.

Functioning and development of this system depend on strengthening military capabilities
and readiness of the NAF, including the development of military capabilities, high combat
readiness, a larger number of personnel, and interoperability and integration with NATO
allied forces.

29 Strategic partnerships and international cooperation complement deterrence and defence

capabilities by providing additional military and security support and contributing to the
preservation of the existing rules-based international order.

30 A developed readiness culture is a prerequisite for societal resilience and survivability of

the state. It is a collective readiness of the entire society to act in times of crisis and war,
the ability to ensure the continuity of critical functions and services, as well as to support
the NAF in defence operations.

31 The development of readiness begins with personal involvement, initiative, and

responsibility of each individual. This involves raising military awareness, acquiring skills
in handling weapons, active participation in national defence, the ability to take care of
oneself and others, as well as willingness to engage in previously -learned and mastered
forms of state defence support.

32 Readiness culture is also crucial at the collective level – it is the ability of communities,

businesses, municipalities and state administration institutions to self-organize and actively
act in times of crisis and war. Pre-developed action scenarios facilitate preparedness for
various disruptions.

33 Readiness of the national economy to overcome crises is a prerequisite for the survivability

of the state. Economic independence and resilience ensure the continuity of all sectors and
areas, maintaining the security of the state in crisis conditions. Investments in the economic
preparedness, production capacities, and adaptability contribute to strengthening Latvia's


-----

defence. Investment in national security and defence also has a positive impact on the
overall investment flow in the Latvian economy, promoting a secure environment for
investors. To enhance supply chain resilience and develop the capacity of Latvia's military
industry, involvement of the Latvian defence industry plays a significant role in the supply
of material and technical resources.


-----

**3** **RESILIENCE, CAPACITY TO ACT, WILL**

34 A responsible attitude of the entire society towards the state and its security, mutual

cooperation among state institutions, effective mechanisms of public and private
partnerships, and self-organization of the society are prerequisites for overcoming any
crisis.

35 State security is directly dependent on the collective responsibility of the society for the

future of the state and the trust in the Republic of Latvia and its values. Purposeful fostering
of understanding of shared values and strengthening of civic activities and participation
form the basis for the unshakable resilience of society. In the face of existential threats, a
society united by common values and allegiance to the state is capable of survival.

36 In times of crisis or war, state administration institutions, local governments, the private

sector, and society as a whole will need to continue providing functions and services critical
to the functioning of the state and meeting the primary needs of society. An essential
element in enhancing overall resilience and capacity to act is the organization and planning
of various types of training and exercises during peacetime.

37 The role and duty of residents, communities, non-governmental organizations (NGOs),

economic operators, local governments, and state institutions are to promote readiness
culture for social action and persistence, including psychological resilience, already during
peace-time.

38 Readiness culture involves both personal and collective responsibility with duties and roles

of each individual, community, and organization. Initiative and self-organization are
crucial in the development of readiness culture.

**Individual Involvement**

39 Every resident of Latvia must defend the set of individual rights established in the

Constitution of the Republic of Latvia, as well as the national values defined therein.

40 Civic participation of Latvian residents is a prerequisite for the implementation of the

country's defence capabilities. Extensive involvement of residents and communities in the
mechanisms of national defence will ensure the collective resilience of the state during
times of crisis and war.

41 Each resident must acquire and enhance the knowledge and skills to be able to protect not

only themselves but also their family, community, and country during times of crisis or
war. Residents are responsible for their preparedness and securing the necessary resources
for independent action in a crisis during the first 72 hours without the support of the state
and local governments.

42 It is equally important to increase residents’ will to defend Latvia through educational work

in educational institutions, as well as to strengthen citizens' connection with the state and
ensure acquisition of specific military competences, where the State Defence Service will
play a crucial role.

43 The involvement of citizens in state defence, the State Defence Service, the National

Guard, and the training of reserve soldiers is imperative. Furthermore, involvement of
residents in practical collaboration with the National Armed Forces units, planning and
implementing resistance to aggressors, as well as promoting a culture of civil resistance,
non-compliance, non-violent resistance, and the dissemination of verified information
about state security and defence are crucial.


-----

44 The success of resistance movement depends on concealed residents support (such as

supplies, medical care, information, financial support, communications, training,
recruitment, and intelligence) for participants in civil and armed resistance, the NAF, and
allied forces.

45 To foster residents’ willingness to defend the state, civic education issues must be part of

the education system, establishing and reinforcing a sense of belonging to the country in
children and youth. Starting from the 2024/2025 academic year, national defence education
will become part of the mandatory curriculum in secondary education, providing students
with the minimum skillset for action in crisis situations and during times of war.

46 In addition to the mandatory educational content, the Cadet Force movement is being

developed, within which 8,000 children in all regions of Latvia gradually acquire and
develop leadership skills during the primary school education stage, while also
strengthening patriotism and their physical abilities.

47 By undergoing national defence education and participating in the Cadet Force, young

people gain fundamental knowledge about national defence, appreciate the importance of
discipline and order, develop self-confidence, and are overall better prepared for the
execution of State Defence Service duties.

48 Colonel Oskars Kalpaks Military High School prepares junior non-commissioned officers’

and potentially future officers, thereby laying the foundation for the NAF officers’ ethos.

**Involvement of Non-governmental Organizations and the Church**

49 NGOs play a crucial role in promoting readiness culture and societal resilience. Their task

is to define and actively engage in fostering civic participation, promote community
involvement and active participation in state defence, thereby strengthening the selforganizing capabilities of society.

50 Each NGO and religious organization enhances psychological resilience, provides

humanitarian aid, supports those affected by crises, participates in civil defence and rescue
efforts, contributes to maintaining public order, and disseminates accurate and verified
information. NGOs promote community involvement in citizen training for action in crises
and enhance society's ability to self-organize.

51 In response to the calls of local governments and state institutions, NGOs participate in

role-play exercises of operational continuity plans to ensure uninterrupted provision of
critical services during times of crisis and war.

**Involvement of the Private Sector**

52 To ensure critical functions and services for society, the execution of mobilization tasks,

and overall as uninterrupted as possible operation of the national economy, the private
sector must continue to operate also during times of threat to national security.

53 It is the responsibility of economic operators of critical infrastructure and critical financial

infrastructure to draw up operational continuity plans, regularly test them in exercises, and
ensure the availability of critical core services and goods during crises and times of national
threat.

54 In private sector institutions that provide critical services and in state administration

institutions voluntary National Guard units are formed from personnel working in these
institutions to support the operation of the institutions and the continuity of critical services
in times of crisis and conflict.


-----

55 Economic operators with the obligation to draw up operational continuity plans are to

incorporate measures and actions in their operation in the event of a national threat,
including assessing the risks of supply security and the influence of unfriendly states. They
shall also provide staff training and regularly conduct crisis exercises.

**Involvement of Local Governments**

56 Each local government has tasks to continue the execution of critical functions for society

and support the NAF in the event of a national threat. These tasks are reflected in the Civil
Protection Plan and are regularly tested in exercises.

57 The active and independent involvement of local governments is crucial in fostering civic

activity and readiness culture among their residents.

58 In collaboration with responsible state administration institutions, municipalities promote

the establishment and maintenance of civil protection shelters, as well as the formation of
voluntary civil protection units.

**Involvement of State Administration Institutions**

59 To ensure the continuity of government operation, the Cabinet of Ministers takes leadership

during times of war, running the state and consolidating resources and tasks.

60 Each industry and state administration institution has its role and duties during times of

war. The task of state administration institutions is to ensure the continuity of critical state
functions and services during wartime. Ministries and their subordinate institutions define
duties in strengthening the resilience of the state and society, draw up emergency response
and operational continuity plans, and provide regular training for critical personnel
responding to national threats.

61 One of the prerequisites for societal preparedness and resilience is a functioning civil

protection system with effective public notification and measures for the protection of
residents.

62 To promote understanding of the role and actions of state administration institutions in the

event of a national threat, it is necessary to continue organizing comprehensive exercises,
involving all government institutions, local governments, economic operators, and NGOs.

**Information Space Protection**

63 The goal of information space protection is to enhance the resilience of Latvia's

government and society against various manipulations, including disinformation and
information influence operations. To ensure societal psychological resilience in crisis
situations, it is essential to enhance public understanding of the threats to the state and
potential aggressor’s intentions.

64 Both the communication capabilities of state administration institutions and enhancing the

preparedness of the media are crucial. The Ministry of Defence improves communication
plans through joint exercises with other government institutions, also involving media
representatives, and ensures crisis communication in the event of a military threat to the
state.

65 To prevent the spread of information which is hostile and damaging capacity to act, state

administration institutions, in collaboration with NGOs and the civic society, must
establish collaboration formats for information space protection. The example of Ukraine
demonstrates that active public participation and self-organization, utilizing technology,

10


-----

can successfully combat Russian propaganda, information operations, and psychological
operations.

66 The institutions responsible for information space protection must ensure a unified

approach to educating the public about threats in the information space.

**Cybersecurity and Cyber Defence**

67 The goal of Latvia's cybersecurity and cyber defence policy is to strengthen the resilience

of Latvia's information and communication technology systems, e-services, financial
services, and electronic communication networks, reducing potential vulnerabilities and
ensuring their continued operation not only in peacetime but also in crisis and wartime
conditions.

68 It is essential to ensure that the information and communication technology infrastructure

has an appropriate level of cybersecurity protection, including the development and
provision of backup solutions applicable to both the public and private sectors. In cases
where the external perimeter of electronic communication is compromised, the use of a
unified state Internet exchange point must be ensured throughout the country.

69 Strengthening Latvia's cyber defence capabilities is crucial, including improving active

cyber defence, increasing the numbers of specialized personnel in the NAF at all levels,
and raising the capacity of the National Guard Cyber Defence Unit.

**Resilience and Development of the Defence Industry**

70 Resilience, development, and ability of the defence industry to function during crises and

wartime are prerequisites for successful national defence.

71 It is crucial to continue the national defence industry support policy to ensure the security

of the supply of material and technical resources and services necessary for the execution
of NAF tasks and to expand the mobilization resource base that corresponds to NAF needs.
Priority areas include armament, maintenance of NAF support and combat equipment,
soldiers’ individual equipment systems, as well as information and communication
technologies.

72 Strengthening the state's role in strategically important areas for the execution of NAF

tasks, including enhancing the legal framework and initiating strategic partnerships in such
logistics areas as ammunition production and vehicle maintenance, is essential. This also
involves preparing strategic partners for continuous work during times of national threat.
The state may be forced to undertake risks that the private sector is not able or willing to
undertake.

73 It is necessary to promote the inclusion of Latvian industry in the supply chain of NAF

capability development projects, thereby expanding the defence-related industrial base and
facilitating knowledge transfer. To achieve this, it is essential to implement defence
industry support measures in collaboration with NGOs and to assess the capacity and
interest of national industry to engage in providing support for defence capabilities
(industry mapping).

74 The development of new technologies with military or dual-use applications facilitates the

execution of NAF combat tasks. Simultaneously, to enhance Latvia's competitiveness and
promote greater economic security it is necessary to expand the defence innovation
ecosystem and foster its export capabilities.

11


-----

**4** **DETERRENCE AND DEFENCE**

75 To deter any intention of an adversary to attack the territory of Latvia and thereby avoid

war, Latvia, together with allies, maintains and develops combat capabilities,
demonstrating commitment and readiness to defend Latvia against any form of threat.

76 The foundation of Latvia's deterrence and defence consists of the military capabilities of

the NAF and the strategy for their use, NATO's collective defence mechanisms, and
strategic partnerships at bilateral and multilateral levels.

77 Latvia's defence planning integrates the experience gained by Ukraine in its fight against

Russia.

**National Tasks and the NAF Development**

78 The task of the NAF is to ensure the defence of the state's territory and its civilian

population from the first centimetre, denying the adversary the opportunity to penetrate the
territory of Latvia, using all necessary and available means.

79 The combat capabilities of the NAF consist of professional service units, the National

Guard or territorial forces, the State Defence Service, the active reserve, and the general
reserve. The development of the NAF is focused on the mobility of units together with
firepower, survivability, decentralization of command and supply, mutual integration and
interoperability with allied forces, technological development, and resilience against
electronic warfare.

80 The NAF are developing capabilities by increasing firepower and ranges that deny the

adversary free movement in the air, sea, and on land. Simultaneously, the NAF continue to
develop air defence, coastal defence, long-range missile artillery, and unmanned aerial
vehicle capabilities, as well as to introduce infantry fighting platforms into its arsenal.
Additionally, the NAF are developing combat service support functions by building
reserves and enhancing medical and logistics capabilities.

81 NAF units demonstrate high combat readiness and respond to various security challenges

as well as provide necessary support to civilian institutions.

82 There is a need to invest in and develop a significantly larger and more capable army. The

introduction of the State Defence Service will provide personnel for the development of
NAF's priority capabilities, growth in personnel, and trained reserve soldiers for high and
general readiness reserve units, contributing to the long-term structural transformation of
the NAF.

83 Timely ability of the NAF, state security institutions, and other responsible agencies to

identify, document, and prove hybrid warfare activities carried out against the country is a
prerequisite for effective action. In the case of hybrid threat, the preservation of Latvia's
statehood and the prevention of further escalation crucially depend on the capacity to act
and collaboration of state administration institutions, rapid response, and international
support.

84 Taking into account geographical and logistical constraints, in the event of sudden and

unexpected threats, the NAF, together with allied forces stationed in Latvia, must be
capable of defending the territory and civilians of Latvia using all available resources until
reinforced by allied support, if it has not occurred prior to the attack. In the case of sudden
and unexpected attacks, as well as regional threats and escalation, the NAF ensure the
defence of the country jointly with NATO's highest military leadership, ensuring both the

12


-----

reception of allied forces and the execution of state defence tasks according to the national
and NATO defence plans until the complete elimination of the threat.

85 To maintain high combat readiness of the NAF, military exercises of various levels are

regularly organized. At least once every four years, the NAF conduct an exercise called
"NAMEJS," involving the entire personnel of the NAF and mobilizing material and
technical resources, including the participation of the private sector and civil defence
system. Exercises are also organized outside military training grounds, including in areas
of each unit's responsibility. Military exercise cycles integrate combat readiness evaluation
of NAF units.

86 To ensure long-term resilience of the NAF in the event of a military conflict, creating

strategic reserves in priority areas such as food, fuel, and ammunition is crucial. Food and
fuel reserves shall primarily be built up within the framework of strategic partnerships, and
large-scale procurements must include supply security principles, concentrating supply
capacity within Latvia's borders and relying less on cross-border deliveries, which is
especially crucial in the first days of war.

87 The increase of ammunition reserves is carried out systematically, with the NAF allocating

a set amount of funding each year.

88 Fuel reserves are ensured by both purchasing storage services from economic operators

and developing NAF stocks to ensure a sufficient amount that can circulate within a
specified time-period, thereby upholding high quality standards.

89 Food reserves are built up by purchasing food storage services from economic operators

who have the necessary infrastructure for food storage and can ensure its continuous
circulation, while also maintaining own reserves.

90 Every year, the NAF update the Mobilization Plan, identifying the capability gaps and

resources that, in the case of mobilization, must be taken from the civil sector to fulfil NAF
tasks. Similarly, during wartime, for the needs of the NAF and allies, it is necessary to take
over territories and properties to ensure unit training, force integration, maintenance, and
manoeuvring. It is crucial to identify missing resources in a timely manner and issue
mobilization requests.

91 The enhancement of Latvia's external borders with both physical and technological

engineering solutions that corresponds to the potential threats from the adversary, is an
important set of measures for strengthening internal and external security of the state. The
NAF in collaboration with the State Border Guard and state security institutions develop
and exercise cooperation plans and mechanisms for scenarios involving hybrid and
conventional threats.

**NATO’s Collective Defence**

92 Latvia's defence is developed within the framework of NATO’s collective defence, which

is the most potent instrument of deterrence against potential adversaries. NATO is a nuclear
alliance providing a nuclear umbrella for all member states. Latvia ensures its role in
promoting this significant mission. The Alliance's greatest strength lies in the unity of its
allies, political will, military capabilities, and resources for the defence of the entire NATO
territory and its population.

93 To deter potential adversaries from attacking Latvia and ensure defence from the first

centimetre, it is crucial to have a developed and implemented NATO "forward defence"

13


-----

strategy. This entails an increased NATO military presence in Latvia with deployed
material reserves, supplemented by air and naval capabilities. It is vital to reinforce the
presence of allies with designated forces, combat-capable NATO command elements in
Latvia, executable defence plans, and political authorization for immediate involvement of
these forces and military headquarters in Latvia's defence in case of military aggression.

94 Headquarters Multinational Division "North" is a NATO military command and control

element in Latvia, which in collaboration with the Latvian NAF will conduct national
defence operations, integrating national and allied forces and performing both national and
collective defence tasks. The division is being developed as a combat-capable unit with the
necessary support capabilities. Increasing contributions of allied countries with personnel
and capabilities are being promoted.

95 The NAF are part of the NATO’s collective defence force. NAF military capabilities and

units are integrated into NATO’s plans for regional defence and the execution of various
types of forces’ military activities.

96 To deter the adversary’s aggression, train the execution of defence plans, and facilitate

interoperability of forces, the reinforcement of NATO’s military activities is essential
already during peacetime. This includes regular exercises of various scale across the entire
NATO territory. Every four years, a large-scale deployment of forces will be exercised in
Latvia to train and test the readiness for the reception, deployment, and integration of forces
and execution of operations.

**Strategic Partnerships**

97 An essential condition for strengthening deterrence and defence measures is the

establishment of robust strategic partnerships as a complementary set of measures that
increases the potential of conventional defence, supporting NATO's collective defence
tasks.

98 Strengthening and deepening of strategic partnership with the United States is critically

important. It is in Latvia's interests to ensure the political will and timely military readiness
of the United States to engage in Latvia's defence within the framework of both collective
defence and bilateral cooperation. Of a particular significance, is continuous military
presence of the United States in Latvia with units, military capabilities, equipment, and
reserve stocks. It complements NAF capabilities and is integrated into Latvia's defence
plans, enabling immediate involvement in Latvia's defence operations in case of a conflict.

99 Political and military cooperation with Canada is essential for promoting the establishment

of an allied brigade-level unit in Latvia, and in the long-term achieving the functioning of
a combat-capable brigade in Latvia that is capable of engaging in Latvia's defence
alongside the NAF without a prior warning. Joint investments with Canada in the
development of NATO’s brigade, the necessary infrastructure and the required reserve
stocks are prerequisites for fulfilling collective commitments.

100 Deepening and integrating defence cooperation among the Baltic States are prerequisites

for more effective regional defence. The ability to provide support and conduct coordinated
defence operations in the event of a sudden attack is a critical supplementary element of
collective defence measures. Common plans and action models for mutual support, as well
as joint efforts in the development of military capabilities among the Baltic States, are
important directions for further deepening Baltic States' cooperation.

14


-----

101 Due to the increasingly critical nature of the threat where response time and readily

available resources are crucial, a regional approach to security is becoming more
significant. Therefore, strengthening regional cooperation becomes a strategic necessity. It
is essential for Latvia to ensure that the defence of the Baltic region is strengthened and
mutually integrated with all Baltic Sea Region countries, thus preventing the adversary
from gaining military superiority.

102 An increasingly vital role in regional defence is played by Denmark, which serves as one

of the host nations of Headquarters Multinational Division “North” and ensures a
significant military presence in Latvia. In collaboration with Denmark and involving other
allied countries, a combat-capable division will be developed.

103 With Finland joining NATO, and with the anticipated accession of Sweden, it is in Latvia's

interests to involve these countries in the defence of the Baltic region. We are interested in
promoting military presence of Finland and Sweden in Latvia through various
multinational military structures, and the placement of NATO’s command elements in both
countries.

104 It is imperative to strengthen the Joint Expeditionary Force with the United Kingdom in

lead. Investment in the joint development and readiness of these forces for defence
measures in their area of responsibility is crucial. This will serve as a complementary and
inclusive set of measures for NATO’s action, at the same time ensuring flexibility and rapid
response opportunities, mitigating time and space challenge in the Baltic States.

105 It is essential to develop cooperation with Poland to strengthen regional cooperation.

Poland is a significant international partner with a growing military potential and the ability
to enhance regional security.

106 Strategic partnerships based on shared understanding, values, and goals provide a

significant addition to Latvia's deterrence and defence potential and serve as an important
framework for the development of practical cooperation also in other areas, such as
economy, industrial cooperation, and the implementation of various joint political
initiatives.

**Contribution to International Security**

107 Latvia's security is directly dependent on the maintenance of a rules-based international

order. Latvia contributes to sustaining this system and ensuring solidarity with its allies, as
well as promoting global security.

108 Latvia, as a member of the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Co-operation

in Europe (OSCE), NATO, and the EU, actively participates in maintaining and improving
the existing international order. Upholding existing commitments and developing new
opportunities within these international organizations is one of the directions that
strengthens security.

109 The EU plays a crucial role in shaping and developing the collective European security

potential, utilizing European-level instruments to enhance common security. Latvia is
interested in a balanced and resource-based development of the EU security and defence
pillar, which, overall, increases the volume and availability of military capabilities of EU
member states for collective defence needs. EU instruments and structures  must be
developed in a complementary and non-competitive manner with NATO. Equal EU's
economic capital investment across all member states is crucial to developing the military

15


-----

industry and mitigating the overall lack of EU capabilities, supporting solutions that
enhance supply chain security and the ability of enterprises to function in crisis situations.

110 The EU plays a significant role in strengthening security in various regions. Therefore,

balanced development of EU partnership policies is important, focusing on the security,
stability, and development of European border regions and prioritizing Eastern Partnership
countries.

111 Additional contributions to strengthening Latvia's security and defence are made through

EU investments in various non-military instruments that promote societal resilience. These
investments focus on addressing issues related to disinformation and strategic
communication, as well as reducing the ability of hostile actors to influence political
processes in the EU and its member states. The synergy and involvement of all EU
instruments and structures are imperative in preventing hybrid threats.

112 Latvia's interests lie in global security stability, for which national responsibility must be

assumed by investing resources in achieving this goal. Latvia's contribution to global
security is closely linked to both the credibility of collective defence commitments and the
preservation of the existing international order. Therefore, future Latvian contributions to
international missions, operations, and rapid response forces are essential for strengthening
European external security and capacity of international organizations.

113 Participation in international military operations, missions, and rapid response forces

enhances the development and experience of the NAF, fosters combat readiness of units,
and improves military interoperability with the armed forces of allied nations. The scope
of NAF involvement is determined by operational needs of Latvia's defence.

114 A significant part of the existing international regulatory framework is the arms control

mechanisms affirmed within the OSCE. The principles of mutual confidence-building,
included in the current agreements, remain relevant in terms of their goals and essence.
However, their effectiveness and impact on collective security depend directly on the
willingness of all parties involved to adhere to them.

115 It is in Latvia's interests to preserve the current security architecture, including confidence
building measures developed so far in the field of arms control. Simultaneously, efforts
should be made to prevent attempts to diminish Latvia's defence capabilities and restrict
the implementation of national defence measures through arms control mechanisms.

116 It is in Latvia's security interests to prevent Russia from achieving victory in the war against

Ukraine. Therefore, it is important to support Ukraine politically and militarily. Latvia
envisions Ukraine as a future member of the EU and NATO and a close ally. Sustained
unity among Western countries  will be particularly crucial in ensuring the necessary
support for Ukraine.

117 The Western appeasement policy pursued for years vis-à-vis Russia has failed. The only

viable approach for Western states in their future relations with Russia is the
implementation of containment policy.

16


-----

**5** **STATE DEFENCE RESOURCES**

**Financial Resources**

118 To achieve the set goals, including the establishment of the State Defence Service, the

development of the NAF reserve, and providing all structural units of the defence sector
with the necessary weapons and other material and technical resources, funding for national
defence is increased. In 2024, 2.4% of the respective year's forecasted GDP will be
allocated for national defence, and starting from 2025, it will be increased to 2.5%. By
2027, defence funding will reach 3% of GDP.

119 When planning the allocation of funds, NATO-prescribed standards that promote the

development of armed forces are observed, with no more than 50% allocated to personnel
expenses and no less than 20% to investments in the acquisition of military equipment and
weaponry. Financial resources allocated for defence are used solely for ensuring national
defence.

120 To ensure the functionality of Comprehensive National Defence, all institutions in their

financial planning allocate resources for the execution of tasks defined in the concept.

121 In order to promote the development and resilience of the defence industry, funding

availability is ensured for strengthening the role of the state and establishing a framework
of strategic partnership.

**Personnel Resources**

122 The wartime strength of the NAF is set to reach 61,000 troops, consisting of 31,000 troops

in peacetime structure and 30,000 troops in the general reserve.

123 The State Defence Service will support readiness culture in which every man and, on a

voluntary basis, woman aged 18 to 27 will have acquired basic military skills, thus
promoting a positive long-term impact on the performance of state defence tasks. To
motivate young people to serve voluntarily in the State Defence Service, opportunities to
provide additional financial resources for budget study places or scholarships should be
considered.

124 The introduction of the State Defence Service will require investments in infrastructure

development, provision of combat equipment, individual and collective equipment, as well
as an increase in the commanding staff.

125 Graduates of the State Defence Service will be included in the NAF reserve system,

initially as high-readiness reserve soldiers and later as general reserve soldiers. With the
assistance of the State Defence Service, training reserve non-commissioned officers and
officers will also complement the junior commanding staff of the NAF.

126 The system for maintaining combat capabilities of reserve soldiers is to be improved,

specifying that all reserve soldiers must be attached to a NAF structure. The NAF will
conduct reserve soldier training once a year.

127 The National Guard plays a crucial role in Latvia's territorial defence. Service in the

National Guard is an honourable matter that should become an integral part of society’s
everyday life.

17


-----

**Infrastructure**

128 To ensure full-fledged development of NAF capabilities and host nation support,

promoting improvement of the allied training systems, a priority will be given to the
construction of necessary infrastructure. This includes developing storage networks,
enhancing existing training infrastructure, training grounds, shooting ranges, and
increasing accommodation capacity.

129 For each type of stock (ammunition, fuel, food), infrastructure development is planned in

parallel with reserve procurement planning. This involves the construction of ammunition
depots, fuel storage facilities, and food storage warehouses. Stockpiling is a long-term
systemic process that involves regular allocation of financial resources for replenishment
until the required material quantity for carrying out NAF wartime tasks is achieved.
Simultaneously with the build-up of strategic reserves, the necessary storage infrastructure
for their storage is developed.

130 The infrastructure of National Guard battalions will be gradually developed to ensure and

decentralize the fulfilment of NAF tasks and supply.

18


-----

**CONCLUDING TASKS**

131 The defence budget will be planned in accordance with the gradual increase in the defence

budget approved by the Cabinet of Ministers. The political ambition envisages that, as of
2027, the defence budget shall reach 3% of the estimated GDP. The Ministry of Defence
will implement the State Defence Concept within the allocated state budget funds.

132 This Concept and the NAF Development Plan, based on this Concept, serve as the basis

for drawing up medium and long-term planning documents, including guidelines issued by
the Minister of Defence for the development of the national defence system and budget
planning for the next year. The NAF development planning process ensures continuity in
implementation of the Concept. Within this process, it is crucial to identify critical NAF
capabilities for the fulfilment of the fundamental tasks of national defence.

133 Based on the Concept, the Minister of Defence, issues guidelines to the Chief of Defence

on the key principles for the State Defence Operational Plan.

134 National defence is not only the responsibility of state authorities and administration

institutions, including local governments, but also the responsibility of each individual,
which is implemented through participation in national defence in accordance with the
directions of action and measures defined in the State Defence Concept.

135 The implementation of the State Defence Concept is ensured by state authorities and

administration institutions, local governments, as well as every natural and legal person
according to their competence and the tasks defined in regulatory acts.

136 The implementation of the State Defence Concept also occurs through regular exercises,

training, and practical drills at the government, individual ministry, local government,
private, and non-governmental sector levels to promote readiness culture and develop and
test crisis management algorithms.

137 In accordance with the National Security Law, the Saeima approves the State Defence

Concept not less than once during each convening by October 1 of its second year of
operation. Responding to the challenges of the geopolitical situation, this Concept has been
developed and approved in an expedited manner.

19


-----

