# Cyber S


-----

-----

# Cyber Security Strategy of Latvia

## 2014–2018


-----

-----

3. Overview of Cyber Security in Latvia ................................................................................................................................  4

4. Key Areas of Action ...............................................................................................................................................................  5

4.1. Governance and Resources of Cyber Security: .........................................................................................................  5

National Cyber Security ...........................................................................................................................................  5

State Owned ICT ........................................................................................................................................................  7

Critical Infrastructure ..............................................................................................................................................  8

Human Resources ......................................................................................................................................................  9

4.2. Rule of Law in cyber space and Reduction of Cyber Crime ................................................................................  10

4.3. Crisis Management ................................................................................................................................................... 11

4.4. Awareness raising, Education and Research ............................................................................................................... 12

4.5. International Cooperation ........................................................................................................................................... 14

5. Link to Other Development Planning Documents ............................................................................................................ 16

6. Final Remarks ......................................................................................................................................................................... 17

7. Acronyms and Definitions of Terms .................................................................................................................................... 18

Appendix No. 1 — Visualisation of National Cyber Security Policy Coordination ............................................................ 21


### CONTENTS


-----

### 1. Introduction


### 1. Introduction


Latvian state administration, society and economy depend
on the opportunities and services ensured by information
and communication technology (hereinafter – ICT), and
ICT determines the existence of information society in
Latvia. The Sustainable Development Strategy of Latvia
defines the promotion of the further development of a
modern and innovative society, open for new ideas and
the use of high technology as an asset for the economic
development and global competitiveness of Latvia.[1]

Due to the increasing use of ICT in society, state administration, and the economy, its illegal use, damage,
paralysis or destruction may cause threats to state and
public security, public order and economic activity,
as well as the hindrance of the further development of
the national economy. It is possible to intentionally and
unintentionally disturb or suspend the operation of the
network of state information systems and electronic
communications, as well as to encumber the functions
of the political, economic and military decision-making
mechanisms of the state, cause material damages, misinformation of society, and trigger technogenic failures.
Insecurity in cyber space may impact the reliability of
the use of ICT and thus prevent the development of a


modern and innovative society. During politically, socially, or economically sensitive developments, major
cyber attacks may be directed against Latvia. A secure
and reliable information society and e-government is not
possible in a state without a national competence in cyber security and cryptography.

With the increasing trend of society’s range and use of
services in cyber space, the number of cyber attacks and
methods in which attacks are carried out is increasing respectively.[2]

To reduce and prevent the risks and threats in cyber space,
a unified and coordinated cyber security policy involving
both the public and private sector is required. The Cyber
Security Strategy of Latvia lays down strategic priorities
in developing cyber security policy and an accompanying
action plan will be introduced in the first half of 2014. The
Strategy has been developed in line with documents of international organisations, especially the EU and NATO as
well as according to the measures specified in the National
Security Concept and the State Defence Concept.

2 _Symantec Internet Security Threat Report 2013 about the increase of_


-----

### Policy


### Policy


In implementing the cyber security policy, the following
principles are being used — development, cooperation,
responsibility, and openness.

**Development – it is possible to protect against rapidly**
growing threats in cyber space only by constantly and
systematically developing and improving skills in the
ICT sector and its security specialisation.

**Cooperation – the effective protection against threats in**
cyber space unrestricted by geographical boundaries of
countries or administrative boundaries of institutions is


### 2. Aims and Basic Principles


**Responsibility – it is possible to effectively reduce risks**
in cyber space only if all parties involved in cyber space,
including individuals, state institutions, and private businesses are informed about and aware of the effects of their
activity or inactivity on their own security and the security of others.

**Openness – the cyber security policy is to be imple-**
mented by facilitating the accessibility of information
and communication technology while respecting the
rights and fundamental freedoms of an individual,
searching for a balance between freedom, privacy, and
security, as well as promoting good practices, ethics,
and standards in cyber space.


### 2. Aims and Basic Principles


-----

### 3. Overview of Cyber Security in


### 3. Overview of Cyber Security


Modern society uses ICT more extensively by both directly acquiring information and processing it and creating
new and widely accessible tools for self-expression. Convenient and diverse mutual communication tools and
platforms are being used to receive services. A total of
75.8 % of the inhabitants of Latvia have used the Internet,
while 70.3 % use the Internet at least once a week[1]. The
number of electronic transactions in the biggest banks in
Latvia exceeds 90 % of the total number of transactions,[2]
and more than 25 % of state institution services are available electronically[3].

Extensive use of ICT has changed the daily routine of
society, and a virtual environment where physical and digital actions merge has been created. The idea that ICT is a
matter of interest of just a small group of professionals has
been gradually substituted by the understanding that the
entire society is, to a greater or lesser extent, linked with
ICT, and the range of services provided and supported by
ICT will increase in the following years. Since ICT is widely
used, all members of society — from ICT users to managers, decision makers and legislators — should have an
understanding about the basic principles of the processes
and security of cyber space.

ICT solutions and services have a complicated structure,
but they are widely accessible. It is easy to use cyber space to

1 Central Statistical Bureau. Inhabitants using computer/Internet at the
beginning of the year. 2012.

2 Latvian Internet Association. Study of Internet Banking in Latvia. 2011.

3 Ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Development. Results of Assessment and Qualification of all Public Services Provided by the


The situation in Latvian cyber space is characterised by
a considerable number of ICT security incidents, from
several incidents of high significance to hundreds of incidents of low significance affecting state and municipal
institutions, private businesses and individuals. According
to an overview by CERT.LV, 4964 high priority incidents
and over 200 thousand low priority incidents have been
registered in 2013.[4] The trend of politically, socially or
economically sensitive developments being accompanied
by intentionally organised cyber attacks in is increasing.
Latvia may be subject to an increased risk during its 2015
Presidency of the Council of the EU.

In order to reduce the number of cases when with the help
of ICT damage to society is caused, it is important to develop a set of comprehensive measures that would protect
cyber space and its services. The strategy sets five priority
areas of action:


##### atvia


1. Governance and Resources of Cyber Security.
2. Rule of Law in cyber space and reduction of Cyber Crime.
3. Crisis management.
4. Awareness raising, education and research.
5. International cooperation.


-----

##### 4.1. Governance and Resources of Cyber Security

ICT solutions and services are developed, improved and
maintained in both the public and the private sector. For
the solutions and services to be reliable, safe and continuous, it is necessary to apply information security requirements, standards, and good practices throughout their
entire life cycle by including risk analysis based security
planning, and assessing political, economic, social, legal,
and personal data protection aspects. Cyber security policy
implementation in Latvia involves a broad, comprehensive
range of interested parties; therefore it is necessary to create
an effective cyber security governance model.

###### National Cyber Security
National cyber security should be viewed in three dimensions — infrastructure, services, and processes —
where the provision of information safety is required.
At the moment, cyber security governance is organised
in a partially centralised model, where the leading institutions (according to the respective authority) perform
the function of handling the strategy, methodology and
coordination of cyber security, whereas supervisors of
specific ICT solutions and services constantly ensure
practical implementation and execution of the established requirements. National cyber security is based on
mutual cooperation, where each state authority performs
its functions, including in cyber space, and cooperates
with other involved parties directly or through the National Information Technology Security Council (hereinafter — Council). The Council has been established
by the Law on the Security of Information Technology which determines the development of cyber security


### 4. Key areas of Action


policy at a national level. According to the Law the
Council coordinates the development of cyber security
policy and planning and implementation of objectives
and measures. The Council is the central national authority for the exchange of information and cooperation
between the public and private sector, and its operation
is ensured by the National Cyber Security Policy Coordination Section of the Ministry of Defence.

###### National cyber security policy is developed by (Visualisation in Appendix No. 1):
1. **Ministry of Defence (MOD) – coordinates develop-**
ment and implementation of information technology
security and protection policy, as well as cooperates
in the provision of international cooperation. The National Cyber Security Policy Coordination Section of
the MOD organises and provides support for the implementation of cyber security policy.
2.  Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) – coordinates international cooperation and Latvia’s participation in various international initiatives related to the cyber security.
3. **Financial and Capital Market Commission (FCMC) –**
regulates and supervises activities in cyber space of
members of the financial and capital market cyber
space; the Bank of Latvia (BoL) promotes secure and
smooth operation of payment systems, while credit
institutions are responsible for secure availability of
electronic services in their sector.
4. **Ministry of Economics (MoE) – develops economic**
policy and promotes the development of competitiveness and innovation.
5. **Ministry of the Interior (MoI), State Police (SP) and**
**Security Police (SeP) – implement the policies for com-**
bating crime public order security protection and the


### 4. Key areas of Action


-----

protection of rights and legal interests of individuals, as
well as coordinates the settlement of crisis situations.


protection of rights and legal interests of individuals, as


1 Existing partners of the Council: association “ISACA Latvia Chapter”, Latvian Open Technology Association, Latvian Information and
Communication Technology Association, Latvian Internet Association,
Association of Commercial Banks of Latvia, Latvian Chamber of Comd I d


**Constitution Protection Bureau (CPB) – oversees**
the critical infrastructure.


In the private sector, the governance of information security is based on the sustainability of business and secure and
reliable provision of services. In some sectors, there are laws
and regulations which, for example, apply to credit institutions, providers of electronic services, or personal data protection; but good practices and standards for the security of
ICT solutions are not widely used. The market of electronic
communication operators is scattered and a part of service


**Constitution Protection Bureau (CPB) – oversees**


-----

environment and organising regular training for leading employers.


environment and organising regular training for lead

According to the Law on the Security of Information
Technology, a national Information Technology Security
Incident Response Institution CERT.LV has been created.
CERT.LV maintains common monitoring of cyber space,
provides support for Latvian and foreign state and municipal institutions, entrepreneurs and individuals in
preventing IT security incidents as well as coordinates
the prevention of security incidents. As activity in cyber
space increases, CERT.LV together with institutions from
the public and private sectors must develop resources
which would allow the summarization of technical information about incidents in cyber space and storage of this
information for analysis and evaluation.

_Required actions:_
1. Improve coordinated development, implementation
and evaluation of the national cyber security policy
within the framework of the National IT Security
Council through cooperation of representatives of public, non-governmental and private sectors. Strengthen
the leading position of the Ministry of Defence in a
coordinated development and implementation of the
cyber security policy.
2. Create an information exchange medium (platform)
by promoting the exchange of information among entrepreneurs about topical cyber security threats, problems, solutions, good practices, and their application.
3. Implement the assessment of risks to national cyber
security.
4. Promote the standards and practices of good security
management in the public and private sector by creating understanding about ICT security in the business


environment and organising regular training for leading employers.
5. Improve the mechanism of implementation and
monitoring of security requirements for electronic
communication operators.
6. Improve the ability of CERT.LV to observe, analyse
and prevent IT security incidents and cooperate with
NATO and EU partners on information exchange.
7. Develop CERT.LV resources and competences to perform centralised security tests.

###### State owned ICT
Cyber security at a national level is closely connected to
the state ICT governance system, which is now partially
regulated by the Law on State Information Systems. Its further development has been outlined in the concept of the
organisational model of state ICT management. The concept sets many tasks for the optimisation of state ICT and
the improvement of management processes of state ICT.
Fulfilment of necessary tasks would allow reaching a homogenous, more shared and professionally and rationally
maintained state ICT infrastructure, which would attract
better motivated human resources with a higher degree of
specialisation and higher professional competences, thus
increasing the overall level of state ICT security. The optimisation of state ICT would, inter alia, allow focusing of
resources for the improvement of the technological security
of state ICT solutions, for example, by creating shared solutions for the continuity of operations, etc. With respect to
the management of state ICT, the concept provides for the
development and implementation of standards and guidelines for the continuity, reliability and security of electronic
state administrative processes.

Currently used state ICT solutions and especially state information systems (SIS) contain information illegal exposure


providers do not fulfil the requirements specified in the leg-
islation, thus causing security risks to both clients and other


-----

or acquisition, distortion or deletion of which can cause
significant damage to a specific person, society, or state.
Denying access to SIS or interrupting the operation of support systems can completely or partially paralyse the work
of the public administration. Therefore it is important that
the development, introduction and operation of state ICT
solutions, including security management, is carried out in
a rational, effective, transparent and mutually harmonised
manner by using best practices of the sector and guidelines
to minimise to the occurrence of ICT security threats due
to mistakes as well as deliberate actions.

The Law on State Information Systems provides for a single
level of technical and organisational requirements for all
registered systems irrespective of their functionality, value
of the collected information, and influence on the execution of functions of the public administration, both within
the institution and outside of it. The lack of differentiation
of requirements causes inadequate pressure on systems of
varying significance and capacity, as well as the willingness
to avoid system registration. Differentiation of the requirements and categorisation of the systems would allow the
application of more precise and - appropriate legal measures in case of a criminal offence.

The case study by MoEPRD suggests that one half of the
holders of state information systems do not ensure measures for security management, as they are not motivated
or competent. The state ICT security monitoring and
control system is insufficient.

_Required actions:_
1. Continue the implementation of improved management measures specified in the conceptual organisational model of state ICT management, which provides
for the development of a unified ICT architecture and


development or improvement of management processes, standards and guidelines.
2. Develop a legal order for a unified management of the
provision of state ICT that provides for a categorisation of systems based on a risk analysis and appropriately differentiated requirement framework for security management.
3. Improve the understanding and knowledge of the
holders of ICT solutions and infrastructure by organising training programmes for the managing staff of
the state administration and the staff involved in ICT
security management.
4. Evaluate the efficiency of the supervision of ICT security management, the responsibility and penalties for
not implementing the security management measures,
as well as to establish minimum requirements for the
work of security managers.
5. Organise extraordinary audits and security tests of
state ICT solutions and infrastructure performed by
independent organisations.
6. Develop the procedure according to which the institutions report to a common competent authority about
the implementation of information security measures.
7. Improve the cooperation between the Latvian Association of Local and Regional Governments, Municipalities and Institutions in order to improve the security
management of municipal ICT resources.

###### Critical Infrastructure
Critical infrastructure of information technology has been
established for the performance of basic functions essential for state and society to ensure the integrity, accessibility and confidentiality of the critical infrastructure. Once
a year the Cabinet of Ministers establishes and reviews the
information technology infrastructure whose termination


or acquisition, distortion or deletion of which can cause
significant damage to a specific person, society, or state.


or acquisition, distortion or deletion of which can cause


-----

can substantially threaten the existence of the state.[1] The
critical infrastructure of information technology has been
included in the critical infrastructure of the state, and its
owners and legal managers, in cooperation with security
institutions and CERT.LV, consistently improve security
measures. Planning and implementation of security measures for critical infrastructure is regulated by the Cabinet
of Ministers.[2] For the purposes of exchange of knowledge
and experience, as well as for the improvement of procedures, representatives of critical infrastructures are regularly involved in training organised by CERT.LV.

_Required actions:_
1. Improve the processing of information and experience exchange about incidents, protection of the critical infrastructure and prevention of risks among the
holders of critical infrastructures, CERT.LV and state
security institutions.
2. Organise crisis training and security breach tests at a
national, regional and international level and in cooperation with the Cyber Defence Unit of the National
Armed Forces (NAF).
3. Strengthen the security of state ICT resources by
developing technical tools for the automatic provision and control of security, as well as to improve the
capacity, knowledge and mutual cooperation of the
security staff.

1 Cabinet Regulation No. 496 of 1 April 2010 “Planning and Implementation Procedure of Identification and Security Measures for the Critical
Infrastructure, including the Critical Infrastructure of Europe.”

2 Cabinet Regulation No. 100 of 1 February 2011 “Planning and Implementation Procedure of the Security Measures for the Critical


###### Human Resources
The situation in state and municipal institutions is characterised by significant differences in human and material resources, from institutions with well-paid and highly qualified employees and modern technical resources
to — in most cases —institutions with employees with
inadequate qualification and low quality information
technology. This creates an unequal level of fulfilment
of obligations laid down by the legislation in the area of
information security management in the state administration. Furthermore, the restricted availability of highly
qualified experts in the labour market does not meet the
demand of the private sector and companies are using
outsourcing services to carry out their functions.

The number of ICT security management experts and security technology experts in the Latvian labour market is
small. The professional standard for ICT security managers and a certification procedure for this speciality have
not been established, and study programmes in computing, computer science and information technology do not
purposefully train experts for this specialisation. There
are minimum competency requirements established for
the ICT security managers in state administration institutions. IT specialists from state and municipal institutions participate in “Be secure” training seminars and
annual briefings in the institutions; however, the acquired
amount of knowledge is restricted and its use in practical
situations is not being practised and tested.

_Required actions:_
1. Assess and raise existing professional standards related
to the ICT by including the requirements for the knowledge about and skills for cyber security.
2. Define, increase and assess the professional competencies of experts responsible for cyber security and promote


###### Human Resources
The situation in state and municipal institutions is char-


###### Human Resources


-----

the use of expert certifications acquired abroad for the
confirmation of such competencies.
3. Promote the contribution of higher education institutions by including cyber security specialisation in study
programmes.
4. Perform a labour market analysis about the demand,
supply, remuneration of cyber security experts and the
employment level of experts prepared by educational
institutions.
5. Improve the competencies of the teaching staff in the
area of cyber security and to support the preparation of
methodological materials.

##### 4.2. Rule of Law in Cyber Space and Reduction
of Cyber Crime

Rule of Law in cyber space is based on the principle of
equivalency, which provides for the observation of laws
and regulations both in the physical and the virtual environment. The state is obliged to ensure the basic rights
and freedoms of any person laid down by the Constitution and the observation of principles of universal rights
irrespective of their field of application. The provided
technological opportunities have favoured the increase
of criminal offences in cyber space. To commit such offences, criminals use automatic data processing systems
as a tool for committing crimes that direct them towards
another protected or publicly inaccessible automatic
data processing system or its resources. An automatic
data processing system can also be used as a medium
for the circulation of illegal or offensive and defamatory
(incitement to racial hatred, distribution of child pornography, etc.) information.

The reduction of cybercrime requires action in two basic


the use of expert certifications acquired abroad for the
confirmation of such competencies.


the use of expert certifications acquired abroad for the


The complicated structure and operation of cyber space outline two problematic areas in the implementation of effective
combating of cybercrime. Firstly, the understanding of the
concept “significant damage” and its application is an important precondition for establishing constituent elements of
a criminal offence and appropriate qualification and punishment of a criminal offence. Secondly, investigation and collection of evidence in cyber space requires specific knowledge.

Implementation of preventive actions requires organised
ICT and a legislative base regulating its security, as well as
effective use thereof. The existing capacity in combating
cybercrime should be developed by strengthening electronic evidence. Investigation, as well as collection and
assessment of evidence requires special knowledge and
a sufficient level of competence is crucial in law enforcement agencies, prosecutor’s offices and courts to ensure
the rule of law in cyber space.

_Required actions:_
1. Assess the laws and regulations in the ICT sector as
a foundation for applying the Latvian Administrative
Violations Code and Criminal Law and to improve this
foundation to ensure effective protection of individuals’ interests through and in relation to criminal law.
2. Assess the present situation and the necessary amendments in legislation that provide for punishment for
causing damage to the security or operation of information systems directed towards automatic data processing systems.
3. Develop the terminology related to the information
security and cyber security in the Latvian language and
harmonise its use in the legislative enactments


directions — preventive work for the reduction of criminal
offences and effective combating of crime.


-----

4. Assess and improve the supervision of obligations in
the area of cyber security laid down by the legislative
enactments and to promote support for the fulfilment thereof.
5. Facilitate discussions and exchange of opinions about
the identification of new ICT crimes and improvement
of the legal basis for the restriction thereof in line with
the international trends.
6. Combat and investigate cybercrimes by assessing and
improving the existing resources, procedures, cooperation mechanisms, and their efficiency.
7. Assess and develop the existing capacity of acquiring
and analysing evidence in the process of investigation
of cybercrimes by developing the competence of SP
and improving the cooperation with CERT.LV.
8. Develop methodical materials for studies about the ICT
sector for the purposes of increasing the knowledge of
police officers, persons directing the proceedings and
judges about the ICT sector and to implement an indepth training programme about the issues of combating cybercrime.
9. Develop a unified mechanism for listing the criminal
offences in cyber space (statistics) in the system of
police, prosecution and court.

##### 4.3. Preparedness and Capacity to Act in Crisis Situations

Institutions which ensure national cyber security capabilities have been set up in Latvia. Plans for action in the case
of increased threat have been developed and are being regularly updated. Cooperation with the Ministry of the Interior
for solving different crisis situations has been established.
The involvement of experts is available in collaboration
with the private sector However the present resources and


measures are not sufficient and organised enough to ensure
efficient and prompt action in the case of serious and extensive ICT security incidents or cyber attacks.

The present situation in Latvia and threats in cyber space,
as well as resources for the prevention of risks and management of a crisis that are at the disposal of the state have
been assessed in the cyber crisis exercise by the Cabinet
of Ministers on 7 December 2012. Reduction of incidents
and the prevention of a crisis require individual understanding about cyber security and the responsibility of
each organisation, where CERT.LV can give advice on
daily work or provide support in cases of serious and
unexpected incidents.

Considering the limited resources of the state administration and the conclusions of the cyber crisis exercise, the
NAF are developing a Cyber Defence Unit to provide support for CERT.LV and NAF units in preventing ICT security incidents and management of consequences in crisis
situations in cyber space or in war time. The Unit would be
used should CERT.LV resources be insufficient and involvement of the Unit would faster expedite the implementation
of emergency measures or if the Unit had at its disposal
special resources for performing such activities.[1] The Unit
is being created as a back-up team of experts consisting
of volunteers from the public and private sector according to the legal basis of the service of the National Guard.

To ensure the functioning and strengthening of the infrastructure of electronic communication the existing infrastructural capabilities should be developed (especially with
respect to resistance to the influence of external conditions),

1 Concept of the National Armed Forces Cyber Defence Unit of the Mif f


measures are not sufficient and organised enough to ensure
efficient and prompt action in the case of serious and exten-


measures are not sufficient and organised enough to ensure


-----

as well as a new infrastructure for securing the basic functions of a state, especially when the daily use of electronic


as well as a new infrastructure for securing the basic func

_Required actions:_
1. Evaluate the definition of a crisis, its procedures, legislation and the use thereof in the case of a possible
cyber crisis.
2. Develop the capabilities of the NAF and the Cyber
Defence Unit to react in a crisis situation and in managing the consequences of major incidents by providing
and ensuring operational capability of the Unit.
3. Develop information technology and communication
systems for the NAF to ensure the support of NAF
management capabilities in crisis situations.
4. Organise regular theoretical and practical training at a
national level with the involvement of high officials and
merchants in order to develop mutual understanding
and coordinate the management of crisis situations.
5. Improve the competence and resources of state institutions when preparing and ensuring the presidency
of the Council of the European Union in 2015 when
global cyber attacks may be directed against Latvia.
6. Develop regional and international cooperation, to
ensure regular training for providing and receiving
support in a crisis situation.
7. Establish an electronic communication network for
emergency situations.
8. Develop a technological and organisational solution
that provides state institutions with infrastructure and
ensures high confidentiality and integrity of and accessibility to state information systems.
9. Strengthen the outer scope of the national external
communication network: establish, categorise, coordinate, evaluate risks, and make necessary improvements
to ensure a reliable and secure flow of data between


Latvia and other countries, but, when necessary, to use
the network for changes in data flows or the restriction


An informed society is a crucial part of a secure and reliable cyber space. Awareness is ensured by purposeful
and regular explanatory work, including the policy and
communication implemented by the leading officials of a
country, raising the issues in educational institutions and
organising regular discussions of experts in the media.

The level of awareness of a society about the threats to
ICT, tools available for their prevention, personal rights in
the electronic medium and their infringement, as well as
about action in the case of a threat is low. According to the
statistics of CERT.LV, in almost all cases when the devices
of users have been infected and have become a part of botnets (approximately 15–20 thousand a month), the users
have not deliberately caused damage and the cause of the
infection is software that has not been updated or the lack
of antivirus solutions when malicious e-mail attachments
are opened. Along with raising awareness of society, it is
important to increase understanding about ethical norms
and moral responsibilities in the electronic environment.

To improve the knowledge of ICT users, it is necessary to
implement a set of complex measures, starting from primary
and secondary education. It is necessary to organise regular information campaigns in cooperation with non-governmental and private institutions, as well as constantly
reflect the information in mass media. At the moment,
cyber security issues are only tested in a uniform model in
general education in an informatics examination (knowl


Latvia and other countries, but, when necessary, to use


-----

To develop new study programmes and educate experts and
professionals from other sectors (e.g., experts in law) about


To develop new study programmes and educate experts and


_Figure 1. The level of cyber space security knowledge according to the target audience._


Academic
_Develop, motivate_
environment

Higher /
Professional \ _Create specialisation_
education

Students /
Educational institutions

Society / All users


edge test part) at the secondary education level. Although
the average level of answered questions is comparatively


At the moment, there are no academic study programmes and scientific activity in the area of cyber
security and people studying the respective subjects
abroad are not motivated to return to Latvia due to low
salaries, lack of opportunities for professional development. According to a study by the World Economic
Forum, Latvia ranks 110th with regard to the availability of scientists and engineers.[1]

1 World Economic Forum “The Global Competitiveness Report


Reserach / Innovation / Opinion leaders

Expertise

General

_Educate_

knowledge

Basic

_Inform_ skills


cialists who are currently working abroad, serve as a basis
for the creation of a national cyber security (including cryptography) school, provide the opportunity in the future to
successfully participate in scientific EU projects and, finally, to create commercial products with a high added value.

_Required actions:_
1. Increase the competency of educational institutions
and teaching staff and their contribution to educating
children and youth about the issues of ICT security by
integrating these issues into the educational system and


edge test part) at the secondary education level. Although


-----

organising learning activities that create understanding
about information security, privacy protection and
the use of reliable e-services. Additionally, opportunities must be ensured for children and youths to report
violations on the Internet and to receive support from
a psychologist. Further education of the teaching staff
about the issues of cyber security must be organized.
2. Develop educational and informative materials about
cyber security for use in educational institutions and
interest groups that are easily accessible and differentiated according to various age groups.
3. Develop academic studies and research in cyber security to train experts, promote innovation, establish
public-private partnerships for the support of science
and research, and to attract European funds, grants and
financial instruments.
4. Create an ICT security laboratory and to organise scientific conferences about topical issues concerning
cyber security and cybercrime in cooperation with
universities and scientific institutes.
5. Implement educational and informative campaigns
and other measures for the overall enhancement of the
understanding of society about the cyber security, cybercrime and important threats, to expand the accessibility of various ICT security software.
6. Develop the exchange of information and opinions
among public administration, associations of the sector, experts, business leaders, as well as creators of
public opinion — non-governmental organisations
and the academic environment.
7. Participate in international informative initiatives and
platforms, use the European Cyber Security Month and
the e-Skills Week to raise issues about the cyber security.
8. Promote innovation in the cyber security sector and
develop a unified academic resource of high-capacity
computing (supercomputer)


organising learning activities that create understanding
about information security, privacy protection and


organising learning activities that create understanding


Due to the awareness of the increasing role of cyber space
in every society, cyber security as an important issue has
been included on the agenda of cross border cooperation
and by international organisations. In bilateral and multilateral cooperation, a wide range of issues are usually considered — from observation of human rights in the virtual
environment to combating of crime, often also involving
the private sector. Under these conditions, different national interests inevitably collide, and thus far the international community has not reached significant progress
in creating a common understanding and approach. At
the same time, many non-harmonised processes still take
place. It is important for Latvia to have knowledge of the
work of international and regional organisations and to
participate in this work while at the same time expressing
support for ensuring the basic principles of a democratic
society in the virtual environment. It should be not only
be safe, but also free and accessible.

Latvia is taking part in international processes, including
the work of NATO, the EU, OSCE and UN, to promote
the improvement of a secure, free and accessible cyber
space. Latvia supports the first comprehensive resolution
of the United Nations Human Rights Council on human
rights in the virtual space and will continue to participate and strengthen such initiatives as the Freedom
Online Coalition, which focuses on observing human
rights and basic freedoms in cyber space, especially the
freedom of speech.


nternational Cooperation


-----

Latvia has joined the Council of Europe Convention on
Cyber Crime and its Additional Protocol concerning the
criminalisation of acts of a racist and xenophobic nature
committed through computer systems. According to the
Convention, all involved countries harmonise their legal
regulations to cooperate in the investigation of crimes
and to ensure that the people responsible for committing
cybercrimes are held liable.

Cyber security is an important part of national defence,
and nationally developed defence capabilities can be
strengthened by cooperating with NATO and EU member states in a crisis situation. To receive effective support
when necessary and to strengthen cyber security measures in the Euro-Atlantic space, the development of both
collective and individual cyber protection capabilities of
each member state should be facilitated in accordance
with the approved NATO and EU cyber security planning
documents. NATO has approved the Cyber Defence Concept and Action Plan and corresponding planning documents, which provide for the necessity to promote the development of cyber security capabilities of both NATO as
a whole and each individual member state.

_Required actions:_
1. Strengthen cooperation with countries from the Baltic and Northern European countries and improve the


cooperation with NATO, the EU, OSCE and UN to
improve the security, accessibility and freedom of ICT.
2. Support international efforts in enhancing mutual trust
and cooperation, emphasising the equal applicability of
international legal norms to both the physical and the
virtual environment.
3. Create a common Baltic university study programme
to combine regional educational resources to preparing
strong and qualified experts.
4. Organise international cyber security events in Latvia
on a regular basis, highlighting Latvia as a country that
takes care of the security of ICT at a national and international level.
5. Develop and test national procedures to receive prompt
and effective help in case of a cyber threat according
to the Memorandum of Understanding between Latvia
and NATO and pursuant to the NATO Cyber Defence
Concept and Action Plan.
6. Strengthen cyber protection capabilities by participating in various international training courses, exercises
and cyber attack simulations within NATO, the EU,
and other international organizations and forums,
giving local experts and the Cyber Defence Unit the
opportunity to improve their knowledge about the
latest solutions in information systems security.


cooperation with NATO, the EU, OSCE and UN to
improve the security, accessibility and freedom of ICT.


cooperation with NATO, the EU, OSCE and UN to


-----

### 5. Link to Other Development P


### 5. Link to Other Development P


_National documents:_

- National Security Concept

- State Defence Concept

- Law on the Security of Information Technology

- Law on State Information Systems (authored by MoEPRD)

- Sustainable Development Strategy of Latvia until 2030

- Guidelines for the Development of Information Society in 2014–2020

- Concept of the Organisational Model of the State Information and Communication Technology Management.

- Guidelines for the Electronic Communication Policy
in 2011–2016

- Authentication Law (authored by MoEPRD)

- Concept of the National Armed Forces Cyber Defence
Unit of the Ministry of Defence, 2013.


### Documents


_International documents:_

- UN Human Rights Council resolution: The promotion,
protection and enjoyment of human rights on the Internet

- NATO Strategic Concept

- NATO Concept on Cyber Defence

- NATO Cyber Defence Policy Action Plan

- EU Cyber Security Strategy

- Convention on Cybercrime (Budapest Convention)

- Europe 2020 A Strategy for Smart, Sustainable and
Inclusive Growth

- Digital Agenda of the EU

- Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council
on attacks against information systems


### Documents


-----

An ex-ante evaluation of the proposed solution has not
been carried out, since cyber security is constantly and
rapidly developing, but the fields of action established in
the guidelines are a continuation of priorities specified in
the National Security Concept and actions initiated so far.
The evaluation of the cyber security provided for in the
guidelines will create a basis for assessing and improving
further policy and the action plan.

Based on the guidelines, an action plan will be developed, which will include detailed results of the actions
and calculations on the influence on state and municipal


### 6. Conclusions


budgets in 2014 and in the following years. Every two
years, the Ministry of Defence performs an evaluation
of the guidelines and implementation of the action plan
within the Council and submits an informative report
and, if necessary, proposals for raising the issues of the
guidelines to the Cabinet of Ministers.

There are no policy planning documents that are be
deemed as having lost their validity. At the same time,
implementation of priorities laid down by the National
Security Concept shall continue.


### 6. Conclusions


-----

### 7. Acronyms and Definitions of


### 7. Acronyms and Definitions of


BoL Bank of Latvia
CCDCOE NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence in Tallinn
CDU Cyber Defence Unit of the National Armed Forces
CERT.LV Information Technology Security Incident Response Institution
CPB Constitution Protection Bureau
DISS Defence Intelligence and Security Service
DSI Data State Inspectorate
ENISA European Union Agency for Network and Information Security
EU European Union
FCMC Financial and Capital Market Commission
ICT Information and communication technology
IT Information technology
LSRTC Latvian State Radio and Television Centre
MoE Ministry of Economics
MoEPRD Ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Development
MoES Ministry of Education and Science
MoFA Ministry of Foreign Affairs
MoI Ministry of the Interior
MoJ Ministry of Justice
MoT Ministry of Transport
MoW Ministry of Welfare
NAF National Armed Forces
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NetSafe Safer Internet Centre of Latvia Net-Safe Latvia
OSCE Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
SeP Security Police
SIS State information systems
SP State Police
SRDA State Regional Development Agency
UN United Nations


-----

###### Electronic communication operator
A merchant or affiliation of a foreign merchant who has
the right to perform commercial activities, provide a
public electronic communication network or electronic
communication services pursuant to the procedure laid
down by the Law on Electronic Communications.

###### Electronic communication network
Transmission systems, commutation and routing devices
(including elements of the network that are not used) and
other resources that allow to transmit signals in the network
with the help of cables, radio waves, optical or other electromagnetic means irrespective of the information transmitted.

###### E-government
Effective management of the state and municipal administration with the use of information and communication
technology.

###### Information society
A society whose members are able and have the opportunity to acquire information with the help of information
and communication technology, link it with the existing
knowledge and use the newly acquired knowledge for
increasing their welfare.

###### Information technology
Technology that uses electronic processing of data, including creation, deletion, saving, reflection and transmitting, for the purposes of performing the required tasks.

###### Information technology security incident
A harmful event or offence, as a result of which the


##### Terms


###### Information and communication technology
A set of knowledge, methods and technical equipment that
ensures acquisition, storage and distribution of any information with the help of computers and communication tools.

###### Cyber security
Cyber security is the collection of tools, policies, security
concepts, security safeguards, guidelines, risk management approaches, actions, training, best practices, assurance and technologies that can be used to protect the
cyber environment and organization and user’s assets. Organisation and user’s assets include connected computing
devices, personnel, infrastructure, applications, services,
telecommunications systems, and the totality of transmitted and/or stored information in the cyber environment.[1]

###### Cyber space
Cyber space is an interactive environment that includes
users, networks, computing technology, software, processes, information in transit or storage, applications,

1 Definition by the International Telecommunication Union in the English language: “Cyber security is the collection of tools, policies, security
_concepts, security safeguards, guidelines, risk management approaches,_
_actions, training, best practices, assurance and technologies that can be_
_used to protect the cyber environment and organization and user’s as-_
_sets. Organisation and user’s assets include connected computing devic-_
_es, personnel, infrastructure, applications, services, telecommunications_
_systems, and the totality of transmitted and/or stored information in the_
_cyber environment” ITU-T X 1205_


##### Terms


-----

###### Critical infrastructure
Critical infrastructure is the objects, systems, or their
parts in Latvia, which are important in providing the
performance of functions essential to society, as well
as for ensuring the protection of human health, security, economic or social welfare, whose destruction or
malfunctioning may significantly influence the perfor
1 Definition of the “cyber space” from the International Telecommunication Union National Cyber Security Strategy Guide in the English
language. “We use the term cyberspace to describe systems and services
_connected either directly to or indirectly to the Internet, telecommunica-_
_tions and computer networks” and the description of cyber space in the_
ITU recommendation _“[This] includes users, networks, devices, all soft-_
_ware, processes, information in storage or transit, applications, services,_
_and systems that can be connected directly or indirectly to networks.”_

ITU-T X.1205. Available at: http://ej.uz/OverviewOfCybersecurity


###### State information and communication  technology
According to the scope and objective of the Concept of
the Organisational Model of the State Information and
Communication Management, state information and
communication technology in this document refers to information and communication technology solutions and
services used, introduced, maintained, and operated by
direct administration institutions and institutions under
direct subordination or supervision thereof.
With respect to municipalities and legal entities or natural
persons of private law delegated to perform the duties of the
state, the concept of state information and communication
technology is applicable to the information and communication technology solutions and services that are used in
order to perform such delegated duties of the state.


-----

#### NATIONAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SECURITY COUNCIL


Monitors,
reacts, helps,
educates,
trains,
analyses


Organises the
implementa-
tion of
communica-
tion policy


Coordinates
electronization
of public
services


Investigate
and combat
cyber crime


Develops cyber security policy


Organises
the
governance
of state ICT


Ensures
operation


Coordinates
international
cooperation


Credit institutions


Oversees
CI


MoI


LSRTC


DISS


SRDA


MoJ


MoES


MoT


MFA


DSI


SeP


-----

-----

-----

-----

