#### R E P O RT

ON STATE DEFENCE POLICY

AND ARMED FORCES

DEVELOPMENT


-----

-----

###### MINISTRY OF DEFENCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA


# R E P O RT

###### ON STATE DEFENCE POLICY

 AND ARMED FORCES

 DEVELOPMENT


-----

Published by:
Ministry of Defence of the Republic of Latvia
K.Valdemāra 10/12, Rīga, LV–1473, Latvia
www.mod.gov.lv

Designed by T. Folks

Photos: A. Kukemilka, M. Zemgalietis, A. Rikveilis, U. Davidovs


-----

## TA B L E O F  C O N T E N T S


###### 7

 9

 13

 18

 25

 37

 41

 48

 59

 61

 64


###### Chapter 1

 Chapter 2

 Chapter 3

 Chapter 4

 Chapter 5

 Chapter 6

 Chapter 7

 Chapter 8

 Chapter 9

 Chapter 10


###### LATVIAN HISTORIC EXPERIENCE

 BASIC PRINCIPLES OF LATVIAN NATIONAL

 SECURITY AND DEFENCE POLICY

 MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

 DEVELOPMENT OF STRUCTURE FOR THE NATIONAL

 ARMED FORCES

 KINDS OF NATIONAL ARMED FORCES, COMMANDS OF

 NATIONAL ARMED FORCES AND SPECIALISED UNITS

 NAF COMMAND AND CONTROL, COMMUNICATIONS,

 COMPUTERS AND INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS,

 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT

 DEFENCE DEVELOPMENT PLANNING

 INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION

 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

 LINKS TO SOCIETY

 CONCLUSION


2004


-----

-----

###### CHAPTER 1
 LATVIAN HISTORIC EXPERIENCE


2004


-----

Latvia from the height of the bird’s flight

2004 national defence system. The Ministry of Defence,
other types of armed forces and their military units,
recruitment of which is still based on the professional and the conscript service, were established a
little later.
Taking into account the lessons learned from
the history, the Latvian initial security and defence
policy was based on the concept of the territorial
defence with a strategic goal to become a full member of the NATO. The new security situation and
international co-operation gave opportunities to
train the military and civil experts of the national
defence system, which are now people who develop
the Latvian military capabilities and build the
NATO-compliant armed forces.
As a result, during the Prague Summit on
21 November 2002 NATO Heads of State and
Governments officially invited Latvia to start accession talks to join the NATO. The invitation internationally acknowledged the achievement of Latvia to
have become a legal, stable and democratic country,


which has established a successful national defence
system. In spite of that, Latvia still continues
to work intensively and demonstrate its commitment to put an equal share for achievement of the
Alliance’s goals, as well as the regional security.
Also, the Referendum of 20 September 2003,
when most of the Latvian citizens voted yes for
joining the European Union, demonstrated the
willingness of Latvia to join the democratic and
economically developed European countries, as
well as its commitment to assume responsibility for
providing the peace and stability within Europe.
29 March 2004 can be considered a symbolic
landmark between the historically inherited insufficiency of security guarantees and the prospects
of stability and security never experienced in the
Latvian history. After becoming a full-fledged
member of international organisations, Latvian
state and population can be confident about their
future and contribute to the development of the
country with determination.


-----

###### CHAPTER 2
 BASIC PRINCIPLES OF LATVIAN NATIONAL SECURITY AND DEFENCE POLICY


2004


-----

– defence enhancement to fight the NBC-weapons;
– readiness of units to participate in the international military and peace-keeping operations;
– necessity to establish modern training bases.
For ensuring the compliance to the NATO
requirements and for receiving the ad hoc support
from the allies, Latvia continues to improve its hostnation’s support system.
Necessity to have professional armed forces is
a prerequisite for a gradual transition to fully professional armed forces by 2006 by dismissing the
conscript service. MoD’s and NAF’s experts have
produced a concept to implement this transition.
It will allow to utilise resources required for the
numerically small Latvian armed forces in a more
efficient way.
Recruitment of motivated people to the national
defence is essential for establishing and developing
of the armed forces, which are based on the professional military service. Therefore, the systems of
recruitment and military conscription are being
improved in order to create interest in people and
ensure competitiveness in the labour market.
Principle of co-operation between the armed
forces and the society is a key prerequisite for
achieving the goals and tasks of the national


defence. The public awareness about the national
defence system, armed forces and their principles
form a solid support to the national security and
defence. Due to the limited resources, as well as
the participation in the collective security system
Latvia does not need to build a massive mobilisation system. However, the co-responsibility of
the publics for the national defence is preserved
through the National Guard.
The armed forces’ capabilities allow them to
professionally clear the natural and unnatural catastrophes, carry out the explosive ordnance disposal,
search and rescue operations, as well as ecological monitoring. There is a similar co-operation
between the public and the civil institutions for
carrying out the military tasks – they provide civil
expertise, mobilisation resources and host-nation’s
support.
Principle of international military co-operation
envisages an expanded international co-operation,
including co-operation with the NATO and the
Baltic States, co-operation with the EU and the
Baltic Sea region countries and co-operation with
the NATO partner countries.
After joining NATO, Latvia retains its current international bi-lateral co-operation projects,


2004


Pre-mission training in Denmark for the Latvian contingent BALTSQN-9 soldiers, February 2004


-----

though it will also define new fields of co-operation
with the NATO states to ensure efficient integration
to NATO.
After NATO integration, the Baltic States should
continue to develop and enhance their joint military projects, thus ensuring efficient utilisation of
resources and improvement of the joint military
capabilities.
Latvian goal in respect of the European security
and defence policy is to facilitate the stability and
security within Europe, strengthen the EU crisis
management capabilities and contribute to the
transatlantic co-operation.
Co-operation with the NATO partner countries,
including Russia, is a way to facilitate trust, security
and stability within Europe. NATO membership
gives an opportunity to Latvia to co-participate in
and contribute to the further development of this
co-operation by sharing its experiences with the
CIS and the South-East European countries, thus
facilitating the process of democratic reforms in
these NATO partner states.

**2.2. Declaration on the Work of the**
**Cabinet of Ministers**

The main goals stated in the Chapter on
National Defence and Security of the Government’s
Declaration, adopted on 9 March 2004, are the
following:
– by the end of 2006, Latvia will only maintain a
professional army. Provision of enhancement of
professionalism of the National Armed Forces
(NAF) and cancellation of the compulsory military service. Creation of an efficient system
for selection and training of personnel, as well
as ensuring a competitive salary system and a
social guarantees programme for soldiers of the
professional military service;
– further progress of the defence system reforms
and ensuring compatibility of the armed forces
with the NATO. Remaining a reliable ally in the
Trans-Atlantic Alliance and participating in its
collective defence system and operations;
– re-structuring of the National Armed Forces
by 2004 in order to ensure settlement of Latvia’s
obligations with regard to the collective defence
system and quality-driven development of the
NAF according to the development aims set by
Latvia itself and the NATO;
– further allocation of 2% of the gross domestic
product for defence needs also ensuring planned


and sound use of the funds;
– through assistance of other NATO Member
States, ensuring full control and defence of our
air space;
– enhancement of the military infrastructure
in order to be able to accept NATO’s military
assistance in case it is needed;
– development of the Latvian brigade in order
to ensure permanent participation of one battalion in NATO’s operations. Development of
specialised units – military medical specialists,
military policemen and sappers according to the
development aims set by Latvia itself and the
NATO;
– active participation in formulation and implementation of the Common European Defence
Policy, further work on the Baltic military cooperation projects and assistance to those countries intending to develop their military forces
according to the principles of a democratic
country;
– completion of the state security bodies’ reform,
ensuring protection of classified information
according to the NATO requirements;
– development of the Home Guard or Zemessardze in order to ensure fulfilment of the collective defence tasks;
– by 2004, re-consideration of the basic principles of the mobilisation and crises control system according to the new defence system;
– provision of efficient strategic management
and planning by preventing functional overlapping between the Ministry of Defence and headquarters of the National Armed Forces;
– provision of the National Armed Forces with
modern equipment and outfit (weapons for antiaircraft and anti-tank defence, communication
systems, armour, sea observation systems and
other equipment);
– support to education that enhances loyalty
to the country and patriotism, physical training and support and development of the Youth
Guard or Jaunsardze;
– active use of the potential of the Latvian science for attaining the aims set for the national
defence system;
– provision of discipline in the National Armed
Forces;
– improvement of public procurement for military needs and enhancement of its efficiency;
– until transition to professional military service, improvement of opportunities for alternative
military service.


2004


-----

Minister of Defence A. Slakteris handing the Defence Minister’s Award “Medal of Honorary Recognition” to
Lieutenant A. Robežnieks, Iraq, May 2004


2004


**2.3. Latvian Membership to NATO**

Latvia considers the membership to the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation to be the most efficient way to secure its sovereignty and security.
Besides strengthening the security of the Baltic
States, the NATO membership also facilitates the
security, stability and welfare within the whole
Baltic Sea region.
A lot of purposive preparatory work to join the
Alliance has been done since 1995, when NATO
membership as the goal of the Latvian foreign and
security policy was first set in the Latvian Foreign
Policy Concept. Efforts have been made to develop
the armed forces, comply with the NATO requirements, implement the relevant planning and budgeting system, strengthen the information security
system, modernise the armed forces’ equipment and
do other relevant tasks.

Latvia together with other aspirant countries
was invited to start the accession talks for joining
the Alliance in November 2002 in Prague. Since
the Prague Summit of November 2002, Latvia has
completed several essential tasks on its road to
NATO: accession talks have been completed, the


Reform Implementation Plan has been produced
and adopted by the Government in March 2003
and the Annual National Programme 2004, which
is the last report of this type, has been produced.
According to the Protocol of Accession ratified by
all NATO states, Latvia joined the Alliance on 29
March 2004.

Besides being the most efficient way to ensure
the national sovereignty and security, the NATO
membership is also an opportunity never experienced in the national history to:
– fully participate in the decision making for
forming the European and global security policy;
– join the family of countries united by the values
of democracy, observance of legal principles and
interests of sovereign countries;
– contribute to the security and stability within
the North European region;
– facilitate the settling of relations with Russia;
– increase the internal political stability and
economic growth, as well as help to attract the
investment;
– build and develop the modern armed forces;
– purposively and efficiently utilise resources
allocated to the national defence.


-----

###### CHAPTER 3

##### MINISTRY OF DEFENCE


2004


-----

Procurement Department has been transformed
into the Provision Policy Department, and elaboration of the procurement policy is now within its
competencies.
In order to implement the Youth Military
Education Concept, the Youth Military Education
Section was established in the Ministry in December
2003. There is a decision made to establish the
Centre for Military Education of Youths, which will
be subordinated to the MoD.
The total number of MoD staff in 2004 is 196,
as well as 26 defence attachés and representatives
abroad.
It is very important to have a qualified staff in
order to provide the efficient work of the MoD,
especially during the increased work load conditions and during times when a part of the MoD’s
civil servants is transferred to work abroad in different NATO structures.
Increase of the MoD’s personnel qualification level is based mainly on academic study programmes. The most popular fields of MA or second
degree studies of the MoD staff are political science,
legal studies, management and economics. Each
year MoD staff has an opportunity to study for the
MA in Global Security or MA in Defence Resource


Management in the UK or USA.
Besides, MoD staff attend diverse courses and
seminars in both Latvian training centres, e.g., State
Administration School, and abroad on regular basis.
Part of MoD employees expand their knowledge at
the military course for civil servants organised by
the BALTDEFCOL.
Employees nominated for the diplomatic service abroad are sent on a special training course,
which is organised by the Attaché Department in
collaboration with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Great attention is paid to foreign language teaching, mainly English and French, to the MoD’s personnel. Foreign language training courses are held
both in the Ministry and at the language schools
abroad (Canada, UK, Slovenia, Luxemburg and
Hungary). Good language skills is one of the criteria set to the applicants who want to work at the
Ministry. In 2004, the MoD has to teach English to
60 of its civilian employees so that they obtain the
Level 3 of NATO STANAG 6001.
The main emphasis in the development and
enhancement of the personnel management system
in 2004 will be put on the personnel training to:
– improve their foreign language skills (English
and French) in Latvia and abroad;


2004


Parade of the NAF units at 11. Novembra krastmala, 18 November 2003


-----

Inauguration ceremony of the Defence Attaché in Denmark, Norway and Iceland, Commander Senior Grade
V. Dreimanis, April 2003


2004


– maintain and extend their professional knowledge (MoD takes advantage of training opportunities provided by the Latvian training centres;
the co-operation with the foreign training centres should be extended to use more short-term
training programmes);
– acquire courses in general security policy,
general communication, resource management,
legislation etc.;
– acquire introductory course in the military
field (short-term course provided by the NDA
and military course for civil servants provided
by the BALTDEFCOL).

In 2004, one of the priorities of the MoD personnel policy is to improve the personnel career
planning system. This is an essential factor in personnel management because it allows to see the
eventual development of their career. The career
development plans for the MoD civil servants and
employees are produced on the basis of their performance and its assessment. These data ensure unbiased assessment of each employee’s professional
skills and knowledge.
The rotation of the MoD personnel in 2004 is
mainly related to their transfer to temporary posts


at the international organisations. The admission
criteria include their knowledge, skills and current
contribution to the Ministry’s work.

**3.3. Aspects of Information Security**

Protection of the classified information in Latvia
is co-ordinated and controlled by the Constitution
Protection Office (CPO), which is also the Latvian
national security institution.
Protection of the classified information is stipulated by the LR Law on National Secret and
Regulations of the LR Cabinet of Ministers on the
National Secret Protection and Regulations on the
List of National Classified Objects. The system of
legal documents in effect stipulates the protection
of the key classified information units – personnel
security including a detailed personnel clearance/
control procedure, physical security, information
transmission security and personnel liabilities in
case of classified information leakage. It is based
on “necessary to know” principle. The legal documents stipulating the security of the transmitted
data are produced in accordance with the development of the information technology.


-----

carried out. In order to implement quality training
of personnel on the information security issues,
experience is obtained from other countries.

**3.4. Consolidation of the Legal Base**

A legal base relevant to the principles of a democratic country stipulating the defence field is one of
the prerequisites for the NATO membership. Many
legal documents stipulating the national defence
field were produced in the early 90-ies, when Latvia
had just started to develop its international cooperation and national defence system. Military
concepts, principles and structure experienced a
rapid development during the last decade, and the
enhancement of the legal stipulation still continues.
Latvia has significantly improved its military legislative system in order to ensure the compliance
of the legal documents stipulating the national
defence with the principles of democracy present
in the NATO states.
The Cabinet of Ministers has approved the new
By-law on the Ministry of Defence in April 2003.
It defines the functions, tasks, competence and
structure of the Ministry of Defence, as well as the
competence of its officials. The By-law states that
Military Enrolment Centre, Military Intelligence
Service, State Agency for Properties of Defence and
Latvian War Museum are institutions subordinated
to the MoD. The MoD is a state share-holder of the
non-profit organisation, state limited liability company “Tēvijas Sargs” (“Guard of Motherland”).
In order to eliminate obstacles for the Latvian
membership to NATO, the specialists of the Ministry
of Defence made great efforts to harmonise the
Latvian legal documents in 2003. In May 2003, the
Saeima (Parliament) adopted the Amendments to
the National Security Law. The purpose of this
law produced by the Ministry of Defence was to
broaden the circles of people who can be involved
in the building of the national security system by
stating that besides the Latvian citizens, also representatives of the foreign and international organisations (especially NATO) can participate in the
above work.
Amendments have been produced to the Law
on Status of Foreign Armed Forces in the Republic
of Latvia, which defines procedures for making a
decision on transit of the foreign troops through
the land territory of the Republic of Latvia, as well
as procedures for foreign troops to transit the land
territory of the Republic of Latvia.


2004


State Secretary of the Ministry of Defence E. Rinkēvičs
(to the right) and Director of the US National
Geospatial Intelligence Agency Lieut.-Gen. J. Clapper at
the International Geospatial Information Symposium in
Riga, May 2004

All the defence institutions work in accordance
with the MoD reglement and instructions on protection of classified information. The NATO and
EU classified information protection systems are
being improved. Sub-registers and control points of
the NATO and EU classified information are being
established at the Ministry of Defence and the NAF.
The relevant amendments have been produced by
the inter-ministerial working group in order to
harmonise the legal documents stipulating the classified information protection with the requirements
of NATO and EU. The process of signing bilateral
co-operation agreements on exchange of classified
information with foreign countries still continues.

Special attention is paid to train the personnel
for working with the NATO classified information.
The staff of the defence system has been introduced
to the requirements and standards of the NATO
security regime. There is a Latvian security officer
working at the Latvian Mission to NATO (Brussels).
Intense personnel training in the information security field and issues related to the national, NATO
and EU classified information exchange has been


-----

The Ministry of Defence has elaborated amendments to the Law on International Agreements of
the Republic of Latvia in order to simplify the procedures of internal harmonisation and procedures
for signing the agreements about participation of
the Latvian NAF in international operations or
joint military exercises abroad, and still observing
the Law on Participation of the Latvian National
Armed Forces in the International Operations and


The Cabinet of Ministers has adopted the Regulations by the Ministry of Defence, which define
different provision, remuneration, social security
and other aspects for the soldiers.
Due to the Latvian membership to NATO, one
of its main legal tasks of 2004 is to ensure that
Latvia joins several Agreements binding to the
NATO member states, which cover the most diverse
fields, e.g., personnel status, information security


2004


Soldiers of the Mobile Infantry Battalion during exercise, January 2004


Law on Status of Foreign Armed Forces in the
Republic of Latvia.
The Military Service Law stipulating the progress
of service for the military personnel came into effect
in July 2003. The Law includes several delegations
to the Cabinet of Ministers and the Minister of
Defence who should define the detailed procedures
for the implementation of the above Law.


etc. Joining is related to a sound analysis of the
Latvian legal documents in order to eliminate
eventual discrepancies between the local and the
international laws.
Due to the fact that Latvia has planned to dismiss
the conscript service, it is important to continue the
legal assessment of the subject and start to produce
amendments to the respective legal documents.


-----

###### CHAPTER 4

##### DEVELOPMENT OF STRUCTURE FOR THE NATIONAL ARMED FORCES


2004


**4.1. NAF Development Plan, Priorities**
**and Structure**

Latvia’s membership in NATO provides not
only the Alliance’s collective security guarantees, it
also sets a requirement to consistently develop the
national military capabilities in order to meet the
joint security goals of the NATO.
Taking into account these benefits and goals,
Latvia has in 2003 reviewed the National Defence
Concept and prepared a new structure for the
National Armed Forces. The draft Structure was
reviewed in a separate NATO Defence Review
Committee (DRC) meeting at the end of 2003 and
concluded to be appropriate for the Latvian abilities.
Joining NATO will bring essential changes to the
national defence strategy and defence system development planning. National Defence Concept, Basic
Principles for the Latvian National Defence System

Coast Guard Ship Flotilla Kristap class patrol
boat KA-08


and Development Guidelines have been adjusted
for the NATO membership. Participation in the
collective defence, establishment of the professional
armed forces, co-operation between the armed
forces and the society and the international military
co-operation are defined to be the basic principles
of the defence.
Membership to the Alliance determines that
Latvia should transform from the territorial defence
model to the collective defence model. Therefore,
the structure of the NAF should be altered in order
to ensure the mobility, professionalism and high
combat readiness of the armed forces’ units.
One of the preconditions for enhancing the NAF
combat capabilities is transition from the conscript
service to the professional military service. Should
the Saeima (Parliament) make such a decision in
2004, the reform is expected to be completed by
2006 as defined by the NAF Professionalisation
Concept.
In compliance with its participation in the collective defence system, Latvia has reviewed the role
of the National Guard in the defence. The future
tasks of the National Guard will include providing
support to the NAF and the National Civil Defence
system, as well as the foreign armed forces.
The future development of the NAF is directed
towards its readiness to participate in the NATO,
EU and other international operations and contribute to the strengthening of the international
security. The NAF capabilities are increased by
expanding, maintaining and improving its efficient
combat capabilities. The host-nation’s support capabilities are being developed as well. However, as
stated earlier, participation in the collective security
system sets specific requirements to the national
defence system.


-----

combat capabilities of relatively small and quickly
deployable units, will became an essential priority during the next few years. These units must be
appropriately trained, equipped and available to the
collective security operations within the NATO, EU,
UN or allied forces.
All the above confirms the invariability of the
NAF mission:
– Latvian national sovereignty, territorial integrity and defence of its population against military aggression;
– high combat readiness, capability to participate and stay on its own during the international
operations;
– efficient Command and Control;
– continuous modernisation of NAF and improvement of the professional combat training;
– co-operation with the state civil institutions
and the society; Provision of support in cases of
natural disasters and emergencies.

Following the Order of the Minister of Defence
of December 2003 on the Structure of the National
Armed Forces, the NAF is to consist of the NAF
Joint Headquarters, Land Forces, Naval Forces,
Air Forces, National Guard, Logistics Command,


2004


-----

structure for war and peacetime, as it was before.
The efficiency of the new structure is characterised
by an ability to command and if needed – to activate the NAF units in peace, threat or war situations
without any structural changes.
The quality of the peacetime tasks of the armed
forces is very much dependant on its structure.
Structure determines the efficiency of command,
co-operation, planning and resource expenditure.
The mission of the NAF structure in peacetime
is to prepare the troops for conducting the military
operations to defend the national land territory, airspace and territorial waters. After joining the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation, this mission will be
extended to include participation in the international operation abroad as a part of the Alliance’s
contingent. There is as requirement set to the
NATO states to have at least 40% of their national
military personnel and units prepared to participate
in the international operations abroad within the
NATO forces. Therefore, there are units included in
the NAF structure who are envisaged to be ready to
participate in the collective security activities and
military operations abroad as requested by NATO.
By 2010, Latvian NAF should have professional
troops with high level of readiness, who are 60–70%
prepared to participate in the international opera

2004


Training and Doctrine Command, Communications
and Information Command, Military Police and
Security Service.
Command of the armed forces is carried out by
the NAF Commander who is directly subordinated
to the Minister of Defence. The NAF Commander
defines the strategic aspects of the armed forces and
is responsible for the NAF command and control.
The NAF Deputy Commander and the NAF
Headquarters are responsible for the implementation of the national and international tasks, training
of the units and their readiness for the international
military missions at the operation command level.
Kinds of the National Armed Forces carry out
the tasks of the tactic command. Commanders of
the kinds of armed forces, National Guard, Military
Police and Commands are responsible for training
and combat and operation readiness of their units,
as well as for preparing the units to participate in
the national and international operations.
Logistics Command is responsible for the provision and logistics of the NAF, as well as training and
combat and operation readiness of their units.
Training and Doctrine Command is responsible
for developing of the military doctrines, recruitment
of personnel, individual training and education.
The new NAF structure does not have a separate

|NAF Commander|Col2|
|---|---|
|NAF Deputy|Commander|

|B|attalions|
|---|---|


-----

tions. However, the reason of such high readiness
is not just a necessity to participate in operations
abroad. If needed, these skills will be applied in the
defence of the Latvian territory.
Being a NATO member state, Latvia will in the
event of threat receive the military support of the
allies, as stated in the security guarantees defined
by the NATO Treaty. In order to be able to host the
Alliance’s troops in the Latvian territory, it is necessary to provide a system for host-nation’s support.
It means that the readiness of the Latvian military
forces must be NATO-compliant also when operating within the Latvian territory and receiving the
assistance of the troops of other countries, when they
are deployed, operate or transit the territory of Latvia.
The Host-nation’s Support Plans and the National
Capability Catalogue (database containing information on available host-nation’s infrastructure and its
capabilities) must be produced for this purpose.
At the same time, the NAF units prepared for
these tasks will also be able to provide support to
the state institutions, municipalities and the ordinary public in the events of natural catastrophes
and emergencies.
In 2004, special attention will be paid to the
establishment of the Infantry Brigade, defining the
responsibilities for the National Guard Regions, spe
NAF Language School


cialisation of the National Guard Battalions, further
enhancement of the Logistics Command, and the
Training and Doctrine Command, as well as establishment of the Communications and Information
Command.
In order to ensure that the goals of the new NAF
structure are achieved, the administrative capabilities of the defence system must be comprehensively
enhanced, the current NAF command and control
system must be optimised and the quality of the
information exchange and its security must be
improved. The tasks of the NAF units must be clarified, their performance must be evaluated, and the
personnel management and training system must
be improved, especially within the National Guard.
The modernisation of the armament and equipment, the enhancement of the mobility capabilities
and improvement of the procurement system and
infrastructure must be commenced in 2004.
It must be stressed that the basis of the successful implementation of the NAF new structure is the
guaranteed availability of the national funds for the
next 3–4 years.

Main priorities of the National Armed Force
development: (separately)
– continue the integration to NATO;


2004


-----

Meeting of the NAF Headquarters’ Senior Officials, August 2003


2004 – modernise the command and control system,
armament, training, provision and logistics systems;
– improve the air-defence, air surveillance and
control systems;
– develop the NAF units and be prepared to
deploy them to the locations of operations;
– develop and find opportunities for the joint
co-operation of the Baltic States in order to
develop and enhance the military capabilities
required for the collective defence;


– improve the host-nation’s support capabilities.

**4.2. NAF Joint Headquarters**

The institution providing the Commander with
an opportunity to carry out continuous command
and control functions is the NAF Joint Headquarters.
Its mission is to prepare the information, documents
and proposals required for making decisions on the
defence policy, and to control the implementation


Structure of the NAF Joint Headquarters

|NAF Commander|Col2|
|---|---|
|NAF Deputy|Commander|

|Office|Account|
|---|---|

|NAF Chi|ef of Staff|
|---|---|
|||

|NAF Commander Military Representatives Office NAF Deputy Commander Office Account NAF Chief of Staff Staff Battalion Administra- J-2 J-3 J-5 J-6 J-8 J-1 J-4 tive Intelligence Operation Strategic Communications Financial Personnel Logistics Departament Security Planning Planning and Information Planning|Col2|
|---|---|
|Administra- tive Departament|J-8 Financial Planning|


-----

Functions of the NAF Headquarters by Departments


2004

|NAF Joint Headquarters|Col2|
|---|---|
|Operation Planning|NAF Development Planning|
|J-3 Operation Planning • Elaborate Operation Plan for the national defence • Elaborate the NAf Activation Plan • Plan and co-ordinate the NAF operations • Plan and co-ordinate the joint international exercises • Provide operation of the NAF command posts • Plan, co-ordinate and control the establishment and development of engineer, defence, NBC-weapon, environmental protection and civil-military co-operation services J-2 J-6 Intelligence Communications and Information • Perform intelligence • Elaborate concepts and activities technical policies • Organise internal • Programme management security activities for Communications and • Support Attaché Service Information systems • Planning and management of military frequency spectrum usage • Information security measures|J-5 NAF Development Planning • Elaborate concepts • Plan development • Implement assessment and reporting systems for the NAF units • Organise bilateral co-operation • Plan co-operation of the Baltic States • Elaborate economic substantiation for the NAF development • Elaborate and control the implementation of the NATO integration related documents • Coordinate and control implementation of the NATO co-operation goals J-1 J-4 Personnel Logistics • Personnel planning • Plan logistics • Personnel recruitment • Plan support of the for units host-nation • Personnel accounting • Establish national support • Elaborate legal element documents • Develop medical • Assess and sertify service J-8 Administrative Financial Planning Department • Elaborate the NAF • Organise administration Budget and operation of the • Assess the financial NAF Headquarters resource expenditure • Organise protocol events • Solve legal issues|


of the orders and instructions passed by the NAF
Commander.
The NAF Joint Headquarters consists of 8
departments:
– J-1 Personnel Department;
– J-2 Intelligence Department;
– J-3 Operation Planning Department;
– J-4 Logistics Department;
– J-5 Strategic Planning Department;
– J-6 Communications and Information Department;
– J-8 Finance and Budgeting Department;
– Administrative Department.
The structure of the NAF Joint Headquarters
can be divided into two parts according to its functions:
1. NAF Development Planning


The NAF development planning is carried out
by the Strategic Planning Department in co-operation with the J-1, J-4 and J-8 departments. The main
task of these departments is to elaborate the NAF
development plans by defining the NAF development priorities and tasks, personnel policy, and
material and financial resource allocation.
2. NAF Operation Planning
The NAF operation planning is carried out by
the Operation Planning Department (J-3) in cooperation with the J-2 and J-6 departments. The
main tasks of these departments are to develop and
implement the Command, Control and Operation
Planning System for the NAF units, as well as to
provide the development planning and co-ordination of the NAF combat and combat support fields/
services.


-----

-----

###### CHAPTER 5

##### KINDS OF NATIONAL ARMED FORCES, COMMANDS OF NATIONAL ARMED FORCES AND SPECIALISED UNITS


**5.1. Land Forces**

In 2003, the Land Forces (LF) continued to
implement the reforms, which were started in the
previous years. After a repeated review of the LF
structure, the reform plans were amended in 2003
while the main task of the reorganisation was kept
unchanged – enhance the command and control
system for the LF units and professionalisation of
the 1st Infantry Battalion.
According to the new NAF structure, the main
units of the Land Forces will be the Special Task
Unit and the Infantry Brigade. The Infantry Brigade
will be a unit, which will provide a comprehensive
combat training for the national battalions and
combat support and logistics units. The above units
will be NATO-compliant and ready to operate


within the NATO High Readiness Forces. A working group was established in 2003 with a purpose to
plan the development of the Brigade and elaborate
the personnel and equipment schemes for it.
The 2nd Infantry Battalion was established in
2002 and since 2004 has been a part of the LF. The
mission of the Battalion is to prepare the soldiers
of professional military service for participation in
the international missions. At the same time, the
Battalion must provide the training of the conscript
service soldiers.
**The mission of the LF is:**
– defence of the national land territories;
– command and control;
– combat and mobilisation readiness;
– participation in the international operations;
– participation in the crisis management;


2004


Structure of the Land Forces

|Land Forces Military Intelligence Special Task Unit Infantry Brigade|Land Forces|Col3|Military Intelligence|
|---|---|---|---|
|Special Task Unit||||

|Infantry|Brigade|
|---|---|

|Rangers|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|Combat Divers||
|Anti-terrorism Unit||
|||

|Com Sup|bat port|
|---|---|
|Arti|llery|

|Logi|stics|
|---|---|
|W|MD|

|Expl Ordn Disp Plat|osive ance osal oon|
|---|---|

|Mili Med|tary icine|
|---|---|


PGA
Unit


Military
Medicine

Transport
Unit


-----

(LATBRIG) Staff and produce the LATBRIG Development Concept;
– by December 2004, produce the Tactical
Doctrine on the Baltic States’ Land Operations
in collaboration with the Land Forces of Estonia
and Lithuania;
– by December 2004, prepare the Explosive
Ordnance Disposal Platoon for its participation
in the international operations;
– continue the modernisation of the Artillery
Wing and the training of personnel;
– continue the development of the NAF Special
Task Unit.

**5.2. National Guard**

After Latvia becomes a member of the collective defence system, the refinement of the total
territorial defence methods and the retention of
the optimal proportion of them in the national
defence system will become topical issues. Also,
the activities for developing the structure of the
National Guard (NG) commenced in 2001 were
determined by the lack of resources required for
qualitative provision and training of the NG units.
In spite of these problems, the National Guard has
and will have an important role and tasks in the
national defence. The structure of the National
Guard should certainly be transformed in order to
achieve its optimum. This process was commenced
in 2002, and its purpose was to reduce the bureaucracy of NG administration and substitute it with an
efficient command and control system. Proposals
have been made for enhancing the structure of the
National Guard, which will ensure the performance
of its new tasks. The purpose of these measures is
to provide the future to the National Guard, develop
its traditions, keep the public motivated to partici

2004


Shooting exercise of the 2nd Company of the 27th
Battalion of the National Guard, March 2004

– explosive object disposal.
**Achievements of 2003:**
– the 1st Infantry Battalion (LATBAT) has been
developed in accordance with the Concept on
Battalion’s Development;
– conscript service soldiers of the Battalion’s
combat support company have been replaced by
the soldiers of career service;
– participation in the international operations
has been provided;
– development planning of the Infantry Brigade
has been commenced.
**Plans for 2004:**
– develop the Land Forces in accordance with
the NAF development plans and NATO Force
Proposals;
– continue the development of the 1st Infantry
Battalion in accordance with the NATO requirements;
– train units in accordance with the LF Tactical
Doctrine ATP-35B;
– by July 2004, establish the Infantry Brigade


-----

pate in the national defence activities and build the
NAF reserve system.
The implementation of the new structure of the
National Guard and clarification of its tasks must be
completed in 2004. The goal of the National Guard
is and will remain the involvement of the Latvian
citizens in the national defence.
According to the new structure of the National
Guard, it will have the following tasks:
– perform the tasks of the national territorial
defence all alone or by supporting the NAF professional units;
– ensure combat and mobilisation readiness;
– perform the support tasks of host-nation;
– guard objects of national importance in the
event of war or threat;
– clear consequences of emergency situations;
– support the society and the Youth Guard
movement.
The National Guard consists of the National
Guard Staff and two Regions. Each Region has 8
Infantry Battalions and 2 Specialised Battalions,
which are specialised in the air defence and the
host-nation support.
**Achievements of 2003:**
The reorganisation of the National Guard has


been continued:
– the number of the National Guard Battalions
has been reduced from 24 to 20;
– two National Guard Regions have been established;
– the specialisation of the battalions has been
commenced;
– the NG Special Task Unit “Vanags” (Hawk) has
been merged with the NAF Special Task Unit.
**Plans for 2004:**
Continue the reorganisation of the National
Guard in order to provide capacity to perform
the following tasks:
– guard the objects of national importance, participate in crisis response and clearance operations, co-ordinate the co-operation with the
National Borderguard etc.;
– provide support to the foreign troops transferring or arriving at the Latvian territory;
– establish combat support and logistics units
in the fields of transportation, civil-military cooperation, logistics, engineer and air defence.

**5.3. Naval Forces**

The first units of the Naval Forces (NF) were


2004


National Guard’s engineers during the explosive ordnance disposal, August 2003


-----

NATO war ship armament;
– participation in the BALTRON project;
– a mine laying vessel of VIDAR Class has been
procured (on duty as a command and logistics
vessel within BALTRON);
– updating of the Submarine Database has been
continued;
– participation in the MOST (Maritime
Operation Sea Training).
**Plans for 2004:**
– integration of Latvian countermine vessels to
the unified countermine vessel unit of NATO,
which is a part of the Mine Counter Measures
Force North (MCMFORNORTH);
– by December 2004, certify the locations of
storing the NATO classified documentation at
the Naval Forces’ Staffs, units and vessels, which
will participate within the NATO forces;
– by December 2004, procure the NATO-compliant encrypting equipment to be used in the
ultra-short wave communications network;
– within the BALTRON project continue the
vessel and staff personnel drills;
– participate in mine clearance operations and
NATO-led exercises;
– implement the NATO requirements on protection of mine-clearing vessels against NBCweapons (NBC) and inspect the current NBC
systems;
– by July 2004, implement the NATO requirements on physical fields of the mine-clearing
vessels and perform their de-magnetisation;
– by December 2004, commence procurement
of active impact trawls for countermine vessels;
– continue to update the Submarine Database;
– build docks in Riga (Daugavgrīva);
– by December 2004, produce the technical
specifications and announce a tender for establishing of the Naval Surveillance System;


2004


established in 1991. Naval Forces have been continuously developed and enhanced and now can successfully perform all the tasks entrusted to them.
One of the key development priorities for the
Naval Forces is to develop the surveillance system.
Its purpose is to ensure the defence of the national
sea border and control of the exclusive economical zone. Other priorities include the extension
of the Naval Forces’ participation in the Baltic
Naval Squadron BALTRON and development of
the infrastructure with the main emphasis on the
building of the docks in Riga.
**Mission of the Naval Forces is to:**
– defend the national sea and inland waters;
– monitor and survey the national exclusive
economical zones, territorial and inland waters
(except rivers and lakes);
– provide the combat and mobilisation readiness
of units;
– lead and perform the search and rescue operations at sea, ecological monitoring and catastrophe clearance;
– search for explosives at sea and dispose them.
Naval Forces consist of the War Ship Flotilla
(WSF), Coast Guard Ship Flotilla (CGSF), Coast
Guard Battalion (CGB) and Search and Rescue Coordination Centre (SRCS).
**Achievements of 2003:**
– the professional skills of personnel, the combat
ship and staff command and control capabilities
have been enhanced:
– planning and commanding of the mine
clearance operation “MCOPLAT 03”;
– participation in the mine clearance operation “OPEN SPIRIT 03”;
– participation in the international and local
sea and staff exercises;
– drills of crews have been increased:
– participation in the working groups on the

|Naval Forc|es Flotilla|
|---|---|


-----

Naval Forces during the mine clearance exercise MCOPLAT 03, May 2003

– test the vessel m-03 at MOST (Maritime Opera- In 2003, the 3D long-range air surveillance 2004
tion Sea Training); radar TPS-117 was set up in Rēzekne and the 2D
– review options to procure an oil clearing ves- medium-range radar ASR-7 was set up in Ventspils.
sel; Fitting of the radars was an essential contribution
– review options to build ships; to the increase of the Latvian defence capabilities
– continue the professionalisation of NF. because they will ensure a full surveillance and

control of the Latvian air space. Both radars have
substantially increased the Latvian air surveillance

**5.4. Air Forces and Air Defence** capabilities, search and rescue operation efficiency

and flight safety, especially in the events of aircraft

One of the key missions of the Air Forces is equipment failure. Radars ASR-7 and TPS-117 are
the implementation of the BALTNET Project. The integrated into the unitary air surveillance system
goal of the project is to create a unitary air surveil- BALTNET and provide a full coverage of the Baltic
lance system of the Baltic States, which would be air space.
integrated in the NATO air surveillance system in **Mission of the Air Forces is to:**
the future. Regional Air Surveillance Co-ordina- – provide for the control and defence of the
tion Centre (RASCC) in Karmevala, Lithuania, and national air space;
national centres in Latvia – at the Riga airport – – provide combat and mobilisation readiness
and Lithuania and Estonia have been established for units;
within the BALTNET Project. RASCC covers two – participate in people and object search and
operative elements – surveillance and co-ordina- rescue operations;
tion. International crews of the three Baltic States – perform air transportation duties;
are on duty at the Regional Centre. The task of the – provide air defence.
national centres is to detect the violations of the ter- Air Forces consist of the Aviation Squadron, Air
ritorial air space and to react on them, as well as to Defence Wing and Air Surveillance Squadron.
integrate the information of all the national surveil- **Achievements of 2003:**
lance active resources and the RASCC. – development of the NATO adequate and com

-----

Operation Procedures (SOP) in order to ensure
the integration of BALTNET into NATINADS
system, set up and upgrade the required devices
and equipment; By December 2004, complete
the certification of the BALTNET security system compliant to the NATO classification level
“Classified”;
– in collaboration with the civil aviation and
other state institutions, continue to enhance the
military air traffic control process in order to
ensure a flexible usage of the air space for air
patrolling operations;
– conduct flights of specially equipped NATO
aircrafts with the purpose to assess the radiation
coverage of the military radars in the Latvian air
space;
– start to develop the ground-air-ground (GAG)
ultra-short wave radio network, set up the
NATO-compliant navigation and identification
equipment;
– enhance the national air defence concept
in accordance with the national and NATO
requirements; enhance the communications network at Air Defence units, and establish a communication line between the Air Defence Wing
and the national Air Support Operation Centre
(ASOC); continue to enhance the infrastructure
of the Air Defence Wing in Lielvārde and the live
shooting-range of Šķēde;
– commence the procurement of the mobile air
defence weapon system RBS-70 by procuring
one RBS-70 battery every year in order to provide one wing by the end of 2006.

**5.5. Training and Doctrine Command**

Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC)
was established in 2002. By creating a centralised system for military doctrine and training, the NAF education planning and coordination has been improved,
thus improving the whole military education and


2004


Air Forces during exercise at the Šķēde base, May 2003

pliant Air Command and Control System has
been commenced in order to integrate it to the
NATO Integrated Air Defence System;
– the 2D medium-range radar ASR-7 has been
set up in Ventspils radio-technical post and connected to the BALTNET system;
– the 3D long-range radar TPS-117 has been
set up in Rēzekne radio-technical post and connected to the BALTNET system;
– agreement on procuring of two Helicopters
Mi-8 has been signed;
– transportation of the NAF soldier contingent
to the locations of international missions has
been provided;
– AF helicopters have participated in several
search and rescue operations at the Baltic Sea;
– training of aircraft crews by participation in
local and international military exercises has
been provided.
**Plans for 2004:**
– establish joint Allied Forces Northern Europe –
AFNORTH – and Latvian Air Forces working
group to facilitate the integration to the NATO
Integrated Air Defence System (NATINADS);
– enhance the Air Command and Control (C2)
system, Operation Concepts and Standard


Structure of the Air Forces

|Air Forces Commander Air Forces Staff Aviation Squadron Air Defence Wing Air Surveillance Squadron|Col2|
|---|---|
|Aviation Squadron|Air Surveillance Squadron|


-----

training system. Training and Doctrine Command
is the contact and co-ordination unit in all fields of
military doctrines, education and training.
Training and Doctrine Command is going to
take over the personnel recruitment functions in
the future. The personnel individual training will be
enhanced and the reglements for the combat tactics
at the platoon, company and battalion levels will be
implemented. The implementation of the NATO
standards in all fields of training and education will
be continued.
**Mission of the Training and Doctrine Com-**
**mand:**
– personnel selection and recruitment;
– individual personnel training;
– development and implementation of the individual training programmes and standards;
– evaluation and control of the individual and
collective training;
– elaboration of doctrines;
– development of manuals and reglements related to training and education;
– development of training standards.
Training and Doctrine Command will consist
of Training and Doctrine Staff, Recruitment and
Selection Centre, National Defence Academy, Noncommissioned Officer School, Language School,
Naval Force Training Centre, Communications
Training Centre and Alūksne Training Centre.
**Achievements of 2003:**
– the NATO Land Forces Tactical Doctrine
ATP-35 (B) applied in the training process has


been translated into Latvian;
– evaluation and revision of the training programmes has been done in order to ensure
that individual training at the NAF Training
Centres is conducted in accordance with the
unitary standard procedures; over 20 individual
training programmes have been evaluated and
developed;
– organisation and equipment schemes have
been developed and introduced in the NAF;
– language training and its evaluation has been
conducted in the NAF Language School; over
800 students have been trained at different levels;
– the training programmes for the Explosive
Ordnance Disposal (EOD) School have been
completed; the qualification upgrade and premission training of the EOD personnel has been
commenced;
– the basic training course of 1570 soldiers
has been completed at the Motorised Infantry
Training Centre;
– 25 cadets of the National Defence Academy
have completed one-year basic officer course,
83 cadets have completed the three-year
officer course, 21 officers have completed
the junior staff officer course, and 23 officers have completed the company commander
course;
– 390 soldiers have completed the communications course at the NAF Communications
Training Centre;


2004


Structure of the Training and Doctrine Command

|Training and Doctrine Command Commander Training and Doctrine Command Staff Dotrine Section Personnel Management Section National Defence Academy Recruitment and Selection Centre Non-commissioned Officer School Language School Naval Force Training Centre Communications Training Centre Alūksne Training Centre|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||National Defe|nce Academy|
||||
||Non-commission|ed Officer School|
||||
||Languag|e School|
||||
||Naval Force T|raining Centre|
||||
||Communication|s Training Centre|
||||
||Alūksne Training Centre||


-----

2004


– 271 soldiers have completed the junior private
course at the Naval Force Training Centre;
– over 60 students of the Baltic States have completed the counter mine activity course at the
Diver Training Centre of the Baltic States.
**Plans for 2004:**
– in July 2004, complete the reglements for the
combat tactics at the platoon, company and battalion level, and include them in the training
programmes;
– by December 2004, commence to develop the
training programme and doctrine for the peacekeeping operations;
– by December 2004, commence to develop the
“Soldier Skill Levels” and standardisation for all
military grades;
– provide the language training at the NAF:
– enlarge and specialise two training sections
of the Language school for con-commissioned officer training and start the course in
military English;
– evaluate the English language skills in
accordance with STANAG 6001;
– train 856 students at all levels in accordance
with STANAG 6001;
– in 2004, train the non-commissioned instructors at different level courses, complete the
implementation of the instructor course at the
Non-commissioned Officer School;
– in April 2004, implement the innovations in
the training programmes of EOD School;
– by December 2004, review and upgrade the
communications course at the NAF Communications Training Centre to comply with the
NATO standard operation procedures;
– by December 2004, start to establish the
Combat Support and Riflemen Weapon School


and develop the training programmes for it;
– produce the Tactical Manuals:
– “Tactics of Infantry Platoon” – May 2004;
– “Tactics of Infantry Company” – August 2004;
– “Basics of Infantry Company Command” –
October 2004;
– “Command and Tactics of Infantry
Battalion” – December 2004 (Draft);
– by December 2004, produce the working
material for developing of the manual for peacekeeping and crisis response operations.

**5.6. Logicstics Command**

Reorganisation process of the Latvian NAF
includes establishment of the NATO-compliant
logistics system. The NAF Logistics Centre was
established in 2002 with the purpose to centrally
provide the NAF units with the material resources
and services. The enhancement of the NAF logistics system will be continued after Latvia joins
NATO. The Logistics Centre is being transformed
into the Logistics Command with the new logistics tasks defined, which are related to the collective defence and participation in the international
peace-keeping operations. Besides the current tasks
(centralised provision of the NAF units with materials, procurement, storage, maintenance and repair
of materials, transportation of personnel and materials, provision of medical care, maintenance of
base infrastructure etc.), the Logistics Command
will also have to provide the NAF units for the
international peace-keeping operations, provide the
national support, provide the host-nation’s support
and prepare and train the logistics units.
Logistics Command will continue to provide the

|Support|Base 2|
|---|---|

|Air F Suppor|orces t Unit|
|---|---|


-----

logistics support to all the NAF units within the
Latvian territory to ensure that they are able to perform their tasks during the peace, crisis and wartime.
Logistics Command consists of Support Bases 1
and 2, Military Medical Centre, Transport Battalion
and Logistics Battalion.

**Achievements of 2003:**
– logistics systems of AF, NF and Riga Garrison
have been taken over;
– fitting and improving of the repair workshop
in Ādaži has been carried out in co-operation
with the Swedish armed forces;
– depot economy has been developed;
– infrastructure for material reserve accumulation has been developed;
– re-arming of NAF units with riflemen weapons
has been completed;
– NAF has received the following material aid
from US, Denmark, Norway, Poland, Switzerland,
Germany and Sweden in 2003:
– armament, equipment and vehicles for one
infantry battalion;
– armament, equipment and vehicles for one
engineer company;
– armament, equipment and vehicles for one
staff company;
– explosives, vehicles, weapons, spare parts to
vehicles and weapons, as well as weapons and
vehicles to be disassembled in spare parts;
– personal equipment for soldiers and English
study lab;
– hardware for the automated logistics management and information system
CONCORDE, search and rescue equipment
for the Air Forces, vehicles and equipment;
– divers equipment, ship engines, equipment
for Naval Forces depots;
– a Standardisation Section has been established
at the Logistics Centre within the logistics management and information system CONCORDE;
– codification of materials has been continued,
administrators and users of the CONCORDE
system have been trained;
– personnel of the Baltic Logistics Group has been
taken over, and establishment of the National
Logistics Planning Group has been commenced;
– national Logistics Concept has been produced;
– the following activities have been carried out
in co-operation with the J-4 Department of the
NAF Headquarters:
– development of the database for the
Allied Deployment and Movement System


Military tattoos of the Special Task Unit, Alūksne,
August 2003

(ADAMS) has been continued; information
on the Latvian port, airport, road and railway
system facilities has been collected;
– Latvian facilities for the air and sea transportation have been identified; market research
has been conducted in order to identify the
civil transportation companies which would
be able to support the Latvian armed forces.
**Plans for 2004:**
– develop the Reglement of National Logistics
Element (NLE); establish NLE management and
co-ordination group;
– establish the UVA co-ordination section;
– by May 2004, establish the Transportation
Control Centre;
– develop the procurement system, improve the
material testing and quality control systems;
– enhance the movement capabilities of the NAF
units (deployment, reinforcement, support, rotation and re-location) by conducting the strategic
movement with the assistance of the commercial
companies in accordance with the agreements
between the Latvian NAF and partner states;
– implement and enhance the new structure of
the Logistics Command; by December 2004,
develop the Logistics bases for Defence Regions


2004


-----

Security (COMSEC) and Computer Security
(COMPUSEC) functions;
– provide the operation of the internal CIS at
the NAF Headquarters and the Command and
Control Centre;
– provide the operation of the NAF stationary and mobile network communications, radio
communications, satellite communications and
information systems;
– provide the CIS support to the NAF activities
for the operation tactical level (operations, missions, exercises);
– provide the CIS support to the NAF Mobile
Command and Control Centre;
– control the electromagnetic spectrum within
the national territory.

**5.8. Security Service**

The Security Service of the Parliament and the
State President is a unit of the National Armed
Forces with a mission to provide security to the
Parliament and the State President and to guard
objects, institutions and persons of national importance. The Security Service must also provide security of the foreign officials under their visits at the
Ministry’s of Defence and NAF objects.
When performing their tasks, the Security
Service maintains active co-operation with the State
President’s Chancellery, Riga Municipal Police and
other municipal institutions. While providing the
security of high-level officials in Latvia and abroad,
the Security Service co-ordinates its activities with
the respective foreign security services.
**Mission of the Security Service is to:**
– provide security (guarding) for the Members of
the Parliament, the Presidium of the Parliament
and its affiliated institutions (objects) in accordance with procedures set by the Presidium of the
Parliament;


2004


1 and 2, Logistics Battalion, Medical Battalion
and Transportation Battalion;
– enhance the Depot of the Latvian NAF
Logistics Command and the material storage,
maintenance and repair system;
– by December 2004, complete the implementation of the automated logistics management and
information system CONCORDE;
– by august 2004, complete the standardisation
of the riflemen weapons;
– receive material aid from the USA, Sweden,
Denmark, Germany and Switzerland.

**5.7. Communications and**
**Information Command**

Communications and Information (CIS)
Command will be a structure to provide the work
of the NAF communications and information systems. It will start to operate as a separate command
in 2007.
**Mission of the CIS Command will be to:**
– provide the planning, development and operation of all the stationary and mobile network
communications, radio communications, satellite communications and information systems
of the NAF;
– monitor and control the NAF CIS including
the network administration and monitoring,
repairs and maintenance;
– implement the CIS projects in accordance with
the NAF plans (including the procurement management within projects);
– train the CIS personnel;
– provide the Military Frequency Control in cooperation with the State Electro-communication
Inspection (SEI);
– provide the CIS security, including distribution of encryption keys, Communications


-----

– provide security of the State President, his/her
family members, the State President’s Chancellery
and Residence in accordance with procedures
set by the State President;
– provide security to foreign officials and representatives of international organisations during
their official visits to Latvia in accordance with
procedures set by the Cabinet of Ministers.
The Security Service of the Parliament and the
State President has received new tasks in 2003
related to the improvised explosive device disposal (IEDD) operations.
The Security Service of the Parliament and
the State President consists of the Staff, the
Parliament’s Security and Staff and Logistics
Company.
**Achievements of 2003:**
The Security Service of the Parliament and the
State President provided for the following activities in 2003:
– security of the LR highest officials during their
foreign visits – 28;
– Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) operations (28), improvised explosive device disposal
(IEDD) operations (2) and object security clearance operations (76) – 106;
– sets of security measures for different level for

eign official visits to Latvia Republic – 23;
– other activities (Parliament meetings security,
escorting of officials, monitoring of demonstrations, tours to the Parliament and the Riga
Castle) – 378.
**Plans for 2004:**
– provide security to the LR Parliament’s highest officials, the State President and his/her
family members, stationary objects of the LR
Parliament and the State President, as well as
security to the foreign officials and representatives of the international organisations invited
by the MoD and the NAF;
– carry out the IEDD operations nationwide in
co-operation with the Ministry of the Interior,
NAF Air Forces and other NAF units;
– implement the personnel recruitment programme;
– implement the technical modernisation programme;
– co-operate with the civil service experts of
the NATO and the Western armed forces for
raising the qualifications of the Security Service
personnel;
– train the personnel of the IEDD Platoon in
IEDD specialities (underwater, chemical, biological and nuclear IEDD training programmes);


2004


Guarding the Parliament is one of the tasks of the Security Service


-----

A soldier of the Military Police

2004 – train cynologists;
– improve the material and technical resources
of the IEDD Platoon.

**5.9. Military Police**

Military Police (MP) was established in 1997.
It is a unit to provide the military discipline and
legality with the rights to perform cognition and
operative activities.
**Mission of the Military Police is to:**
– provide assistance to the commanders (chiefs)
of the military units during the security activities of military events, military discipline, law
and order, and prevent malfeasances and criminal offences;
– guard objects and officials defined by the
Commander of the National Armed Forces in
accordance with the military reglements;
– provide the traffic control for military vehicles,
escorting of officials and security of the military
cargos;
– search and detain the defendant or convicted
soldiers who avoid their trials or penalties, as
well as soldiers who have deserted or are in law

less absence or missing;
– detect criminal offences conducted at the
military service or their locations, which are
performed by soldiers, national guards or civilian employees and are related to abuse of
their status of service or performance of their
duties;
– provide the escort and security for detained
soldiers who have been detained as suspects
or to whom the security measures of the house
arrest or imprisonment have been applied.

MP consists of the MP Staff, Staff and Logistics
Platoon, MP Company and Cognition Section.
**Achievements of 2003:**
– seminars and lectures to the soldiers of the
career service and CS about observance of the
military discipline in the NAF units have been
carried out;
– traffic control for NAF military vehicles has
been provided at irregular schedule;
– MP instructors have prepared and carried
out the pre-mission training of KFOR and OIF
military policemen in co-operation with the
Training and Doctrine Command’s Staff;
– guarding function has been commenced at different military objects;
– escort of high officials and important cargos
has been conducted for 204 times;
– order has been provided in the NAF events
including patrolling and security reinforcement
for 86 times (MP has co-operated with the Road
Police during the patrols);
– 49 legal cases have been taken to court, 16
service investigations have been carried out and
6 administrative protocols have been made.
**Plans for 2004:**
– develop the training programme and commence the training of two military policemen
sections to participate in the NATO operations;
– select and prepare MP soldiers to participate
in the KFOR and OIF international operations;
– provide security during the exercises
Cooperative Nugget, Medceur/Rescuer and
Second Step;
– continue to comply the MP with the NATO
standardisation agreements;
– commence qualitative operation of courier
post for NATO;
– develop the international co-operation with
the Baltic States, Italy, Denmark, Poland, Ireland
and Croatia.


-----

###### CHAPTER 6
 NAF COMMAND AND CONTROL, COMMUNICATIONS, COMPUTERS AND INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS, PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT


**6.1. Command and Control, Communications,**
**Computers and Intelligence Systems**

The purpose of the command and control,
communications, computers and intelligence systems (C4I) is to provide the information exchange
required for the NAF command, control and cooperation during the peace and wartime. Modern
and NATO standards compliant C4I system is one
of the key prerequisites for a successful NATO
membership. Taking into account the rapid development of the information technologies, procurement
of modern communications devices and equipment
has become one of the NAF priorities. Special attention is paid to the NATO-compliant communications equipment, as well as its security in the work
with the classified information.
**Achievements of 2003:**
– The Baltic Command and Control Information
System (BALTCCIS) has been developed:
– central and national support servers have
been installed;
– server rooms have been equipped in accordance with the NATO Security Standards;
– Defence Telecommunications Network (DTN)
has been connected to the units at the battalion
level, the encrypted Internet Protocol (IP) for the
command system has partly been implemented;
– Latvian units deployed to the Afghanistan,
Iraq and KFOR missions have been provided
with the INMARSAT satellite equipment;
– deployable units have been equipped with the
HARRIS – FALCON II radio stations;
– Naval and Land Forces’ short-wave radio network with the data transmission option has been
established through the FALCON II encrypting
system;


– provision of the NAF units with handheld
radio stations has been commenced;
– in accordance with the NATO Joint Frequency
Agreement (NJFA) the basic spectrum has been
harmonised, and the spectrum control system
has been implemented.
**Plans for 2004:**
To continue the development of the BALTCCIS:
– train programmers at the German Air
Force Programming Centre;
– complete the installation of software and
hardware, as well as the connection of clients

Radar TPS-117 in Audriņi of Rēzekne district

to the system;
– in December 2004, complete the project
security accreditation;
– by October 2004, establish and equip
premises for processing and storage of the
national and NATO classified information;


2004


-----

Soldiers of the Cēsis Non-commissioned Officer School during shooting exercise, summer of 2003


2004 – by December 2004, partly implement the
Project of NAF Information System Support
(NISS);
– by December 2004, procure and certify the
encrypting equipment for the NAF;
– develop the Defence Telecommunications
Network (expansion, management and establishment of the Training and Command Centre);
– by December 2004, provide the NAF deployable units with the FALCON II radio systems;
– commence the establishment of the field tactical communications system (FTCS);
– develop the NAF frequency management:
– by June 2004, complete the establishment of
the spectrum monitoring system by using the
top class equipment, and settle the national
military spectrum in accordance with the NATO
Joint Frequency Agreement;
– by October 2004, install the Spectrum Data
Processing System (MDMS) and software
“Spectrum XXI”.

**6.1.1. Cartography and Geographic Information**

For successful implementation of their tasks,
the National Armed Forces require relevant topo

graphical maps, city maps, sea and air navigation
maps, special cartography products for conduct of
diverse military tasks, and other spatial information. Therefore, the Ministry of Defence and the
NAF have to pay more attention to the development
of the cartography and geographical information
fields, as well as applying of the new technologies.
In 2003, the Ministry of Defence continued its
co-operation with the State Land Service on the
basis of the Agreement on Establishment of the
National Cartography System, signed in 2000. For
enhancing the technological development of the
field, modern technological equipment was procured to increase the production quality and technological abilities of the maps, as well as the technical potential of separate military users.
**Achievements of 2003:**
– The work in collaboration with the State Land
Service to develop the cartography products has
been continued:
– military topographical maps at the scale of
1: 50 000;
– total operations maps at the scale of 1:250 000
(land and air versions);
– military topographical maps at the scale
of 1: 25 000 samples of scale topographical
maps;


-----

– the technology for producing of the city
maps and the prototype of the military map
of Riga city has been developed;
– NATO standards for producing the maps
and digital geographical products have been
clarified;
– participation in several international key events
in the field of military geography – NATO/PfP
Geographical Conference, working group of the
NATO Standardisation Agency, annual Baltic
military cartography conference;
– co-operation in the field of bilateral relations with the National Imagery and Mapping
Agency of the USA’s Department of Defence,
military geography structures of the Baltic
States, Czech Republic and other countries; the
Memorandum of Understanding On Co-operation in Mapping/Geodesy and Exchange of
Geographical Materials has been prepared for
signing between the LR Ministry of Defence
and the Agency of Geographical and Satellite
Surveillance of the Ministry of Defence of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland;
– training course in the UK and France has
been completed: one NAF officer has obtained
the MA in Military Geographical Information
Systems, and another NAF officer has obtained
the qualification in satellite image processing
and analysis technologies.
**Plans for 2004:**
– continue to develop the military topographical
maps at the scale of 1: 50 000, the total operations maps at the scale of 1: 250 000 and the
military maps of cities;
– develop the structure of the military geographical information – fill the respective positions
with the staff of appropriate qualifications;
– continue the current bilateral co-operation,
improve contacts between the military geography experts of the Baltic States by providing
opportunities for them to participate in international conferences and working groups;
– organise training seminars to geographical
information users on opportunities of the geographical information usage and potential of
the new technologies.

**6.2. Personnel Management**

Professional staff and efficient personnel management system is one of the key prerequisites


for successful operation and development of the
NAF. Implementation of these tasks are related to
both elaboration of legal documents specifying
the progress of the military service and personnel
recruitment and assessment criteria, and implementation of social guaranties and competitive
salaries to the ones found in the labour market.
Due to the Latvian membership to NATO, special attention must be paid to the personnel planning. A large number of qualified officers must be
transferred to the NATO Staffs. At the same time,
the structure of the NAF Command must be gradually enhanced because the amount of work grows
essentially after joining the Alliance. The staff of the
NAF Headquarters has to work in accordance with
the NATO Staff Procedures.
As a NATO state Latvia should essentially increase the size of units to be deployed to the NATO
operations, as well as consider new fields of operation. A purposive information campaign and a
detailed recruitment plan for attracting a qualified
personnel to the NAF structures must be elaborated
in order to implement the above decision.
By the end of 2006, the NAF could fully discard
the conscript service. Decision to professionalise
NAF has the following substantiation:

Soldiers of the Mobile Infantry Battalion during exercise, January 2004


2004


-----

Management, which is a base for developing of
the comprehensive NAF personnel programme
and system has been produced;
– preparation has been done to implement the
new centralised system for planning and developing of the officer service career, which will
facilitate the development and management of
the officer career progress (this system includes
the personnel accounting, training, service missions, service performance assessment and certification);
– the Handbook on Officer Career Management,
which defines and standardises the procedures
of professional development and career progress
of the officers, has been developed;
– the NAF automated personnel accounting
system (APAS) has been developed in order to
ensure the efficient personnel management;
– a comprehensive progress assessment and certification system for military personnel career
has been implemented, which is required for
personnel selection, assigning a higher rank of
service or promoting to a higher position;
– a draft regulation has been produced to
increase the soldier remuneration in 2004 in
order to improve the social guarantees and life
quality of the military personnel.
**Plans for 2004:**
– enhance the personnel management policy
compliant to the NATO requirements and standards;
– ensure the efficient personnel recruitment,
assessment and career planning, as well as training of appropriate personnel to serve within the
NATO structures;
– ensure efficient personnel selection and training when manning the units for participation in
the international missions;
– implement the new programmes of remuneration and motivating bonuses for soldiers (motivating bonuses are envisaged to the soldiers who
serve in dangerous or specific conditions);
– develop the management system for the
progress of the non-commissioned officer
service by producing and implementing the
Reglement (Manual) for Managing the Progress
of the Non-commissioned Officer Service;
– continue to enhance and comply with the
APAS;
– enhance the NAF personnel assessment and
certification system.


2004


– Armed forces should be relevant to the current situation of threat, the elimination of which
depends on the quality, and not the quantity of
the armed forces;
– according to the survey carried out by the
company “DATA Serviss” in December 2003
on the Latvian Public Opinion About National
Defence Issues, 82.7% of the Latvian population
back the professional armed forces;
– by becoming a NATO state, Latvia must provide its participation to the collective defence
of the Alliance. By discarding the mandatory
military service:
– NAF will obtain larger operative capabilities for participation in the international
operations;
– NAF units will have higher level of combat
readiness;
– NAF units will use modern weapon systems and combat vehicles;
– financial resources will be used in a more
efficient way;
– NAF will have small but well-prepared
reserves.

An issue of attracting the personnel becomes
essential when building and developing the armed
forces based on the professional military service.
Therefore, recruiting system must be compatible
with the nowadays requirements – it must be flexible, modern and competitive in the labour market.
In addition to the recruitment, it is also important to provide appropriate social guarantees to
the soldiers and their families. NAF must also pay
special attention to the provision of the high quality
training, armament and equipment.

After professionalisation of the NAF, the National
Guard and the Youth Guard will have an important
role as a base for recruiting of the professional service soldiers. At the same time, the combat capabilities and the training quality of the National Guard
units will be increased. The National Guard’s personnel policy and professional growth programme
is developed in accordance with the requirements
of the nowadays military capabilities, thus preserving the link to the society and the potential of the
military reserves. This approach is the basis of the
National Guard’s future.
**Achievements of 2003:**
– the Draft Concept on NAF Personnel


-----

###### CHAPTER 7

##### DEFENCE DEVELOPMENT PLANNING


**7.1. Annual National Programme**

The fifth and the last document of the NATO
Membership Action Plan – Annual National Programme 2004 – was submitted to the NATO in
October 2003. Its purpose was to reflect the Latvian
preparation for NATO membership, as well as to
be the base for assessing the implementation of the
Latvian obligations required for its membership to
the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation.
Annual National Programme 2004 was produced


on the basis of the tasks defined by the Latvian
Reform Implementation Plan, which set specific
obligations to be implemented till Latvia joins
NATO.
The following factors were taken into account
while producing the Annual National Programme
2004:
– Annual National Programme of the previous
year (thus ensuring the mutual succession and
compliance of the Programmes);
– invitation to join the Alliance;


2004


Discussion “Defence Reforms in the Baltic States”, 18 June 2003


-----

– Naval Forces will develop the mine clearing
capabilities; great attention will be paid to the
modernisation of mine clearing vessels in order
to be able to participate in the NATO operations
from 2004;
– Air Forces will develop the air surveillance
and air defence capabilities; the main task of
2004 will be to continue the connection of
the Baltic Air Surveillance System (BALTNET)
to the NATO Integrated Air Defence System
(NATINADS).
NATO Force Proposals will have a key role in
development of the new structure of the National
Armed Forces. Each proposal will be rigorously
reviewed and calculated, and the accepted proposals will be integrated into the structure of the
Latvian National Armed Forces.
Modernisation of the National Armed Forces is
absolutely one of the key priorities of the Defence
Budget 2004. Enhancement of the military capabilities by development of the host-nation support capabilities, communications equipment, air
surveillance, unit training and readiness, as well as
provision and logistics are the main fields of the
Investment Programme.
For facilitating the integration of the Latvian
National Armed Forces to the NATO, a joint working group of Latvian and Headquarters Allied
Forces North will be established in each kind of the
Latvian armed forces and in the fields related to the
NATO integration (e.g., communications, logistics).
The co-operation between the Baltic armed
forces will be continued in 2004. It has a great
value because it increases the compliance of the
Baltic armed forces to the NATO and optimises the
defence resource expenditure of the Baltic States.
Baltic co-operation is one of the basic principles in
the Latvian defence planning.

**7.2. NATO Co-operation Goals**

NATO Co-operation Goals will have a key role
in the future planning of the national defence.
Initially, the basis of these Co-operation Goals is
the Force Proposals of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation received in June 2003.
All NATO and invited countries have received
such a set of proposals. Force Proposals have been
produced based on the NATO Force Planning
Procedure with emphasis on the development of
capabilities required for the NATO operations and
military fields with insufficient capabilities. Force


2004


– readiness to the NATO membership and readiness to assume the obligations of an ally with the
actual joining to the NATO;
– changes in the international security situation,
transformation processes within NATO and
Guidelines of the Alliance adopted during the
Prague Summit.
Annual National Programme consists of six chapters: (1) political and economical issues; (2) defence
and military issues; (3) resource issues; (4) information security issues; (5) legal issues related to the
NATO membership; and (6) implementation of the
Annual National Programme of the previous period.
Chapter on defence and military issues of the
Annual National Programme 2004 provides a
review on the development of the Latvian defence
fields emphasizing the key achievements of the previous Annual National Programme and giving an
introduction to the plans for 2004. This chapter lists
the main priorities for the NAF development:
– Land Forces will develop the Infantry Brigade
with appropriate combat support and combat
logistics capabilities; it is planned to reduce the
number of Defence Regions from four to two by
the end of 2003; transformation of the territorial
forces will be continued in 2004;

International mine clearance operation MCOPLAT 03,
May 2003


-----

Ceremony to mark the raising of flags of the new NATO states, Mons, Belgium, 15 April 2004

Proposal set has 3 parts: NATO deployable forces and long-term development plans of the National 2004
(deployable units of the NAF, which will participate Armed Forces.
in the NATO-led operations), proposals related to
the planning period 2005–2010, and long-term proposals related to the scientific projects of military **7.3. Planning, Programming and**
kind with the purpose to implement the newest **Budgeting System**
technological achievements in the Alliance’s forces
after 2010. A continuously increasing defence budget
NATO Force Proposals suggest that Latvia results in more responsibilities and new duties to
should develop different capabilities required for enhance the system for efficient usage and control
the integrated military structure of the Alliance and of the budgetary funds. Therefore, the Minister of
define units, which can be deployed to the NATO- Defence has set a condition in 1999 to implement
led operations. Taking into account the current and the Planning, Programming and Budgeting System
planned resource availability and impact of the (PPBS) in compliance with the planning principles
proposals on the current development plans, the of the NATO states. Its purpose is to build a planMinistry of Defence together with the experts of ning system, which would assist in elaboration of
the National Armed Forces analysed the set of Force programmes to be implemented and in achieving
Proposals by reviewing each task separately and of the maximum efficiency from expendable repreparing a reply about the Latvian position on it. sources. The PPBS provides a clear picture and subFor developing the NATO Co-operation Goals stantiation of the resources required for each task.
there were consultations conducted with the part- For ensuring more efficient defence resource manner countries. Latvian replies to the Force Proposals agement, the planning system has been upgraded
were reviewed in September 2003 during the visit and implemented based on the requirements set for
of the NATO working group to Latvia. Latvia will the NATO membership. Budgeting process is the
produce its final reply in 2004. Thereafter, the final stage in the planning of the defence system
Force Proposals will become the NATO Co-opera- development and is based on the previously protion Goals. They will form basis for the mid-term duced development plans.


-----

between all PPBS stages has been enhanced in order
to provide a more efficient financial (investment)
analysis compared to the achieved results (benefits).
The Instruction on Long-term Expenditure Calculation has been issued every year as an aid to the
budget planning and creation, which includes deadlines, forms, instructions for budget presentation,
as well as budget planning meeting and reporting
system. Instruction contains also aid materials, e.g.,
methodological directives for investment planning.
For implementing the budget expenditure process, the budget expenditure monitoring is of a
great value – it provides the management with the
information on the current status and facilitates the
planned and the optimal budget expenditure. The
resource expenditure control provides an opportunity to follow the implementation of the planned
prioritised activities of the current year, as well as
the elaboration of the eventual legal documents
related to their implementation.
Budget funds expenditure control, including remunerations, is performed on regular basis
through the following activities:
– monthly budget funds expenditure – the
Ministry of Defence holds monthly meetings on
budget expenditure, which can also be arranged
more frequently if necessary;
– monthly Budget Funds Expenditure Analysis
has been produced, which is submitted to the
Ministry of Finance;
– amendment requests to the institution financing
plans have been analysed;


2004


PPBS provides a clear responsibility and competence division in the process of planning, programming and budgeting. Responsibility division clearly
defines responsibilities of each level commander
in relation to the goal achievement and financial
resource expenditure. PPBS envisages a gradual delegation of resource expenditure competencies to the
lower levels of the management chain. Expenditure
groups and their elements comply with the tasks
set to the structure. The performance assessment
is carried out at all levels – central, regional and
unit levels. Performance assessment is based on the
quantitative and qualitative criteria.
The requested resources are allocated in accordance with the management chain and are based on
the mid-term plans. Commanders of the kinds of
forces and separate units are to submit the budget
requests produced in accordance with the defined
budget programmes to the NAF Headquarters who
then submits them to the MoD. Co-ordination of
requests is carried out at all levels. Involvement of
all level MoD’s officials and NAF’s commanders
ensure understanding about the priorities, tasks and
resources of the NAF development.

**7.4. Resource Expenditure Control**

Resource review process provides information
about performance of each task at each level.
NAF works on enhancement of the reporting
system in co-operation with the MoD. The feedback

|Col1|2003 mill. Ls|2004 mill. Ls|
|---|---|---|
||82.78||
||22.42||
||41.60||
||10.14||
||8.62||


-----

– institution cost estimates have been analysed;
– statistic report and review analysis have been
produced;
– inspections and audits have been conducted.
If, due to priority changes, it is necessary to conduct the re-allocation of the financial resources, it
is conducted through the financing plans and these
changes upon requests of the structural units are
produced by the Ministry of Defence. The planned
financial resources can only be re-allocated between
programmes and sub-programmes by amending
the Law on the National Budget. It is conducted by
the LR Parliament.
The accounting and reporting system on financial resource expenditure has been purposively and
continuously enhanced in order to provide an over

view about the performance of each activity, project
or priority.

**7.5. Budget of the National Defence, Security**
**and Integration to NATO Programme**

One of the priorities defined by the Government
is the Latvian integration to NATO, and it is reflected in the resource allocation to the defence. On
5 April 2001, the Parliament adopted the Law on
Financing the National Defence, which stipulates
that the funds allocated to the national defence,
security and integration to NATO should reach 2%
of the GDP in 2003. This law was amended on 9
May 2002 stipulating that 2% of the GDP will be


Breakdown of Budget 2003 and Budget 2004 of the Ministry of Defence by Programmes and Subprogrammes


2004

|Code|Name of Programme (Subprogramme)|Budget 2003|Plan 2004|Changes to 2003|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||Ls|%|
||Management and administration of the national defence|6 727 059|7 514 783|787 724||
||Central office|4 096 689|3 733 078|-363 611||
||Pension fund of the military personnel|1 093 527|1 202 940|109 413||
||Defence attachés and representatives|1 536 843|2 016 149|479 306||
||Subsidy to the journal "Tēvijas Sargs" (Guard of Motherland)|0|71 000|71 000||
||Integration to NATO|0|491 616|491 616||
||CS accounting and subscription to the CS|3 590 296|1 369 304|-2 220 992||
||National security protection|1 096 105|2 114 290|1 018 185||
||War museum|396 049|475 718|79 669||
||Contributions to the international organisations|63 651|689 927|626 276||
||Repairs and construction|6 685 241|9 557 017|2 871 776||
||Work of the Latvian National Partisan Union, finding out the beds-of-honour and setting up the memorial marks|4 000|5 500|1 500||
||Subsidy to the Latvian National Soldier Union for setting up a memorial for the Kurzeme fortress battles|0|6 500|6 500||
||National Armed Forces|64 167 021|68 909 375|4 742 354||
||NAF leadership|6 932 691|4 044 056|-2 888 635||
||General units|7 471 452|2 690 680|-4 780 772||
||Air Forces|9 019 257|4 521 913|-4 497 344||
||Naval Forces|6 444 584|4 018 430|-2 426 154||
||Land Forces|10 099 326|6 286 760|-3 812 566||
||National Defence Academy|440 513|1 115 766|675 253||
||Logistics Forces|14 554 308|18 301 598|3 747 290||
||Training and Doctrine Forces|9 204 890|1 585 012|-7 619 878||
||Centralised remuneration for the international operation and National Armed Forces personnel|0|26 345 160|26 345 160||
||Subsidy to the Latvian National Soldier Union for setting up a memorial for the Kurzeme fortress battles|9 100|0|-9 100||
||Loans to the officers who have acquired the officer basic course at the National Defence Academy|42 000|80 000|38 000||
||Youth Guard|0|663 394|663 394||
||Total:|82 780 522|91 385 808|8 605 286||


-----

allocated to the national defence, security and integration to NATO till 2008. Therefore, the growth
of the funds allocated to the defence will directly
depend on the growth of the GDP.
121.96 mill. Ls or 2% of the GDP were allocated to the National Defence, Security and NATO
Integration Programme in 2004. Compared to the
Clarified Budget 2003, the Defence Budget 2004
has been increased by 11.90 mill. Ls or 11%. A more
detailed insight to the expenditure of funds planned
to the national defence can be found in the Law on
Budget 2004 and Explanatory Paper 2004 of the
Ministry of Defence.
Financing allocated to the Ministry of Defence
in 2004 was 91.39 mill. Ls or 75% of the financing
allocated to the National Defence, Security and
NATO Integration Programme. The 30.57 mill. Ls
is expenditure of other institutions, which is classified as defence expenditure in accordance with
the NATO definition on defence expenditure (e.g.,
it refers to units who are armoured and trained in
the field of military tactics and are included in the
armed forces in the event of war). The following
expenditure is qualified for this purpose:
– Ministry of the Interior – 20.23 mill. Ls,


of which 15.85 mill. Ls were allocated to the
National Borderguard and 2.36 mill. Ls to the
Security Police;
– Security Administration of the Latvian Bank –
4.6 mill. Ls;
– Constitution Protection Office – 3.54 mill. Ls;
– Ministry of Foreign Affairs for implementation of the Membership Action Plan and maintenance of the NATO Mission – 0.98 mill. Ls;
– Crisis Control Centre and Translation and
Terminology Centre – 0.27 mill. Ls;
– State Land Service for producing maps – 0.45
mill. Ls;
– Ministry of Transport and Communications
for Coastal automatic Identification System –
0.25 mill. Ls;
– Ministry of Environment for procurement of
hidrometeorology radar - 0.25 mill. Ls.

A comparative review on the main figures of
Defence Budgets 2003 and 2004 is provided below
in order to give an overview about the development
of the defence system in 2004.
The Minister’s of Defence Guidelines for the
Development and the Budget Planning of the


2004


-----

Canteen of the Mobile Infantry Training Centre

National Defence System in 2004 define the main following activities within the Budget 2004:
2004
tasks of 2004: – development of infrastructure – Ls 8 542 307;
– complete the implementation of the defence – participation in the international peace-keeptasks of the Reform Implementation Plan and ing missions – Ls 5 154 910;
plan for the relevant future development; – development of the NAF communications sys– implement the new structure of the NAF, which tem – Ls 4 568 000;
is based on the transition from the approach of – commencing of the salary reform in the NAF –
a large mobilisation, which was required for Ls 2 822 180;
the territorial defence, to the smaller but more – building of the military runway at the Riga
sophisticated National Armed Forces, which are airport – Ls 1 500 000;
better suited for the collective defence; – accommodation for the NAF soldiers of pro– continue to implement the career planning sys- fessional military service – Ls 1 000 000;
tem for the MoD and NAF personnel, improve – Naval surveillance system – Ls 1 000 000;
the training and education system, provide the – short range air defence system – Ls 1 000 000;
social guarantees and salary reform for the sol- – procurement of influence and acoustic trawls
diers of professional military service; for Condor II Class vessels – Ls 1 000 000;
– ensure the readiness of NAF units to partici- – medium range anti-tank missile system –
pate in the international operations, deploy and Ls 1 000 000;
maintain units at missions; – development of docks and infrastructure for
– procure modern armament and equipment; the Coast Guard of the Latvian Naval Forces in
– continue the Baltic Sea and Baltic State Co- Daugavgrīva – Ls 670 000;
operation, review additional opportunities to – establishment of the national cartography sysdevelop, prepare, deploy and support the troops tem – Ls 674 000;
during the NATO-led operations; – contribution to the NATO military budget –
– continue the NAF compliance in all fields to Ls 500 000;
the NATO Standardisation Agreements. – establishment of the Air Surveillance and
The largest financing has been granted to the Control System (BALTNET) – Ls 447 000.


-----

###### CHAPTER 8

##### INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION


National Armed Forces have participated in various
courses, seminars and international military exercises after assessing the prioritary fields of co-operation. Therefore, we can state that through its participation in the Partnership for Peace Programme our
National Armed Forces have achieved an essential
progress in its development and are now emphasizing practical application of the new skills, sharing
its experience and supporting other countries of the
Partnership for Peace Programme.
An important step was taken in 2002 when


2004


8.1. Partnership for Peace Programme

Partnership for Peace Programme was one of
the key initiatives established by the NATO in 1994.
Latvia joined the programme in 1994, and it has
been the most efficient way to achieve the practical
military readiness compliant to the NATO standards up to now.
Every year Latvia has been producing the
Individual Partnership Programme (IPP), within
which the specialists of the Ministry of Defence and


Soldiers of the NAF’s unit BALTSQN-6 during the mission to Bosnia-Herzegovina, October 2002


-----

Latvia decided to finance its participation in the
events of the Partnership for Peace Programme in
order to support and facilitate the development of
the Programme and increase its contribution to it.
Therefore, since 2002 Latvia has been covering all
the costs related to its participation in the events of
Partnership for Peace Programme.
It must be added that NATO has made a decision that all the invitee countries including Latvia
are no longer required to submit the IPP. Despite
of it, Latvia has produced the IPP 2004 as a flexible plan with the purpose to participate in those
PfP activities, which facilitate the practical military
readiness compliant to the NATO standards.

**8.2. Participation in Peace-keeping Operations**

One of the goals of the Partnership for Peace
Programme is the Latvian participation in the
NATO-led peace-keeping operations. Since 1996,
units and personnel of the Latvian armed forces
have been participating in all the peace-keeping
operations at the Balkans, thus demonstrating our
commitment not to just consume the security but
also provide it to others.
After completing the SFOR mission in February
2003, the Latvian company started to serve in the
KFOR mission to Kosovo. One NAF officer also
took part in the SFOR mission in 2003.
Since February 2000, the Latvian medical and
military police units have been participating in the
KFOR mission as a part of the UK contingent but
since 2003 – as a part of Scandinavian and French
contingents. In 2003, Latvia participated in the
KFOR mission with its military policemen units,
explosive ordnance disposal unit and staff officers.
An infantry company and staff officers (100 soldiers) left for mission to Kosovo in February 2004.
Military Medical Unit of eight people and one
staff officer continued their mission to Afghanistan
in 2003.
In May 2003, soldiers of the NAF left for the
mission to Kuwait and then to Iraq within the mission Iraqi Freedom. In February 2004, an infantry
company, staff officers, explosive ordnance disposal and national logistics support groups were on
the mission to Iraq. The work of the Latvian units
and observers in the peace-keeping operations has
been praised highly. Latvia has obtained practical
experience and demonstrated its readiness to cooperate with the forces of the NATO and partner
states.


Minister of Defence A. Slakteris viewing the gun
Brauning, which is in the armament of the mission, Iraq,
May 2004

On 31 March 2002, EU officially took over the
operation in Macedonia from the NATO. Latvia had
confirmed its participation in this operation even
before the official handover took place, by sending
two officers to Macedonia to serve in the first EUled international operation. As the operation was
extended till December 2003, Latvia also extended
its participation in it.

**8.3. Co-operation with the Organisation for**
**Security and Co-operation in Europe**

Latvia has been participating in the Organisation’s
for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)
observer missions since 1999 by sending its observers to Bosnia-Herzegovina, Northern Caucasus,
Macedonia and Kosovo on Border Monitoring
Missions. In 2003, there was one Latvian military observer on the OSCE Observer Mission to
Georgia.
In accordance with the signed Vienna Paper’99
Latvia has to submit military information to the
OSCE regarding the NAF’s military capabilities,
budget, personnel, armaments, defence planning
and other issues.


2004


-----

Participation of NAF Soldiers in International Operations in Years 2003/2004


**Country of Operation** **Number of Personnel** **Period of Time** **Location**


02.2003. – 08.2003.
08.2003. – 02.2004.
02.2004. – 06.2004.
06.2004. – 10.2004. –
02.2005.


Kabul
International
Airport

Multinational
Brigade “North” –
US-led

Multinational

Division
“Centre – South” –
Polish-led

LSU and EOD
units at
US GS base

KFOR –
Multinational
Brigade
“Centre” –
Swedish, Finnish and
Norwegian-led

B-SQN –
Multinational
Brigade
“North – East” –
French-led

EUFOR Headquarters –
French-led

Border
monitoring


2004


**Afghanistan (ISAF)**
ISAF III LC
ISAF IV LC

ISAF V LC

ISAF VI LC

**Bosnia – Herzegovina (SFOR)**
SFOR LC I
SFOR LC II
SFOR LC III
SFOR LC IV

**Iraq (OIF)**
OIF LC I
OIF LC I LSU
OIF LC I EOD
OIF LC I NSE
OIF LC II
OIF LC II EOD
OIF LC II NSE
OIF LC III
OIF LC III EOD
OIF LC III NSE
OIF LC IV
OIF LC IV EOD
OIF LC IV NSE

**Kosovo (KFOR)**

KFOR VII LC

B-SQN 7

KFOR VIII LC

B-SQN 8
KFOR IX LC

B-SQN 9
KFOR X LC

KFOR XI LC

**Macedonia (EUFOR)**
EUFOR LC I
EUFOR LC II

**Georgia (OSCE mission)**

|8 medics 8 medics + 1 staff officer 8 medics + 1 staff officer 8 medics + 7 drivers + 3 staff officers + 1 non-commissioned officer|02.2003. – 08.2003. 08.2003. – 02.2004. 02.2004. – 06.2004. 06.2004. – 10.2004. – 02.2005.|
|---|---|
|1 staff officer 1 staff officer 1 staff officer 1 staff officer|02.2003. – 08.2003. 08.2003. – 02.2004. 02.2004. – 08.2004. 08.2004. – 02.2005.|
|105 (infantry company + staff officers) 30 soldiers 6 soldiers 3 soldiers 105 (infantry company + staff officers) 6 soldiers 3 soldiers 134 (infantry company + staff officers) 6 soldiers 3 soldiers 134 (infantry company + staff officers) 6 soldiers 3 soldiers|08.2003. – 02.2004. 05.2003. – 11.2003. 05.2003. – 11.2003. 04.2003. – 10.2003. 02.2004. – 07.2004. 11.2003. – 07.2004. 10.2003. – 04.2004. 07.2004. – 11.2004. 07.2004. – 11.2004. 04.2004. – 08.2004. 11.2004. – 02.2005. 11.2004. – 02.2005. 08.2004. – 12.2004. 12.2004. – 04.2005.|
|2 staff officers 5 MP 6 EOD soldiers 1 staff officer 2 staff officers 5 MP 1 staff officer 2 staff officers 5 MP 100 (infantry company + staff officers) 3 staff officers + 2 drivers 5 MP 3 staff officers + 2 drivers|02.2003. – 08.2003. 02.2003. – 08.2003. 01.2003. – 07.2003. 02.2003. – 08.2003. 08.2003. – 02.2004. 08.2003. – 02.2004 08.2003. – 02.2004. 10.2003. – 04.2004. 02.2004. – 08.2004. 02.2004. – 08.2004. 04.2004. – 10.2004. 08.2004. – 02.2005. 10.2004. – 04.2005.|
|1 staff officer, 1 staff specialist 1 staff officer, 1 staff specialist|03.2003. – 09.2003. 09.2003. – 12.2003.|
|1 officer 1 officer 1 officer 1 officer|01.2003. – 07.2003. 03.2003. – 11.2003. 11.2003. – 05.2004. 05.2004. – 05.2005.|


Abbreviations:


LSU – Logistics Support Unit
B-SQN – Baltic Squadron
EUFOR – European Union Force
ISAF – International Security Assistance Force
KFOR – Kosovo Force
LC – Latvian Contingent


MP – Military Police
NSE – National Support Element
EOD – Explosive Ordnance Disposal
OIF – Operation Iraqi Freedom
SFOR – Stabilization Force


-----

Commander of the US Michigan State Army National Guard Brigadier General R. V. Taylor receiving the award of
the Minister of Defence “Medal for Honorary Recognition”, 24 November 2003


Every year the Ministry of Defence produces
and submits to OSCE information on the Annual
Calendar of Military Activities, Annual Exchange
of Military Information, documents on Defence
Budget and Planning, Information on Light and
Individual Weapons, Compliance with the Code
of Conduct in Military-Political Issues and Global
Exchange of Military Information.
Representatives of the OSCE countries perform
annual inspection and assessment of the Latvian
NAF units each year.
The Law on Open Sky Treaty of 24 March 1992
envisaging inspections (flights) in the territories of
other countries, was adopted on 13 November 2002.
The purpose of the Treaty is to increase the mutual
trust between the countries by conducting mutual
surveillance flights in each others territories. It
gives opportunities to obtain additional information about the armed forces of the member states
and their activities, as well as their military objects.
Latvia became a full member state of the Treaty on
11 February 2003.
In 2003, Latvia voluntarily filled out the Ottawa
Convention (On Banning of the Land Mines) report
form, thus supporting the desire of the international
society to stop the distribution of land mines in


the world and dispose the used ones. Latvia complies with the requirements of the Convention –
it does not produce land mines and banned their
export and transit through the territory of the
Latvia Republic in 1995.

**8.4. Bilateral Co-operation**

With the re-establishment of the Latvian independence and development of the defence system
in the early nineties of the previous century, Latvia
has commenced its international co-operation in
the field of defence. Successful integration to the
international security structures was not possible
with the Latvian internal resources alone, therefore foreign aid was of great importance. Efforts
of Latvia and its co-operation partners lived up to
expectations when on 29 March 2004 Latvia joined
the NATO Alliance. The similar scope and directions of co-operation will be maintained based on
the current and very successful experience.
The Ministry of Defence and the NAF has
established co-operation with approximately 30
countries. It is divided into consultations, assistance
of experts, civil and military personnel training,


2004


-----

material aid and participation of the Latvian units
in the international peace operations as a part of the
foreign contingents.
The priorities of further co-operation were defined within the BALTSEA (Baltic Security Assistance)
Forum in 2002, which are being reviewed on regular
basis taking into account the development of the
defence system as well as the political situation
within the country. Based on the defined priorities of
the co-operation, the main attention will be paid to
expert consultations and training in future.
By becoming a full-fledged NATO state, Latvia
is interested to continue close co-operation with
the members of the Alliance. Latvia has accredited
its defence attachés in the USA, Canada, Denmark,
Norway, Iceland, Germany, Austria, Switzerland,
Russia, France, Spain, Belgium, Luxemburg, the
United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Czech Republic,
Slovakia, Hungary, Poland, Lithuania, the Ukraine,
Sweden, Estonia, Finland, Turkey, Romania, Bulgaria,
Italy, Greece and Portugal.
Latvia has very active bilateral co-operation with
the USA. US experts have been providing assistance
in the fields of logistics, C4I, personnel management, administration and training management
for several years. US Foreign Military Financing


Programme has covered the costs of the expert
group, English teacher, implementation of the
BALTNET system and equipment of Harris communications. Junior officer training is carried out
within the US International Military Education and
Training (IMET) Programme and Co-operation
Programme with the Michigan National Guard.
G. Marshall Centre, which is located in Germany,
organises training and seminars for the Latvian civil
and military personnel on regular basis. Every year
Latvian representatives have opportunities to study
at the US Military Academies.
Bilateral military co-operation between Latvia
and Canada takes place within the Military Training
Assistance Programme (MTAP). One of the basic
directions of this programme is the English and
French language training. It allows the representatives of the Latvian Defence to obtain knowledge
in Canada in various military specialities, which are
mainly related to the peace-keeping operations.
**United Kingdom has provided a military budget**
expert to work at the Ministry of Defence. The
Ministry has implemented the Western-type planning, programming and budgeting system under
his leadership. UK provides education opportunities to the Latvian civil and military personnel. UK


2004


Commander of the Polish Armed Forces General C. Piatas visiting Latvia, 19 November 2003


-----

has participated in creating and developing the
concept of the National Defence Academy, NAF
Non-Commissioned Officer School and Enrolment
Centre. Since 2000, Latvia has been participating
in the peace-keeping mission to Kosovo within the
British military contingent. In February 2003, five
military policemen and one staff officer left for the
mission in accordance with the rotation procedure.
**Germany is one of the most active contributor**
to Latvia in the field of military personnel training.
Latvian NAF have received several important donations from Germany. Germany participates in the
establishment of the NATO-compliant C4I system
(BALTCCIS project). A German advisor is providing consultations to the Naval Forces in the field of
logistics.
**France provides the military training within**
the specialised and the staff officer training, as well
as opportunities of the French language training.
Latvian Naval Forces have established active cooperation with France.
**Belgium provides assistance to Latvia in the di-**
verse issues of legislation and NATO standard implementation. Very close co-operation has been established between the Naval Forces of both countries.
**Denmark has been one of the first and most**
active countries assisting Latvia in a number of
projects that deal with the civil and military personnel education and training, as well as providing expert advice in the defence planning issues.
Denmark has offered a lot of training opportunities at its military academies. Since 2000, a Danish
officer has been working full time as an advisor
in the Latvian Armed Forces Strategic Planning
Department. At the same time Denmark provides
substantial material support, e.g., in the reconstruction of the National Defence Academy. In
2003, the establishment of the Infantry Brigade was
commenced in the Latvian Armed Forces with the
Danish assistance. A Latvian company has participated in SFOR and KFOR missions as a part of the
Danish contingent.

A **Norwegian armed force representative has**
been providing assistance to the Latvian NAF on
long-term planning issues since 1999. Currently an
advisor is providing her consultation to the NAF
in the personnel issues. Norwegian advisors provide their assistance also to other units of the NAF.
Essential assistance from Norway has been received
for establishment of the Explosive Ordnance
Disposal School and Diver Training Centre of the
Baltic States. The mine laying vessel Vale and the 2D
medium-range radar ASR-7 were donated to Latvia


in 2003. Explosive Ordnance Disposal units have
participated in the KFOR mission as a part of the
Norwegian contingent. There are also opportunities
provided for the NAF representatives to study at the
Norwegian Staff College.
**Poland has provided great assistance in the**

Soldiers of the Latvian contingent BALTSQN-9 during the pre-mission training in neutralisation of unexploded ordnance in Denmark before leaving for Kosovo,
February 2004

issues related to the NATO integration. Since 2002,
Latvian Naval Force cadets have an opportunity to
study at the Polish Navy Academy. Commanders of
all the Polish Armed Forces – NAF, NF, LF, AF, as
well as the Polish Minister of Defence have visited
Latvia during 2003–2004. Poland has granted several important equipment and weapon donations
to Latvia.
The main field of the co-operation with Czech
**Republic has been the NATO integration. Czech**
side has repeatedly expressed its readiness to provide support and assistance to Latvia during its
integration process. Czech Republic provides military training to the Latvian officers and has assisted
in the defence planning issues. Czech Republic provides an essential support in preparing the Latvian
military experts in the field of defence against
chemical, biological and nuclear threat.
Co-operation projects with **Hungary have also**
covered consultations on the NATO integration
issues. The first bilateral talks between the countries
at the expert level have taken place.
Co-operation with **Sweden covers several**
important long-term planning projects in the field
of defence. Sweden provides training opportunities to the Latvian military personnel. Within the
military assistance projects, Sweden has donated
military equipment and weapons to the Land Force


2004


-----

Defence planning and implementation of the
democratisation processes are the main directions
of this co-operation. Opportunities to study at the
Latvian NAF Training Centres were provided to
the representatives of the Georgian armed forces.
Latvia has donated its communications equipment
to Georgia.
Latvia is interested to develop positive and pragmatic co-operation with Russia. Both countries have
jointly participated in the international Naval Force
exercise in the Baltic Sea. Russia has invited the
Latvian representatives to participate in various conferences on democratic control of the armed forces
and civil-military co-operation. This co-operation
demonstrates the interests and readiness of both
countries to co-operate in the field of defence.

**8.5. Military Co-operation between**
**the Baltic States**

One of the priorities of the Latvian security and
defence policy is the military co-operation of the
Baltic States and participation in the joint military
projects. Co-operation with Lithuania and Estonia
is an essential precondition for security in the
region.
Joint projects of the Baltic States are:
– Peace-keeping Battalion of the Baltic States
(BALTBAT);
– Joint Air Control System ( BALTNET);
– Baltic Naval Squadron (BALTRON);
– Baltic Defence College (BALTDEFCOL);
– Baltic Joint C2 Information System
(BALTCCIS);
– Baltic Joint Personnel Accounting System
(BALTPERS);
– Baltic Medical Unit (BALTMED).

**BALTBAT**
The task of the Baltic battalion (BALTBAT) is
to perform the peacekeeping operations under the
mandate of the UN and/or the OSCE. Since 1996,
representatives of the Latvian National Armed
Forces (NAF) constituting BALTBAT, have taken
part in SFOR missions to Bosnia-Herzegovina and
KFOR mission to Kosovo.
From 2000, each Baltic State forms and develops
its own national battalion within the BALTBAT.
BALTBAT is the first joint project within the
Baltic military co-operation and is a good example
for successful international co-operation with all its
goals achieved.


2004


battalions and the Air Defence Wing of the Air
Forces, as well as equipment for the military ambulance. Swedish instructors continue to work at the
1st Infantry Battalion and Air Defence Wing of the
Air Forces.
Latvia has activated its co-operation with
**Finland. Expert talks on weapon control and mili-**
tary training opportunities have been planned.
Junior officers and instructors of the NAF attend
specialised course in Switzerland. Military contacts
at the political level have been activated.
Latvia has been united with other NATO new
member countries – Lithuania, Estonia, Bulgaria,
Rumania, Slovakia and Slovenia – in the common goal of becoming a full-fledged NATO state.
Currently the main task is to maintain the intensity
and directions of the established co-operation.
Latvia has been making a lot of efforts to change
from the security and assistance receiving country
into the security provider. The mission of this work
is to assist countries with similar foreign policy. For
increasing the stability within Europe and the whole
Transatlantic space, it is important to Latvia to share
its experience with the countries which are at the
beginning of their road to democracy.
Latvia provides consultations and expert assistance, training opportunities and material aid. Special attention is paid to the countries of similar
past, i.e., ex-soviet countries. For these countries
the Latvian experience on its road to integration
to the Euro-Atlantic society is of great importance
because besides the theoretical assistance, we can
also offer the practical one.
In 2002, the Ukraine and Georgia announced
their desire to join NATO. For achieving it, both
countries need international support. The main
directions of the co-operation with the Ukraine and
Georgia are the fields of defence planning, training
and material aid.
The main directions of the co-operation with
the Ukraine cover issues related to the NATO integration. The Ukraine hosted an international conference in 2003 with the participation of the Baltic
States, and a similar event is planned to take place
in Latvia in 2004. Both countries co-operate in the
field of environmental protection and training, e.g.
Latvia covers the study costs for a Ukrainian representative at the BALTDEFCOL in Tartu, Estonia
while the Ukraine offers opportunities for the
Latvian military personnel to study at its military
educational establishments.
Latvia co-ordinates the co-operation with
**Georgia together with Lithuania and Estonia.**


-----

Exercise BALTIC EAGLE 2003 in Ādaži, September 2003

After receiving the invitation to join NATO and **BALTNET** 2004
full-fledged joining the Alliance, the military plan- The goal of the project is to establish a unitary
ning priorities of the Baltic States have changed, Baltic Air Surveillance System, which will in the
and therefore it was necessary to review the joint future be integrated into the NATO air surveillance
projects and change the way of co-operation in system.
order to increase the co-operation between the The main tasks of the BALTNET project durBaltic Land Forces. ing 2003 were to enhance the BALTNET system
The official transformation of the BALTBAT (network capacity has been increased in order to
project was held during the closing ceremony of be used for the BALTCCIS as well), to train the
the exercise BALTIC EAGLE 2003 on 26 September personnel and to continue the BALTNET integra2003 in Ādaži, Latvia. tion into the NATO Integrated Air Defence System

(NATINADS). In 2004 as well, the main attention

In order to continue the commenced co- will be paid to the BALTNET personnel training
operation between the Baltic Land Forces, the and the BALTNET integration to the NATO air
Commanders of the Baltic armed forces have signed surveillance system.
the plan about the future co-operation between the In 2003, Latvia procured a 3D long-range
Baltic land forces and closure of the BALTBAT radar TPS-117 from the US company Lockeed
project, which envisages to: Martin. This is the first large procurement made for
– establish a training and education system com- strengthening of the national defence capabilities
pliant to the NATO standards; since Latvia regained its independence. The radar
– train the Baltic land force units at the battal- ASR-7 donated by Norway was set up in Ventspils
ion/brigade level; in 2003.
– establish a doctrine unit for the Baltic land
force development at the end of 2003 to produce **BALTRON**
the above doctrine; The mission of the Baltic Naval Squadron is to
– consider other opportunities of the Baltic land ensure the permanent rapid reaction capabilities at
force co-operation. sea during peacetime and situations endangering


-----

**BALTDEFCOL**
Baltic Defence College BALTDEFCOL was
established in 1998 in Tartu, Estonia. The mission of
the College is to train the officers at the battalion’s
commanding level at the Joint Command and Staff
Course, as well as senior officers to work at different
level staffs.
The fifth Senior Staff Officer Course of
BALTDEFCOL started on 4 August 2003. There
are 12 Latvian officers, as well as officers from
Lithuania, Estonia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Denmark,
UK, Hungary, Poland, Canada, the Ukraine,
Rumania, Serbia-Montenegro, Sweden and Georgia
participating in the course. Representatives from
Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania and Croatia are studying
at the Colonel Course. All studies are in English.

It is also possible to take the Civil Servant
Course at the College. It is made for the civil servants of the Ministries of Defence, Foreign Affairs
and the Interior of the Baltic States. This year
four civil servants of the Ministry of Defence, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of the
Interior and the Crisis Control Centre participate
in the course.
Institute for Regional Security Studies has been


2004


Diver Training Centre of the Baltic States in Liepāja

the state, inviolability of the territorial waters and
economic zones of the Baltic States, participation in
joint search and rescue operations as well as mine
sweeping operations and military training at sea.

Squadron consists of five vessels of the Baltic
States. Latvian mine trawlers VIESTURS and
IMANTA, staff/logistics vessel VIRSAITIS and
minesweeper NAMEJS participate in BALTRON
from the Latvian side. Each country is responsible
for logistics and technical condition of the own
vessels.

The Baltic States Naval Training Base is being
established and developed in Liepāja within the
BALTRON project:
– BALTRON Countermine School;
– the Baltic States Workshop for Repairs of
Countermine Equipment (technical maintenance and repairs of sonors);
– Diver Training Centre of the Baltic States (PfP
Programme countries were invited to participate
in the course of 2003);
– a Course in Tactic Training was carried out
in September 2003 at the Training Base for the
Baltic Naval Forces.


-----

established at the Defence College, which will prepare the future teachers for the College. Baltic students of political science will have an opportunity
to study for the MA degree there.
The long-term development plan of the
BALTDEFCOL envisages that the Baltic States will
have to take over the funding of the College from
2004, and gradually also – the teaching positions.
The Senior Leadership Course substituting
the Colonel Course for training the senior civil
and military officials will be introduced at the
BALTDEFCOL from academic year 2004/2005.

**BALTCCIS**
The goal of the project is to increase and develop the Baltic command and control capabilities,
create a reliable joint military information exchange
system, which will later be connected to the NATO
system. The project will allow to establish a unitary
information management and control system in the
Baltic States.
An agreement was made on 10 December 2002
about placing the central server of the system in
Latvia. Hardware and software required for the


implementation of the project was set up in 2003 –
the central server has been delivered to Latvia and
launched. The full launch of the system is expected
to take place at the end of 2004.
Currently work is being done on preparing
the quadrilateral Memorandum of Understanding
between Germany and the Baltic States on work,
administration and financing of the BALTCIS
project. The project will provide 24-hour operation,
exchange of command and control information during the Baltic exercises, as well as ability to exchange
the information from BALTNET, BALTBAT and
BALTRON. It will be possible to provide the information exchange on the logistics, search and rescue
activities, civil crisis and other issues.

**BALTPERS**
The purpose of the project is to establish a joint
accounting and management system for persons
subject to the military service in the Baltic States.
The project’s software was handed over to the Baltic
States in November 2002. At the end of 2003 the
project was transformed in automated personnel
accounting system.


2004


Closing ceremony of the exercise BALTIC EAGLE 2003, 6 September 2003


-----

-----

###### CHAPTER 9

##### ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION


Latvia has confirmed its position in the field of
environmental protection by joining the international conventions on environmental protection,
signing international agreements on improving of
the environmental quality and participating in the
elaboration and implementation of the Agenda
21 Strategy and the regional Baltic Agenda 21
Strategy.
The main goals of Latvia in the environmental
protection are to:
– maintain high standards for environmental
quality;
– reduce the amount of contamination;
– use the natural resources optimally.
For achieving these goals, the issues of environmental protection are integrated into the plans of
all sectors of national economics and state administration, including the sector of national defence.
According to the Strategy on Environmental
Protection of the Ministry of Defence and the NAF,
the following environmental protection activities
are to be implemented for facilitating the following
goals besides the main goal of the national defence:
– increase the environmental awareness for people working in the defence field;
– gradually and regularly improve the environmental quality in all main sectors of concern;
– prevent the contamination threat, use environmentally friendly technologies and change the
respective technological processes and working
methods in order to reduce the threat to the
environment as much as possible;
– restrict usage of environmentally hazardous
raw materials and resources; facilitate the sorting, processing and recycling of the liquid and
solid waste;
– optimally use the energy resources, facilitate


the energy saving and usage of regeneratable
energy sources;
– observe the requirements of nature protection, protect the endangered plants and animals,
preserve the ecosystems, biological diversity and
social, cultural and historical heritage;
– prevent and eliminate the contamination, clear
up and re-cultivate the objects of nature, involve
the military structures in civil environmental
protection activities and projects;
– introduce the public to the military objects
with a purpose to educate and protect the natural, cultural and historical environment.
One of the main tasks of the Latvian NAF in the
environmental protection field to be solved is the
elimination of the inherited contamination of its
territories.
Over 100 000 ha or 1/7 of the Latvian total territory is contaminated with explosive objects. 80 000
naval and other type of ammunition is in the Baltic
sea including the Latvian territorial waters. In order
to eliminate the contamination left after both World
Wars and the Soviet Army, the NAF have been disposing the explosive objects on regular basis since
1993, with special attention paid to the explosive
ordnance disposal. Each year 4000 ammunition
units of large calibre have been disposed by the
NAF personnel on land and at sea. During a year
the Latvian Naval Forces both alone and in collaboration with the Baltic Naval Squadron BALTRON
find and dispose or hand over for disposal approximately 80 explosive objects.
The Naval Forces participate in the ecological
monitoring, search and rescue operations at sea,
catastrophe clearance and explosive object search
and disposal at sea in accordance with the Latvian
laws and international agreements. Within its com

2004


-----

that they comply with the requirements defined
by the legal documents on national environmental
protection.

The armoured and other vehicles and weapons
used during the NAF tactical exercises can have
a negative impact on the environment. Therefore,
environmental protection issues are included in
the training plans of all level military personnel.
NAF personnel acquire their knowledge at the
National Defence Academy, NAF Non-commissioned Officer School and seminars and training
held in Latvia or abroad. In collaboration with the
Coast Guard of the Naval Forces, a training seminar
on naval environment protection has been organised for the Naval Forces. An Armed Forces Manual
on Environmental Protection has been published,
regular seminars are arranged with the participation of the national environmental organisation
experts.
Successful co-operation has been established
between the countries of the Baltic Sea region. A
joint strategy on co-ordination and optimisation of
the military sector within the environmental protection, and a unitary training programme for the
Baltic environmental officers are being elaborated.
The environmental experts of the Ministry of
Defence and the NAF frequently organise, as well
as participate in experience sharing seminars on
elaboration of plans for environmental education
and environmental management in Estonia and
Lithuania. Latvia can be proud of its experience
because Environmental Management Plan for
Ādaži Base was the first document of this kind in
the Baltic States.

Important co-operation contacts have been made
with the countries of other regions, e.g., Switzerland,
UK, Norway, Bulgaria and the Ukraine. Long, stable and fruitful co-operation in the environmental protection field has been established with the
US Department of Defence, USA’s Environmental
Protection Agency and US National Guard.
Education courses were organised in Latvia and
USA, and essential assistance and support received
during the elaboration and implementation of the
Environmental Management Plan for Ādaži Base.
A range of activities addressing the environmental
protection issues were organised in Latvia in 2003
with the support of the US Military Cooperation
Office. In 2004, it is planned to organise an international seminar on the naval environment protection
with the participation of the foreign experts.


2004


A soldier of the Explosive Ordnance Disposal School
during the exercise, June 2003

petencies, the Coast Guard Flotilla controls the
observance of legal documents and international
rights stipulating the usage of the Latvian waters.
In accordance with the requirements set in the
NAF mission, the activities of the armed forces
must comply with the legal documents on the environmental protection, and the armed forces must
actively participate in the environment protection
in the long term. Therefore, environment protection plans defining the environmental protection
activities have been elaborated, e.g., several important documents were produced for the NAF in 2002
based on the Environmental Management Plan for
Ādaži Base, – Development Plan for Ādaži Base for
2003–2006, Nature Protection Plan for the Natural
Reserves of Lieluika and Mazuika Lakes for 2002–
2007, and Nature Protection Plan for Ādaži Base
for 2002–2007. The implementation of the tasks
defined in the Environmental Management Plan
for Ādaži Base was continued in 2003. Currently,
a Forest Management Plan for Ādaži Base is being
elaborated.
The study of the potentially contaminated territories was started in 2002, with a purpose to elaborate plans for their re-cultivation and decontamination in the future. A Registration Programme for
Contaminated and Eventually Contaminated Sites
was produced after studying the information of the
archives, detecting all the objects concerned and
establishing a database on objects possessed by the
Ministry of Defence. A detailed study of the prioritised potentially  contaminated territories was
carried out in 2003.
In 2003, the petrol stations were equipped with
the monitoring drill holes, and the technical condition of several artesian bores was assessed to ensure


-----

###### CHAPTER 10

##### LINKS TO SOCIETY

**10.1. Public Awareness**


One of the priorities of the Ministry of Defence
and the National Armed Forces is the provision
of true, timely and comprehensive information to
the public. A successive dialogue and co-operation
between the Ministry, the Armed Forces and diverse
groups of society is the key to mutual understanding, trust and respect. Continuous increase in the
information availability and immediacy, as well as
enhancement of information personnel’s work are
the basic principles for the implementation of the
MoD’s public relations.
Tasks for the public awareness are defined every
year, and they are consistently based on the public
opinion surveys and defence policy priorities. In
the second half of 2003 the MoD has produced
conceptually new strategic guidelines for the public
relations, which now form the basis of the public
awareness work within the defence system and
provide continuity of the information work. The
purpose of the guidelines is to create unitary understanding about the public awareness tasks and their
implementation within the defence system.
The public opinion survey carried out in
December 2003 by the company Data Serviss has
shown the increase in the number of Latvian
residents who consider the national defence situation to be improving. The support to the Latvian
membership to NATO has grown as well. The public has obtained a better understanding about the
Alliance and back its policy and tasks. The support
to the public opinion that Latvian security is best
strengthened by integration to NATO and EU, has
grown in 2003. Most of the Latvian residents consider that EU must form its own security policy as
well, though the greatest part of them think that EU


Shadow Day at the Ministry of Defence and the
National Armed Forces, 25 February 2003

must closely co-operate with NATO in this field.
Most of the population (82.7%) back the transition of the Latvian Armed Forces to the professional
military service. The public understanding about
the NAF in general, and its units in particular has
improved. Almost 80% of the Latvian residents think
that the state needs NAF and it must be developed.
In 2003 as well, most part of the Latvian population backed the participation of NAF soldiers in
international missions.
The Minister’s of Defence Report to the
Parliament on the National Defence Policy and
NAF Development in the respective year is being
published since 1999 in order to strengthen the dialogue with the society and Members of Parliament.
Information on the defence development goals
and key tasks, and their implementation, as well as
achievements and input in the enhancement process of the national defence capabilities is provided
to the Parliament.


2004


-----

2004


The home page of the Ministry of Defence
(www.mod.gov.lv) provides information about topicalities of the Ministry of Defence and the NAF.
Several new chapters have been created there, e.g.,
Soldier in Mission. This chapter covers updated
information about the units of the Latvian Armed
Forces who serve abroad. In January 2003, the home
page hosted a competition “What do you know
about NAF?”, and at the end of 2003 there was competition in four Latvian regional schools organised
in co-operation with the Latvian Transatlantic
Youth Club.
The Ministry issues monthly journal “Tēvijas
Sargs” (Guard of Motherland). It is popular among
youth and the older generation. The journal is distributed in all the NAF units throughout Latvia.
The journal “Militārais apskats” (Military Review)
issued by the National Defence Academy provides
academic articles about diverse military issues.
Twice a month a TV programme “Laiks vīriem?”
(Time for Men?) is broadcasted, which is made
in co-operation with the TV creative company
“Labvakar” (Good Evening).
The Ministry has established good co-operation with the Latvian regional TV stations, which
once a month broadcast TV programmes in Latvian
regions on up-to-date and main events in the
defence and security field. A radio programme
“Junda” (Wake-up Call) is also broadcasted every
week, which provides information on the latest
events in NAF to the radio listeners.
The Ministry of Defence produces monthly
video reviews about the key events within the MoD
and NAF. They are distributed at the NAF units and
schools, which provide course in national defence.
Information about topical defence issues is published in booklets, brochures and information leaflets. They are targeted to Latvians and foreigners
and issued in Latvian, English and French. Booklets
on MoD and NAF were published in 2003.
MoD has always actively co-operated with nongovernmental organisations. Close co-operation
has been established with the Latvian Transatlantic
Organisation (LATO) and Latvian Transatlantic
Youth Club (LTYC) since the day they were established. Several public awareness projects have been
carried out together with the two organizations.
Successful co-operation has been established with
the Institute of Latvian Foreign Policy. Conferences
on national security and defence issues have been
organised jointly, and input in the scientific work
has been made. The Ministry supports and co-operates with the Brothers’ Cemetery Committee and


other organisations whose mission is to preserve
the historic values and honour the memory of soldiers.
Open Days are held in each NAF unit. The family members of conscripts are invited to participate
in the attestation ceremony and visit the place
of service and see its conditions, as well as meet
officers and non-commissioned officers, who are
responsible for the progress of the conscript service.
Mothers of the best conscripts are congratulated on
the Mother’s Day.
The Journalist Days in NAF are very popular
among journalists. Once a year journalists become
soldiers in the Ādaži Infantry Training Centre –
they put on field uniforms, participate in theoretical
and practical exercises, go to shooting-range and eat
in the soldier canteen. This is the way the press can
obtain better understanding about the service in the
armed forces and processes within the defence field.
Mass media days are being held at the Navy and Air
Forces as well.
Great attention is paid to the co-operation with
schools. The Ministry of Defence together with nongovernmental organisations and National Military
Service Administration Offices, Recruitment and
Selection Centre meet youths at schools to introduce them to the Latvian security policy and service
within NAF. At the end of 2003, the experts of MoD
and NAF visited schools several weeks before and
after the national holidays in order to talk about the
national defence issues, work of the armed forces
and daily routine of soldiers.
In 2004, special attention will be paid to the education of the public relations personnel, accreditation of journalists to the defence system, preparing
a mobile exhibition, establishment of the defence
system’s intranet for informing the internal target
groups, introducing of corporative design standards, as well as co-operation with diverse groups of
interests and public organisations.
NAF and especially the National Guard have
been participating in the unmilitary tasks and have
been providing great assistance to municipalities,
State Police and Fire Fighters since the first days of
their establishment. NAF soldiers provide assistance
in search and rescue operations on land and at sea in
cases of natural disasters and other accidents. NAF
participate in activities to prevent illegal fishing and
other events related to the environmental protection and preservation. Explosive ordnance disposal
is especially important to the public. Thousands of
explosive objects from World Wars I and II found
on land and at sea have been disposed every year.


-----

**10.2. Military Education and Patriotic**
**Education**

Patriotism and national consciousness of the
Latvian citizens has always had and will always have
an important role in establishing and developing the
state. In the last few years the Ministry of Defence
and the National Guard have actively participated
in patriotic education of the youths in accordance
with the Concept on Youth Education in National
Defence Field approved by the Cabinet of Ministers
on 2 February 2002.
Transition to the professional military service
and dismissal of the conscript service sets new
tasks for the education of youths in the national
defence field, which is carried out by the Ministry
of Defence. Besides facilitating the formation of
national consciousness, it also has to become a
selection system for the military career. Therefore,
the purpose of the Ministry’s of Defence work with
the youths is to:
– facilitate the national consciousness and education of youths in the field of national defence;
– create an early interest of youths about the
military service;
– increase the selection opportunities in the
recruitment of motivated personnel for professional military service.
The Ministry of Defence organises the work
with the youths in two ways:
– in 1992, the National Guard established the
Youth Guard, which has become the largest
youth organisation in Latvia during the last
years;
– since 1997, the experts of the National Military
Service Administration Offices teach optional
course in national defence at some of the secondary educational establishments.
The Concept of Youth Guard created in 2003
must facilitate the development of the youths’ movement with the purpose to inform youths and arouse
their interest about the national defence activities,
which is of key importance in case of professional
military service.
For providing a more efficient familiarisation of
youths to the national defence tasks, it is necessary
to merge the existing kinds of military training of
the pre-military service. In the future, the military
education of youths should be organised within
the framework of the unitary system – the Youth
Guard. The organisation management of the Youth
Guard will be provided through the MoD’s Youth
Education Section, and the Youth Guard leaders


NAF Day in Jelgava, April 2003

and instructors will be working under its subordination. Infrastructure and resources of the Military
Enrolment Centre and National Armed Forces will
be available for providing of the youth guards’ training process.
The training process consists of theoretical lessons, which are carried out at schools during the
academic year, and practical lessons (camps, reunions, competitions), which are organised with the
assistance of the National Armed Forces’ units and
are held at their bases.
The training process within the Youth Guard is
organized in two age groups:
– Junior group (aged 12–15). The main task of
its training programme is to learn the military
history, find out and clear the memorial sites
of soldiers. It provides an insight in the functions, structure, soldier life and military training
basics of the Latvian National Armed Forces.
The programme includes hiking tours and militarised competitions;
– Senior group (aged 16–18). Its task is to acquire
the training course in the national defence.
The programme provides knowledge about the
Latvian military history, current security policy of
the state, integration process and NATO membership. The programme covers lessons in drill, tactics,
topography, course in weapons and shooting, first
aid. The training process pays great attention to
the development of the youth’s physical capabilities
– muscle strength, quickness, fitness and endurance.
The programme should be obtained during 3 years.
The training process ends with exams, and diploma
is issued for acquiring the course, which gives the
first hand in the competition to enter the military
educational establishments and start the professional service in the NAF.


2004


-----

### C O N C LU S I O N


Strengthening and developing of the Latvian independence
requires efforts, purposefulness and efficiency of each Latvian citizen, as well as the state as a whole. Democracy, stability, security and
welfare are values, which we all chose in the early nineties of the
previous century. Every opportunity should be taken in order to
make this choice irreversible and ensure that the goals are achieved.
Strengthening of the self-defence capabilities and choice of the cooperation partners are among the most important opportunities and
tasks.
For providing the Latvian national security and defence, the
Minister of Defence and the personnel and soldiers of the Ministry
of Defence, National Armed Forces and institutions subordinated
to them must perform their daily tasks with the highest sense of
responsibility. Our goals are clearly defined and our needs are based
on well-considered foreign, security and defence policies.
The efficient development of the national defence system and its
basic element – the National Armed Forces –, as well as motivated
and professional civil and military personnel, appropriate infrastructure, armament, equipment and vehicles are preconditions and goals
to be achieved through consistent and continuous work during the
next few years. Therefore, the development of the national defence
system and armed forces must be purposively continued to ensure
that Latvia becomes an equal member of NATO and is able to contribute considerably to the forming of the international security
environment.


-----

