#### Ministry of National Defence
 Republic of Lithuania

# NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY


-----

-----

## NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY  STRATEGY

APPROVED
by Resolution No. 818 of the Government
of the Republic of Lithuania of 13 August 2018

##### Contents

 General Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

 Targets and Objectives of the Strategy, Evaluation Criteria and their Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

Cyber Security and Cyber Defence Capabilities of the State 7

Cybercrimes **. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .** 10

Cyber Security Culture and Innovation **. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .** 12

Private-Public Partnership **. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .** 16

International Cooperation. . . . . . . . **. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .** 18

##### Implementation of and Responsibility for the Strategy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21

 Criteria for Assessing the Implementation of the National 

 Cyber Security Strategy and the List of Targeted Values. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22


-----

-----

N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 3

It is evident that information and communication technology has changed and is still changing our
lives at a rapid pace thus having a great impact on the activities of private and public sectors. Undoubtedly, any damage to a state’s critical infrastructure through the use of malicious software in combination
with a disinformation campaign might lead to chaos in a country. The number of cyber incidents grows by
10% every year; the incidents become increasingly complex: cyber-attacks last longer and are better coordinated. For this reason, current threats must be countered in an expedient manner using new measures
and tools.

The Ministry of National Defence has prepared the National Cyber Security Strategy which demonstrates one more step forward made towards ensuring cyber security of the country. The Strategy is a key
document which sets the aims and objectives of Lithuania’s public and private sectors as well as research
and educational institutions for the next five years. The Strategy takes a holistic approach, where cyber
security is seen as an integral part of digital ecosystem rather than an independent national goal or as a
set of tools designed for responding to challenges of the digital age.

Our aim is to raise public awareness and enhance the resistance of the Lithuanian society to cyber
incidents which pose national security threats, present risks to the fulfilment of functions assigned to the
governmental and municipal authorities and institutions as well as to the provision of e. public services
rendered by such public bodies, to the development of business, to personal data protection and to
the fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals. I am confident that we will considerably strengthen
Lithuania’s cyber resistance, if we respond to the most relevant challenges the Lithuanian digital society
and economy faces and take the responsibility for the security of our activities in cyber space all together.

Raimundas Karoblis,
Minister of National Defence


-----

**The first target of the Strategy –**
to strengthen cyber security of the country and the development
of cyber defence capabilities.

**The second target of the Strategy –**
to ensure prevention and
investigation of criminal offences in cyber space.

**The third target of the Strategy –**
to promote cyber security culture and development of innovation.

**The fourth target of the Strategy –**
to strengthen a close cooperation between private and public sectors.

**The fifth target of the Strategy –**
to enhance international cooperation and ensure
the fulfilment of international obligations in the field of cyber security.


-----

## General Provisions

1. The National Cyber Security Strategy (hereinafter referred to as the “Strategy”) defines the
most important pillars of the national cyber security
policy. The Strategy is aimed at strengthening the
development of the state’s cyber security and cyber
defence capabilities preventing and investigating
cybercrimes, promoting cyber security culture and
the development of innovation, enhancing close
private-public partnership (PPP) and international
cooperation, and ensuring the fulfilment of international cyber security obligations within the country
until 2023.
2. The Strategy has been developed in consideration of the environmental analysis, data from
the conducted research, and suggestions offered by
public and private sector representatives. It meets
the provisions of the Programme of the Seventeenth
Government of the Republic of Lithuania, which was
accepted by Resolution No. XIII-82 of the Seimas of
the Republic of Lithuania of 13 December 2016 “On
the Programme of the Government of the Republic
of Lithuania” (hereinafter referred to as the “Programme of the Government of the Republic of Lithuania”), the National Security Strategy approved by
Resolution No. IX-907 of the Seimas of the Republic
of Lithuania of 28 May 2002 “On the Approval of the
National Security Strategy”, the Law of the Republic
of Lithuania on Cyber Security, the communications
and recommendations made by the European Parliament, the Council, and the European Commission
in the field of cyber security as well as the Commu

N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 5

nication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and
Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions
“A Digital Single Market Strategy for Europe” dated
6 May 2015 and the Lithuanian Information Society
Development Programme 2014–2020 “Digital Agenda
of the Republic of Lithuania” approved by Resolution No. 244 of the Government of the Republic of
Lithuania of 12 March 2014 “On the Approval of Lithuanian Information Society Development Programme
2014-2020 “Digital Agenda of the Republic of Lithuania”. After Lithuania joined the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
recommendations produced by this organisation on
Digital Security Risk Management for Economic and
Social Prosperity have also become part of the key
guidelines reflected in the Strategy.
3. Terms used in the Strategy shall have the
same meanings as those defined in the Law on Cyber
Security, the Law of the Republic of Lithuania on the
Organisation of the National Defence System and
Military Service, the Law of the Republic of Lithuania
on Higher Education and Research and the Law of
the Republic of Lithuania on the Right to Obtain Information from State and Municipal Institutions and
Agencies.


-----

-----

N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 7

### Targets and Objectives of the Strategy,  evaluation criteria and their Values

## Cyber Security and Cyber Defence Capabilities of the State


5. The first target of the Strategy is to strengthen cyber security in the country and to develop cyber defence capabilities.

6. Like other countries of the world that have
well-developed broadband infrastructures and in
which ICT potential is being actively explored, Lithuania has become attractive not only to individuals,
groups of individuals or organised groups but also
to the countries specified in the reports of national
security threats and issued annually by the State
Security Department of the Republic of Lithuania
and the Second Investigation Department under
the Ministry of National Defence of the Republic of
Lithuania (hereinafter referred to as the “SSD” and
“SID”, accordingly). Those countries threaten Lithuania’s national security and conduct hostile activities in global and Lithuanian cyberspace. Data collected by the National Cyber Security Centre under
the Ministry of National Defence (NCSC), SSD and
SID reveal that Lithuania continuously encounters
various types of cyber incidents that are intended to
encroach on the information resources and critical
information infrastructures. According to forecasts,
the number and extent of cyber incidents are expected to increase.[1]

7. According to data in the National Cyber Security Status Report 2017, the National Electronic
Communication Networks and Information Security
Incidents Investigation Unit (also referred to as the
“Computer Emergency Response Team in Lithuania” or “CERT-LT”) processed 54,414 cyber incidents
in 2017. Also in 2017, the number of recorded cyber
incidents was 10% higher than in 2016. While cyberespionage attacks primarily target Lithuanian state
information resources, private critical information
infrastructures and other entities of strategic or
significant importance to the national security are
also at risk. While applying technical cyber security


measures, the NCSC has identified that the highest
number of malware was detected in the sectors of
energy (27%), public security and legal order (22%)
and foreign affairs and security policy (21%). Compared to 2016, malware has mostly spread in the
fields of public security and legal order, foreign affairs and security policy and energy. The condition
of public sector websites, which according to the
National Cyber Security Status Report 2017 has deteriorated, also influence the state of cyber security.
8. The explosion of cyber incidents that is indicated in the annual reports of the NCSC, SSD and SID
is proof that every cyber security entity must determine the amount of time, money and other resources to allot to the protection of their communication and information systems and provided services.
Cyber security entities perform security risk assessments, but they are often of formal nature only and
are conducted so as to comply with legal requirements or internationally recognised standards.

The _Risk Analysis Manual_ published by the
Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Lithuania
12 years ago reflects the progress in risk assessment
in the light of current conditions of research and innovation, but the security risk assessment methodology has changed over time and the understanding
of risk assessment performance has transformed
from the assurance of control environment to the
holistic approach of risk assessment of organisations’ activities.
9. Individual security risk assessment processes have already reached maturity level in Lithuania, however, on the national level, the security risk

1 The State Security Department of the Republic of
Lithuania and the Second Investigation Department under
the Ministry of National Defence (2018). National Security
_Threat Assessment;_ National Cyber Security Centre under
the Ministry of National Defence (2018). National Cyber Se_curity Status Report 2017._


-----

8 N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y

assessment culture and cyber security risk assessment processes are still fragmentary. Cyber security
threats and security gaps have not been adequately
analysed and holistically integrated into the process
of risk assessment. Furthermore, rapid ICT development presents a challenge to ensuring that cyber security professionals have adequate knowledge, skills
and practice.
10. In order to enhance the culture of effective
cyber security policy making and implementation
and to improve cyber security risk assessment and
other requirements, the following changes occurred
in 2018:
10.1. The provisions of the Law on Cyber Security were recast to improve organisation, management and control of the cyber security system; the
competence, functions, rights and duties of state institutions responsible for cyber security policy making and implementation were specified; the duties
and responsibilities of cyber security entities were
defined in more detail, and additional cyber security assurance measures were established.
10.2. Regulatory functions of state information
resources security, activities of public communications networks, public digital communication services and digital information hosting service providers were consolidated which enabled systematic
cyberspace monitoring, and management of cyber
incidents occurring in communication and information systems of cyber security entities. The NCSC is
the only agency in Lithuania that organises cyber
incident management and assists other state institutions, businesses and residents on the one stop
shop principle.
11. Consolidation of capabilities aims at developing an integral cyber security management system in Lithuania to represent a systematic approach
to the security management planning in any field,
encouraging cyber security entities to focus on security management quality, reducing administrative
burden falling on cyber security entities, ensuring
systematic assessment and evidence-based security
management culture, and facilitating optimisation
of security expenditure planning. Consolidation of
capabilities also aims at ensuring sustainable development of cyber security competences and enhancement of regional cyber security capabilities.
12. The Ministry of National Defence of the Republic of Lithuania and the NCSC continuously cooperate with cyber security entities, consult them on
cyber security issues, and organise cyber security
exercises.


In 2017, the national cyber security exercise Cy_ber Security 2017 had around 200 participants from_
over 50 organisations of private and public sector.
In cooperation with the Communications Regulatory
Authority of the Republic of Lithuania, the Lithuanian Police and the State Data Protection Inspectorate,
workshops for representatives of cyber security entities were organised. Participants were familiarised
with the requirements of legal acts related to cyber
security and had training on management and counteraction to cyber incidents against critical communication and information systems.

The Ministry of National Defence will continue to organise national cyber security exercises
on a regular basis and will promote continuous improvement of the cyber security skills not only in
the national but international cyber security exercises as well.
13. The European Union (EU) and the North

Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) acknowledge
that cyberspace has been increasingly used as a
separate military space or as a tool of hybrid warfare. Cyber tools may be used to sabotage activities
of a country’s critical information infrastructure
(e.g., the cyber-attack which took place in one of
Iran’s nuclear energy objects in 2010), might adversely affect national and public security (e.g., the
cyber-attacks on Ukraine’s power plants in 2015
and 2016), economy and social welfare. For this reason, protecting the national cyberspace is a matter
of national security for every country.

In accordance with the decision adopted during the NATO Warsaw Summit 2016 where cyber
space was recognised as the fifth domain of warfare the Lithuanian Armed Forces have become the
main cyberspace defence entity for the Republic of
Lithuania. The strengthening of cyber defence in
order to prevent military cyber threats and effectively manage cyber incidents is a prerequisite for
ensuring vital and primary interests of national security. To fulfil the objectives set for the Lithuanian
Armed Forces, national cyber defence capabilities
will be developed by ensuring interaction between
the Lithuanian Armed Forces and the country’s civil
capabilities, also capabilities of the Lithuanian
Armed Forces to ensure reliable deterrence of aggressors in cyber space. In case of failure to ensure
effective deterrence, the Lithuanian Armed Forces
would defend the Republic of Lithuania by using
military cyber security measures acting autonomously and in cooperation with allies.


-----

N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 9

14. Objectives for achieving the first target of the Strategy:


14.1. The first objective
**_of the first target_** is to develop
a systematic approach to
cyber security and preventive
activities.

14.2. The second objective
**_of the first target is to impro-_**
ve the efficiency of the cyber
security policy making and
implementation by reducing
administrative burden falling
on cyber security entities.

14.3. The third objective
**_of the first target_** is to promote
national cyber security exercises
and participation in international exercises.

14.4. The fourth objective
**_of the first target is to develop_**
cyber defence capabilities
of the country.


This objective will be accomplished by improving the methods of cyber security risk identification, evaluation and forecast; by building up a picture of cyber security identification
and a risk map to reveal the risks typically encountered in
particular sectors; by establishing regional cyber security
centre and state-controlled electronic communications network with a set of cyber security measures, linking state and
municipal institutions, agencies and state companies, which
perform state mobilisation tasks for ensuring vital state
functions; by carrying out surveys on cyber security state,
progress reports or maturity assessments; by implementing
other measures and actions in order to enhance cyber security level and preventive activities.

This objective will be implemented by improving legal framework in the field of cyber security; by preparing standardised but differentiated cyber security requirements; by analysing best practice, standards applicable to ensuring cyber
security; by encouraging cyber security entities to follow
such standards; by establishing a national integrated crisis
management mechanism to ensure cooperation among concerned parties at all levels; by updating the cyber security
risk assessment system; by assessing the methodological
possibilities to monitor and control the funds which are necessary to ensure cyber security while establishing priorities
for the funds’ allocation and use; by implementing any other
measures of cyber security policy making and implementation.

This objective will be implemented by periodically organising complex national cyber security exercises and participating in international cyber security exercises organised by
the EU, NATO and other countries; by incorporating lessons
learned from national and international exercises into management of situations, incident assessment, information
communication and other activities.

This objective will be achieved by ensuring effective interaction between the Lithuanian Armed Forces and civilian
cyber defence capabilities; by developing cyber defence
capabilities; and by providing assistance to other state and
municipal institutions and agencies.


-----

10 N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y

## Cybercrimes


15. **The second target of the Strategy is to**
ensure the prevention and investigation of cybercrimes.

16. Cybercrimes have a negative impact on the
global economy. According to research[2], global damage caused by cybercrimes amounts to hundred billions euros a year and has been increasing. Persons
committing cybercrimes are interested not only in
financial details, but also in data, in general. For this
reason, the number of crimes that undermine electronic data and information system security specified in Chapter XXX of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Lithuania has also been steadily growing.
According to the data of the Institutional Register
of Crimes, in 2017, 594 cybercrimes were recorded;
in 2016, 336 offences were recorded. As the European Cybercrime Centre (EC3) operating within the
European Police Office (hereinafter referred to as the
“EC3”) states, cybercrimes are most often encoun

2 Center for Strategic and International Studies, M cAfee (2018). _Economic Impact of Cybercrime – No Slowing_
_Down,_ Cybersecurity Ventures, Herjavec Group (2017). 2017
_Cybercrime Report._

3 Europol’s European Cybercrime Centre (EC3) (2017).
_2017 Internet Organised Crime Threat Assessment (IOCTA)_


tered by those European Union Member States that
have a well-developed broadband infrastructure
and well-functioning online payment systems.[3]

17. Referring to the data of a survey conducted
by PwC in 2018 (Global Economic Crime Survey 2018),
in 2018, fraud crimes committed in cyberspace were
among the most common crimes which caused the
most damage to private sector entities. EC3 forecasts that the rapid development of ICT and methods of social engineering, among other reasons, will
increase the number of cybercrimes. Moreover, cybercrimes which do not necessarily involve the use
of ICT, for instance, fraud or extortion, are “going
digital“. In order to commit cybercrimes or to conceal their traces, the latest ICT solutions, cryptocurrencies and services offered in anonymous networks
are used.
18. The company Cybersecurity Ventures calculated in 2017 that the financial damages caused
by cybercrimes using malware have been increasing
each year. Additionally, they forecast that by the end
of the year 2019, the world would suffer the damage
of more than USD 11 billion due to the spread of ransomware. EC3 predicts that this trend will continue
due to the increase of the Internet of Things (IoT)
devices. Although malware is only one type of cybercrimes, the European Union Agency for Network and


-----

Information Security (ENISA) in its Threat Landscape
Report 2017 which was published in 2018 indicated
that malware is the most frequent cyber threat that
has prevailed in recent years.
19. Crimes related to the sexual exploitation of
children in cyberspace are considered to be the most
harmful and injurious cybercrimes, the spread of
which is prompted by rapidly developing ICT and its
potential. According to the Lithuanian national criminal records register and the Europol, such crimes
have been increasing and spreading in Lithuania[4]
and in Europe.[5] In seeking to prevent crimes related
to the sexual exploitation of children, Lithuania has
transposed Directive 2011/92/EU of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011
on combating the sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children and child pornography, which replaced Council Framework Decision 2004/68/JHA (OJ
2011 L 335, p. 1) into national legislation and on 6 November 2012 ratified the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse dated 25 October 2007.
20. In order to combat international cybercrimes, it is important to develop close cross-border
cooperation and exchange of information, to maintain and deepen agreements and membershipbased relationships. To this end, it is necessary to
have the strong political will to effectively fulfil international obligations and comply with international
standards to ensure cyber security and combat cybercrimes. To express a clear political will, Lithuania
ratified the Convention on Cybercrime of the Council
of Europe of 23 November 2011 (hereinafter referred
to as the “Budapest Convention”) and its additional


N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 11

protocols. In addition, Lithuania transposed Directive 2013/40/EU of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 12 August 2013 on attacks against information systems, replacing Council Framework Decision 2005/222/JHA (OJ 2013 L 218, p. 8) into national
legislation. Obligations are successfully fulfilled
on both legal and practical levels by cooperating
with the International Criminal Police Organisation
(hereinafter referred to as the “INTERPOL”) and the
INTERPOL Global Complex for Innovation (IGCI), the
Europol and EC3 and the European Union’s Judicial
Cooperation Unit (Eurojust). Moreover, Lithuania has
taken part in the activities of continuously operating contact points of the network specialising in the
field of cybercrime investigation which was founded
on the basis of the European Judicial Network (EJN)
and in accordance with the Budapest Convention.
21. Since cybercrimes continue to evolve,
personnel of law enforcement authorities must be
equipped with necessary skills to perform their allocated tasks. The appropriate competences of employees and their superior officers of the prosecution authorities and the courts must be taken into
account as well. In relation to the investigation of
cybercrimes, the competence of law enforcement
authorities is crucial in order to detect, capture and
investigate electronic evidence.

4 According to the data of the Lithuanian national
criminal records register, in 2016, 123 crimes were registered as per definition provided in Article 309(2) of the
Criminal Code, in 2017 – 132.

5 European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation (Europol) (2017). Europol Review 2016–2017.


22. Objectives for achieving the second target of the Strategy:


22.1. The first objective
**_of the second target_** is to develop capabilities and capacities
of the country for combating
cybercrimes.


This objective will be attained by improving the legal framework, by further strengthening the professional capacity of
law enforcement authorities, by creating information and/
or analysis systems, putting in practice advanced operational methods, procedures and technical tools specifically
designed to combat cybercrimes.


22.2. The second objective
**_of the second target_** is to
strengthen the prevention and
control of cybercrimes.


This objective will be implemented by promoting the society’s culture of self-protection and responsible behaviour
in cyberspace; by increasing the operational effectiveness
of law enforcement authorities and ensuring effective international cooperation while investigating cybercrimes; by
developing effective cooperation between law enforcement
authorities and academia, private and public sector representatives and society.


-----

12 N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y

## Cyber Security Culture and Innovation


23. **The third target of the Strategy is to pro-**
mote cybersecurity culture and innovation.

24. It is impossible to avoid cyber incidents in
the modern-day world, even if all existing cyber security measures are to be applied. For this reason,
public and private sector representatives must improve cybersecurity culture of their employees. According to IBM report published in 2017[6], the number
of cyber incidents caused due to employee negligence has been growing (in 2017, the number of such
cyber incidents constituted more than 20%, in 2016 –
15%). More than 30% of these cyber incidents happened because employees opened malicious links
or documents sent to them via email. In Lithuania,
the number of emails created using social engineering methods has also been rising.[7]
25. According to the European Innovation

Scoreboard dated 2018, private sector representatives in Europe have been increasing their focus on
ICT training of their employees. While Europe as a
whole has an average index of 21%, in Lithuania it is
slightly greater than 10%. Civil servants in Lithuania
are given opportunities to improve their skills in the
field of cyber security and the number of civil serv

ants who have taken cybersecurity courses is growing annually. According to Civil Service Department,
there were 146 such civil servants in 2015, 249 – in
2015 and 289 – in 2017. Routine and regularly updated training courses for private and public sector
employees would increase employees’ duty of care
as well as the overall cybersecurity culture.
26. Efficient and regular dissemination of information on the latest cyber incidents and other
factors that may cause personal data breach or pose
a risk of becoming a victim of cybercrime is a key
measure for strengthening cybersecurity culture
of the Lithuanian people. According to the special
Eurobarometer survey 464a which reveals Europeans’ attitude towards cybersecurity, only 16% of the
internet users in Lithuania believe that the risk of
becoming a victim of a cybercrime has not been increasing (the European Union average is 11%). Nevertheless, as 49% of the internet users in Lithuania

6 _IBM. IBM X-Force Threat Intelligence Index 2018_
_(2018)._

7 National Cyber Security Centre under the Ministry
of National Defence (2018). National Cyber Security Status
_Report 2017._


-----

believe that they are not sufficiently aware of the full
risk of cybercrimes (the European Union average is
51%), the dissemination of information should be increased in this regard.
27. There have been a number of surveys and
forecasts conducted worldwide which indicate that
people lack cyber security skills[8] and that this will
continue to be true in the future. Quality public education which corresponds with the needs of labour
market is a tool that can contribute to professional
competence. Presently, cyber security programmes
are offered by four universities in Lithuania; yet according to the results of the survey titled “The ICT
Specialists in Lithuania: Situation in the Labour Market and Employers’ Needs” that was carried out by
the association Infobalt and the public institution
Invest Lithuania, current labour market needs are
not met. In order to reduce the gap between supply and demand of cybersecurity specialists, the
existing cybersecurity study programmes must be
improved and new study programmes shall be established.

To boost cybersecurity culture, children and
pupils should be provided with the fundamental
knowledge of cybersecurity under nursery,  preschool, primary and/or secondary education programmes since ICT is used to ensure educational
and learning processes.

In the context of implementing programme
of the Government of the Republic of Lithuania on
reorganisation of the system of teachers’ up-skilling
and training, efforts should be made to improve
teachers’ qualifications in the area of cybersecurity.
Having the opportunity and ability to expand and
deepen their cybersecurity knowledge, teachers of
different educational areas would not only be able
to educate young people better, but would contribute to the development of knowledge and innovation based society and further cybersecurity awareness raising as well.
28. Many cybersecurity experts[9] estimate that
by the year 2019, there will be at least 1.5 million
employment vacancies worldwide for cybersecurity
professionals. The study “ICT Specialists in Lithuania: Situation in the Labour Market and Employers’
Needs”, conducted by the association Infobalt and

8 ISACA. State of Cybersecurity 2018 (2018), Information Security Community on LinkedIn, (ISC)[2]. Cybersecurity
_Trends. 2017 Spotlight Report (2017).2017 Spotlight Report_
_(2017)._

9 Silensec. Addressing the Cyber Security Skills Gap
_(2017)._

10 Indeed. _Indeed Spotlight: The Global Cybersecu-_
_rity Skills Gap (2017),_ Information Security Community on
LinkedIn, (ISC)[2]. Cybersecurity Trends. 2017 Spotlight Report
_(2017.)2017 Spotlight Report (2017)._


N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 13

public organisation Invest Lithuania in 2018, revealed
that while there are 22,600 ICT specialists in Lithuania, about 13,300 more would be needed within the
following three years. Regrettably, researchers provided no details about this shortage of cybersecurity
specialists in Lithuania, but it may be assumed that
they are in high demand. To address this shortage,
cybersecurity skills that cybersecurity specialists are
expected to have in Lithuania first must be identified because the demand for cybersecurity professionals may vary in different countries and problems
related to the lack of cybersecurity skills may differ
according to the conclusions of studies carried out
in other countries[10].
29. With regard to rapid development of cyberspace, various opportunities for innovation, which,
in turn, drives economic and productivity growth,
have emerged. This prompts the creation of new and
better jobs, increases social mobility and responds
to social and security challenges globally.

Lithuania joined the European Union a relatively short time ago, for this reason, there is neither
long tradition of cybersecurity scientific research
nor education, whereas they are present in other EU
Member States. The European Union has provided
Lithuania with a great opportunity to promote investment in scientific research through the general
research and innovation programme Horizon 2020
(2014–2020). Through this programme, Lithuania may
contribute to the development of the digital economy and defence policy on both the national and
the EU level. However, all efforts of the state in this
direction must be focused on support measures that
promote international networking in finding potential employees and partners. This would stimulate
private sector investment in the R&D and innovation areas, new technologies, tools and services and
in the cyber security area as well. The designing of
innovative cyber security products would not only
provide additional support and leverage for the
competitiveness of the Lithuanian industry, but it
is a key factor in responding to modern cyber incidents. It is also important to encourage Lithuania’s
academics to participate in joint international academic publications in the field of cyber security, to
attract as many students as possible to high-level
R&D projects that focus on cyber security, to promote public-private partnership and academia cooperation and to increase the number of foreign
doctoral students in the area of cyber security.
30. According to the data from the European

Innovation Scoreboard 2018, in comparison with
other EU Member States, Lithuania is a moderate innovator but it has advanced considerably in terms
of innovation and improvement of the ecosystem of
innovation.[11] In the European Union, the private sec

-----

14 N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y

tor still allocates insufficient resources to innovation compared to its rivals beyond European Union
borders. No reliable measurements of the cyber security market have yet been carried out in Lithuania,
but it is acknowledged that this market has been
growing and, for this reason, innovation would help
strengthen Lithuania’s competitive position in the
development of new innovative products and services. This synergy could be attained by combining
initiatives of innovation and general national policies while promoting long-term science, technology
and innovation development.


31. Lithuania’s regulatory and supervisory environment is favourable to financial services and
promotes innovation in the finance sector. Pursuant
to the data of Lithuania Fintech Report 2017, there
were 117 financial technology enterprises operating
in Lithuania in 2017. The development of financial
technology is one of the strategic activity directions
for the Bank of Lithuania and its activity in one of
the most promising and prospective areas of financial technology innovation, blockchain technology,
will further drive innovation in financial technology
field.


32. Objectives for achieving the third target of the Strategy:


32.1. The first objective
**_of the third target_** is to develop
scientific research and activities that create high added
value in the area of cyber
security.

32.2. The second objecti**_ve of the third target_** is to
develop creativity, advanced
capabilities and cyber security skills and competence
that meet market needs.

32.3. The third objective
**_of the third target is to_**
promote public, private, and
academic partnerships while
creating innovation in cybersecurity field.


This objective will be implemented by creating favourable conditions for the creation of new, advanced cybersecurity initiatives; by promoting growth of the cybersecurity market, by
expanding export of cybersecurity services to foreign markets;
by developing cyber security sector of financial technology and
by conducting research.

This objective will be implemented by creating a cybersecurity
competence model; by establishing cybersecurity competence
standards; by developing systems of training, accreditation and
certification oriented towards the needs of the labour market;
by attracting, nurturing and retaining talent; by creating training and testing environments for cybersecurity; by teaching
newcomers and providing retraining opportunities for ICT workers; and by training employees working with sensitive data.

This objective will be implemented by identifying the common
needs of the private and public sectors and their importance in
relation to scientific cybersecurity research; by creating technical measures, methods and other resources; and by developing
the requisite expertise for solving cybersecurity problems or
fulfilling any other specific tasks for cybersecurity.


11 European Commission. 2018. The European Innova_tion Scoreboard (2018)._


-----

N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 15


-----

16 N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y

## Private-Public  Partnership


33. The fourth target of the Strategy is to promote close PPP.

34. In modern states, in which the broadband
infrastructures are well developed, public sector representatives as well as managers of critical
information infrastructures who are often private
sector representatives, are not always able to combat cyber incidents independently. Thus cooperation between public and private sectors becomes
inevitable in order to ensure comprehensive cybersecurity. The PPP success factor is a fully-fledged
partnership, which entails trust and mutual benefit. Thus public and private sectors should strive
to work together to this end.
35. The Cyber Security Council set up following the approval of Resolution No. 422 of the Government of the Republic of Lithuania of 23 April
2015 “On the Approval of Establishment of a Cyber
Security Council and its Rules of Procedure” is an
example of PPP on a political level. All efforts must
be made to effectively enjoy the rights of a Cyber


Security Council that are defined in the Law on Cyber Security.
36. To ensure PPP, the Cyber Security Information Network (hereinafter referred to as the
“Network”) is used. The aim of the Network is information sharing, exchange of cybersecurity recommendations, instructions, and technical solutions,
and other measures which could help ensure cybersecurity of the Network members. It is necessary to integrate appropriate measures in the Network for more effective and trusted cooperation
among the Network members.
37. The advantages of ICT are beyond question in the 21[st] century, but the issue of how to
effectively address vulnerabilities in ICT systems
arises. Security vulnerabilities may be detected by
the persons who may have different goals; however, in order to develop a responsible disclosure
approach, it is important to give a particular opportunity to a person, who has been able to identify a vulnerability and wants to contribute to security of ICT systems, to cooperate with cybersecurity


-----

entities whose security vulnerability was disclosed.
Establishment and public announcement of a
formalised procedure for responsible disclosure
would contribute to the protection of cybersecurity entities from possible damage caused by cy

N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 17

ber incidents or could considerably diminish such
damage. This would also enhance cybersecurity of
the country and would give more opportunities for
PPP.


38. Objectives for the attainment of the fourth target of the Strategy:


38.1. The first objective
**_of the fourth target_** is to
improve coordination of PPP.

38.2. The second objective
**_of the fourth target is_**
to increase cybersecurity maturity of small and
medium-sized enterprises
(hereinafter SMEs).


This objective will be implemented by creating a sustainable
PPP model in the field of cyber security; by identifying responsibilities and capabilities related to cybersecurity; by improving effective exchange of relevant information about cyber
threats, cyber incidents and lessons learned; by supporting an
early warning system; and by creating new or improving the
existing communication techniques and processes.

This objective will be implemented by encouraging SMEs to
verify their cybersecurity state and address cybersecurity gaps.


38.3. The third objective
**_of the fourth target_** is to
develop a responsible vulnerability disclosure practice.


This objective will be implemented by establishing operational
principles, methods, technical capabilities or other measures
designed for this purpose.


-----

18 N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y

## International  Cooperation


39. **The fifth target of the Strategy is to en-**
hance international cooperation and ensure the
fulfilment of international obligations in the field
of cybersecurity.

40. Lithuania’s national security and the prosperity of the Lithuanian society depend directly on
stable, easily and freely accessible and secure cyberspace. Considering the fact that modern cyber
threats and risks can easily cross national borders,
Lithuania will seek to strengthen its national cybersecurity by actively cooperating with bilateral and
multilateral partners and by participating in international forums designed for resolving problems related to cybersecurity and internet governance.
41. Lithuania is eager to become an active
partner in the international community which seeks


to resolve cyber security and internet governance
problems. Lithuania is active in building cooperation
with partners and allies by signing an international
agreement for legal regulation of cyberspace which
shall comply with the provisions of international
law, standards and principles that apply to activities
in cyberspace in relation to protection of the open
Internet principle as well as other principles on fundamental freedoms and human rights.
Lithuania advocates more close and harmonious cooperation with NATO and the European Union
in the cybersecurity field with the aim of avoiding
overlap of functions and activities. Lithuania shall
also strengthen bilateral political and technical cooperation with other countries which adhere to the
principles of democracy, especially, with the United
States of America.


42. Objectives for the fulfilment of the fifth target of the Strategy:


42.1. The first objective
**_of the fifth target_** is to develop
international, cross-border
cooperation, including cooperation with the countries
of the Baltic region in the field
of cyber security.


This objective will be fulfilled by participating in the activities
of the European Union, NATO, the United Nations, the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), organisations of the Baltic region and other international organisations.


-----

N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 19


42.2. The second objective
**_of the fifth target is to strengt-_**
hen international cybersecurity
capabilities and capacities.

42.3. The third objective
**_of the fifth target_** is to further
develop the dialogue with
the United States of America
in the field of cyber defence
and to strive for the involvement of the United States
of America in Lithuania’s
cybersecurity projects.


This objective will be implemented by initiating and leading the
Permanent Structured Cooperation in Security and Defence Policy (PESCO) project for improvement of cooperation in security
and defence area in terms of those EU member states that have
military capabilities which meet higher criteria and are bound
by greater commitments.

This objective will be implemented by developing bilateral cooperation between Lithuania and the USA at technical and political levels and by pursuing activities that would strengthen Lithuania’s cyber defence and cybersecurity capabilities.


-----

-----

N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 21

## Implementation  of and Responsibility  for the Strategy


43. The Government of the Republic of Lithuania shall approve an inter-institutional operational plan where particular measures and funds
will be foreseen in order to implement the targets
and objectives of the Strategy. The Ministry of National Defence shall coordinate the drafting of this
plan jointly with the NCSC. Ministries, other state
or municipal authorities, agencies or organisations
specified in the inter-institutional operational plan
of the Strategy shall, within the limits of their competence, participate in the implementation of the
Strategy (hereinafter referred to as the “Strategy
Implementers”).
44. Non-governmental organisations, representatives of public and private stakeholders and
Lithuania’s academia may contribute to the Strategy’s implementation and the fulfilment of its goals
and objectives.
45. Each year the Strategy shall be implemented using funds allocated from the Republic
of Lithuania state budget, municipal budgets, the
European Union and other international funds, and
other legally obtained sources. The responsibility for planning of the required financial resources
shall be assumed by the Strategy Implementers and
shall be carried out according to the principle of
subsidiarity as defined in the Law on Cybersecurity.
46. The accomplishment of the Strategy’s
goals shall be assessed according to the criteria for
implementation of the Strategy and the targeted
values indicated in the Annex to the Strategy. Monitoring and assessment of the implementation of
the Strategy will be also based on publicly available data derived from the Department of Statistics,
Eurostat, sociological surveys and other surveys.
The Ministry of National Defence, the NCSC and the
Cyber Security Council shall monitor the results of
the Strategy’s implementation.
47. The Strategy Implementers shall provide
the NCSC with information on the course of the implementation of the Strategy and its effectiveness


along with supporting documents after the end of
a year but no later than before 15 January of the
following year. This information may be accompanied where appropriate with proposals for revision
of the Strategy or its implementation documents.
If requested by the NCSC, the Strategy Implementers are obliged to submit any other information
required for monitoring of the Strategy implementation results. All stakeholders are entitled to propose updates to the provisions of the Strategy at
any time during its implementation.
48. After receipt of the information specified in Paragraph 47 of the Strategy, the NCSC shall
provide the Ministry of National Defence with processed data on the state of implementation of the
Strategy’s targets and objectives of the previous
year and shall also forward its suggestions and
indicated problematic issues which hinder the implementation of the Strategy no later than 1 February of the current year.
49. The Ministry of National Defence shall
summarise the information received over the previous year and the data about the course of implementation as well as efficiency of the Strategy
by 1 March each year. Aggregated information on
the annual implementation of the Strategy shall
then be presented to the Cyber Security Council
and submitted to the Government. The Government shall report to the Seimas of the Republic of
Lithuania with regard to the implementation of the
Strategy annually by providing an Annual Report on
the State of National Security and Development.
50. All public information related to the annual and final Strategy implementation assessments shall be announced on the NCSC website.
51. The NCSC shall draft a final assessment
of the implementation of the Strategy six months
before the Strategy’s implementation deadline and
shall submit it to the Ministry of National Defence.
It shall be then forwarded to the Cyber Security
Council and the Government.


-----

22 N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y

### Annex to the National Cyber Security Strategy

## Criteria for Assessing  the Implementation of the National  Cyber Security Strategy and the List  of Targeted Values

|Item Number|Name of the Evaluation Criterion|Value of the Evaluation Criterion|Col4|Col5|Responsible state institution|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Initial known value in 2017|2021|2023||
|The main purpose of the National Cyber Security Strategy (hereinafter referred to as the “Strategy”) is to provide the Lithuanian people with the opportunity to explore the potential of information and communications technology (ICT) by identifying cyber incidents timely and effec- tively, by preventing cyber incidents and their recurrence, and by managing the impact of cybersecurity breaches.||||||
||Position of the Republic of Lithuania in the global cyber security index (not lower than specified)|57|30|20|Ministry of National Defence|
|1.|Level of cyber incident threat (not higher than specifei d)|3.4|3.2|3|Ministry of National Defence|
|The frist target of the Strategy to strengthen cyber security in the country and to develop cyber defence capabilities.||||||
|2.|Percentage of cyber security entities that meet cyber security requirements (not lower than specifei d)|*|35|50|Ministry of National Defence|
|3.|Percentage of public sector websites that are difficult to hack (not lower than specifei d)|25|28|32|Ministry of National Defence|
|4.|Percentage of managers of critical information infrastructure and state information resources that participate in national cyber security exercises (not lower than specifei d)|42|60|70|Ministry of National Defence|
|5.|Percentage of modernised cyber security and cyber defence capabilities of the state (not lower than specifei d)|Restrict- ed (R)|R|R|Ministry of National Defence|
|The second target of the Strategy is to ensure the prevention and investigation of cybercrimes.||||||
|6.|Percentage of police offci ers, public prosecutors, specialists and experts who are involved in the investigation of cybercrimes and have complet- ed respective training (not lower than specifei d)|*|70|90|Ministry of National Defence in coopera- tion with the Strategy Implementers|
|7.|Number of created or implemented informa- tion/analysis systems, procedures and techni- cal tools specifically designed to combat cyber- crimes, in units (not lower than specified)|*|2|5|Ministry of National Defence in coopera- tion with the Strategy Implementers|


-----

N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 23

|Item Number|Name of the Evaluation Criterion|Value of the Evaluation Criterion|Col4|Col5|Responsible state institution|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Initial known value in 2017|2021|2023||
|8.|Number of projects intended for the prevention and control of cybercrimes, expressed in units (not lower than specified)|2|2|2|Ministry of National Defence in coopera- tion with the Strategy Implementers|
|9.|Number of participations in international events and working groups for the prevention and investigation of cybercrimes, expressed in units (not lower than specified)|12|14|15|Ministry of National Defence in coopera- tion with the Strategy Implementers|
|10.|Number of participations in international operations to investigate cybercrimes (not lower than specified)|3|4|6|Ministry of National Defence in coopera- tion with the Strategy Implementers|
|The third target of the Strategy is to promote cybersecurity culture and innovation.||||||
|11.|Total number of projects that have promoted innovation in the cybersecurity field since 2018|0|5|10|Ministry of National Defence in coopera- tion with the Strategy Implementers|
|12.|Amount of investment in the promotion of digital literacy culture and the development of knowledge related to cybersecurity and scientific research, thousand Eur (not lower than specified)|*|1, 000|2, 000|Ministry of National Defence in coopera- tion with the Strategy Implementers|
|13.|Number of persons who have obtained qualifications in cyber security, in units (not lower than specified)|33|200|400|Ministry of National Defence in coopera- tion with the Strategy Implementers|
|14.|Percentage of public servants and employees of public institutions who were trained via the module of the State Civil Servants’ Register and Public Service Management Information System (not lower than specified)|0|10|70|Ministry of National Defence in coopera- tion with the Strategy Implementers|
|The fourth target of the Strategy is to promote close PPP.||||||
|15.|Number of PPP models in the field of cyber security, expressed in units|0|0|1|Ministry of National Defence in coopera- tion with the Strategy Implementers|
|16.|Percentage of managers of state information resources and of critical information infrastruc- tures incorporated into the Cyber Security Information Network (not lower than specified)|36|86|90|Ministry of National Defence|
|17.|Number of measures designed to improve the cybersecurity status of SMEs, expressed in units (not smaller than specified)|0|4|6|Ministry of National Defence in coopera- tion with the Strategy Implementers|
|18.|Number of measures designed to develop a responsible vulnerability disclosure practice, expressed in units (not smaller than specified)|0|1|2|Ministry of National Defence in coopera- tion with the Strategy Implementers|


-----

24 N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y

**Name of the Evaluation Criterion**

19. Percentage of participation in the meetings,
forums or other events related to cyber
security matters organised by the EU, NATO
and the Baltic Region to which invitations were
received (not lower than specified)

20. Percentage of participation in the meetings
of international organisations for cyber
incidents’ investigation to which invitations
were received (not lower than specified)

21. Number of cooperation agreements signed
with international organisations, European
Union Member States, NATO Member States,
countries in the Baltic region and other
countries in the field of cybersecurity,
in units (not lower than specified)

    - Initial value of a respective criterion for the assessment of implementation of the Strategy is not known
because authorities which coordinate the compliance with
a certain assessment criterion have no information on the
values of these assessment criteria. Data on the value of
an assessment criterion will be collected in 2019.

|Item Number|Name of the Evaluation Criterion|Value of the Evaluation Criterion|Col4|Col5|Responsible state institution|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Initial known value in 2017|2021|2023||
|The fifth target of the Strategy is to enhance international cooperation and ensure the fulfilment of international obligations in the field of cybersecurity.||||||
|19.|Percentage of participation in the meetings, forums or other events related to cyber security matters organised by the EU, NATO and the Baltic Region to which invitations were received (not lower than specified)|25|50|70|Ministry of National Defence in coopera- tion with the Strategy Implementers|
|20.|Percentage of participation in the meetings of international organisations for cyber incidents’ investigation to which invitations were received (not lower than specified)|70|85|100|Ministry of National Defence|
|21.|Number of cooperation agreements signed with international organisations, European Union Member States, NATO Member States, countries in the Baltic region and other countries in the field of cybersecurity, in units (not lower than specified)|2|1|2|Ministry of National Defence in coopera- tion with the Strategy Implementers|


-----

N A T I O N A L C Y B E R S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 25


-----

**N A T I O N A L C Y B E R**
**S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y**

Managing editor Aušra Pipirienė

Editor Julija Zujevaitė-Rinė

Graphic designer Aida Janonytė

30.05.2019. Circulation 40 units. Order GL-414.

Ministry of National Defence of the Republic of Lithuania,

Totorių St. 25/3, LT-01121 Vilnius

Layout by the Visual Information Section

of the General Affairs Department of the Ministry of National Defence,

Totorių St. 25/3, LT-01121 Vilnius.

Printed by the Military Cartography Centre of the Lithuanian Armed Forces,

Muitinės St., Domeikava, LT-54359 Kaunas District.

The bibliographic information about the publication is
available in the National Bibliographic Data Bank (NBDB)
of the Martynas Mažvydas National Library of Lithuania.


ISBN 978-609-412-164-7


-----

