SECOND
INVESTIGATION
DEPARTMENT STATE SECURITY
UNDER THE DEPARTMENT OF
MINISTRY OF THE REPUBLIC OF
NATIONAL DEFENCE LITHUANIA

## NATIONAL  THREAT ASSESSMENT

# 2020


-----

SECOND
INVESTIGATION
DEPARTMENT
UNDER THE
MINISTRY OF
NATIONAL DEFENCE


STATE SECURITY
DEPARTMENT OF
THE REPUBLIC OF
LITHUANIA


## NATIONAL  THREAT ASSESSMENT
# 2020


-----

### CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION 3

SUMMARY 4

REGIONAL SECURITY 8

MILITARY SECURITY 19


ACTIVITIES OF HOSTILE INTELLIGENCE AND
SECURITY SERVICES


26


PROTECTION OF CONSTITUTIONAL ORDER 37

INFORMATION SECURITY 40

ECONOMIC AND ENERGY SECURITY 48

TERRORISM AND MIGRATION 55

GLOBAL SECURITY 60


-----

### INTRODUCTION

The National Security Threat Assessment by the Second Investigation Depart
ment under the Ministry of National Defence (AOTD) and the State Security

Department of the Republic of Lithuania (VSD) is presented to the public in

accordance with the Articles 8 and 26 of the Law on Intelligence of the Repub
lic of Lithuania. The document provides consolidated, unclassified assessment

of threats and risks to national security of the Republic of Lithuania prepared

by both intelligence services.

The document assesses events, processes and trends that make the biggest

influence on national security situation in the Republic of Lithuania. Based

on them and considering the long-term trends affecting national security, the

document provides the assessment of major challenges that the Lithuanian

national security is to face in the near term (2020–2021). The assessments of

long-term trends project the perspective up to 10 years.

The assessment is based on information available before 10 December 2019.

The table below outlines the language of probability and definition of terms

used in this assessment:

|Short term: 0–6 mont|hs Near term: 6 mont|hs – 2 years Mid term:|3–5 years Long term: 6–10 years|
|---|---|---|---|


< 25 % 25–50 % 50–75 % > 75 %

UNLIKELY POSSIBLE LIKELY HIGHLY LIKELY


-----

### SUMMARY

 **The main threat to Lithuania’s national security is Russia’s foreign and**

**security policies driven by the Kremlin’s desire to ensure the regime’s sta-**

**bility and demonstrate its indispensability to domestic audience. While dis-**

satisfaction with declining living standards and actions of authoritarian regime

in Russia has been on the rise, even the largest protests in Moscow in recent

years have failed to mobilise a largely passive society.

 **Russia’s increasing military potential and activity in the Western Military**

**District and Kaliningrad region, as well as its deepening military integration**

**with Belarus, has a negative impact on Lithuania’s military security. Russia**

is consistently strengthening its conventional and nuclear capabilities, deve
loping new armaments and conducting large-scale exercises. Russia’s mili
tary potential and the rapid centralized decision-making create a significant

advantage for Russia over Lithuania and other neighbouring states.

 **The Russian intelligence and security services that are closely cooperating**

**with the Belarusian intelligence and security services pose the main intelli-**

**gence threat to Lithuania. The system of free electronic visas to Kaliningrad**

and St. Petersburg allows Russian intelligence services to collect information

from visiting tourists and to look for recruitment targets. Russian intelligence

services not only actively collect intelligence information related to Lithuania,

but also seek to carry out influence activities through the Russian compatriot

community in Lithuania.


-----

 **Ongoing malicious use of Russian and Chinese cyber capabilities is being**

**observed in Lithuanian cyberspace.** The biggest threat to the security of

Lithuanian information systems, and the information stored in them, is the

cyber espionage of the Russian intelligence services. The development of 5G

technology without sufficient focus on the trustworthiness of the IT service or

product provider may become a new risk factor.

 **In the information domain, events that underpin Lithuania’s statehood**

**and testify to its resistance to the Soviet occupation are the main targets of**

**the Russian propaganda and its history policy. For this reason, Russian propa-**

ganda seeks to convince foreign and domestic audiences that those convicted

during the case of January 1991 coup case are unduly persecuted political pri
soners.

 **The biggest risk to Lithuania’s energy independence comes from Rus-**

**sia’s aim to maintain its dominance over the Baltic energy markets. Russian**

energy companies seek to establish themselves in the Lithuanian liquefied

natural gas market and try to adapt to new conditions shaped by Lithua
nian projects ensuring energy independence. The Belarusian nuclear power

plant under construction in the vicinity of Lithuania does not comply with

international safety standards. Russian State Atomic Energy Corporation

‘Rosatom’ ignores unfavourable findings of international and Belarusian

experts, neglects demands of construction supervisory bodies and seeks to

cover up incidents.


-----

SUMMARY

 **Russia seeks to expand its influence in the West through parliamentary**

**diplomacy.** In bilateral and multilateral parliamentary diplomacy fora, the

Kremlin looks for foreign politicians and public figures to represent its posi
tion internationally and to influence political processes in their own countries.

Moscow’s main goals are to legitimize the results of its aggression against

Ukraine and to incite disagreements among Western countries about the pol
icy of sanctions against Russia.

 **The Commonwealth of Independent States remains the key area for Russia**

**in terms of maintaining its influence.** Russia’s negotiations with Belarus on

energy cooperation and deeper integration shift to political pressure. Despite

Minsk’s relative success in delaying decisions on further integration, Belarus’

financial and economic dependence on Russia enables Moscow to pursue

deeper political integration.

 **In order to regain its global power status, Russia attempts to discredit**

**Western policies in geopolitically important regions and expand its influence**

**there. The Kremlin tries to halt the Western integration of Ukraine, Moldova**

and Georgia and bring them back into the Russian sphere of influence. Russia

expands its influence in the Middle East, North and Central Africa, South Amer
ica, and the Arctic.


-----

 **China expands its influence around the world by consolidating support on**

**international arena for its global political agenda. China’s pursuit of techno-**

logical advantage and its penetrating investment activities increase the vul
nerability of other states and pose the risk of losing control over the criti
cal infrastructure. Russia’s confrontation with the West in international arena

encourages Moscow to coordinate its interests with China. These countries

maintain close political and military relations and coordinate positions on

international issues.

 **The level of terrorist threat in Lithuania remains low. While the number of**

terrorist attacks is on the decline in the European Union, ISIL and Al Qaeda

continue to pose a major terrorist threat. The change of the ISIL leader has had

little effect on the viability of the organization. ISIL still seeks to fulfil its vision

of a ‘caliphate’, continues its anti-Western propaganda, and incites extremists

and supporters online to independent attacks in Western countries. The threat

of terrorist attacks by right-wing extremists in Europe is increasing.


-----

### REGIONAL SECURITY

_REUTERS / Scanpix_


-----

Why Russia poses a threat to Lithuania?

Russia’s foreign and security policies pose a threat to Lithuania’s national

security. In their pursuit Russia seeks to: 1) undermine the sovereignty of

other states and increase its influence there; 2) weaken NATO and the EU,

confront their policies, and sow discord among Allies; 3) replace international

system based on the rule of law with ‘pragmatic’ agreements made behind

closed doors; 4) develop offensive capabilities of its armed forces and

intelligence services, increase the effectiveness of their use against

foreign countries.

Russia’s foreign and security policies are driven by the interests of the Kremlin

and its threat perception. The Kremlin’s fundamental objective is to ensure

stability of the regime. The Russian political and military authorities consider

that the West seeks to impose a regime change. Therefore, the Kremlin

seeks to halt NATO enlargement, restrict the exposure of Russian society to

democratic political culture, and limit the activities of civil movements and

media critical of the regime.

Moscow sees international relations as an arena of geopolitical competition

between the great powers and their alliances. Moscow considers it necessary

to expand its sphere of influence at the expense of its perceived opponents.

The Kremlin sees the development of Russia’s geopolitical influence as

securing its national interests and presents this to the domestic audience as

evidence of the regime’s effectiveness and indispensability.

The regime effectively combines political and diplomatic activities with

economic and military clout. By providing attractive offers for hydrocarbons,

arms or other trade deals, the Kremlin is increasing political dependence

of other countries on Russia. Moscow uses these methods in an attempt

to weaken the unity of NATO and the EU, to undermine the rules based

international order, and to secure its global military presence.

Russia is able to use its military power quickly and efficiently in order to

achieve its political goals, especially in the situations where potential

repercussions do not include unacceptable losses. Russia used such

‘windows of opportunity’ to occupy part of Ukraine and to consolidate its

military presence in Syria. The Kremlin also dispatched its military advisers,


-----

REGIONAL SECURITY

The survival strategy of the Russian regime
is seclusion and repression

The year 2019, especially its second half, was marked by the largest protests in

Russia since 2011 and 2012, when population protested against the falsification

of the parliamentary and presidential elections results. This time, protests also

broke out because of elections, when in mid-July 2019 Moscow City Electoral

Commission refused to register virtually all candidates opposing the regime.

The use of administrative resources in elections is a common practice used

by the Russian authorities. However, this year the refusal to register opposi
tion candidates led to unexpected public resistance. There was outrage over

the undisguised application of double standards by the authorities, which

rejected the majority of signatures submitted by opposition but accepted all

signatures for candidates endorsed by the regime.

Dissatisfaction with the regime in Russia has been on the rise since 2018

when a wave of protests over pension reform occurred. Six months after the

record-breaking victory in presidential elections in March 2018, Vladimir Putin’s

ratings began to decline and the ruling party ‘United Russia’ had one of the

worst performances of the last decade in regional elections.

Citizens’ dissatisfaction with the government is increased by the protracted

stagnation of the Russian economy. While the country’s GDP has been rising

marginally for the last three years, the real income of the Russian popula
tion has been on decline since 2014. In fact, the Kremlin was so fed up with

the pessimistic figures provided by the Russian Federal State Statistics Service

that decided to replace its chief executive and to revamp the methodology for

calculating real income, which was supposedly outdated and did not reflect

the real-life situation. The data since 2013 had to be reviewed and a more

optimistic version of the country’s economic situation was to be presented.

This very much mirrors the use of statistics in Soviet-era propaganda, which

had to prove just how good life was in what was supposedly the most powerful

country in the world.

The regime also responds bureaucratically to the decline of its popularity. In

the 2019 regional elections, a large number of regime-sponsored candidates

campaigned as formally independent candidates in order to disguise their ties


-----

11


Moscow protest participants were massively detained

_AP / Scanpix_

was tightly controlled and critics of the regime, or at least more popular per
sonalities, who could take away votes from regime candidates, were prevented

from running in the elections.

The regime tried to suppress the Moscow protests by creating an atmosphere

of fear. Protest organizers were often detained before protest actions took

place, jailed, and significant financial charges were pressed against them for

alleged damage. Attempts were made to detain as many protesters as possible

and criminal proceedings were launched in an extremely expeditious manner

against those who allegedly used violence against law enforcement officers.

Court proceedings indicated that Russia is becoming a nation-wide surveil
lance state. It has not so far been publicly known, for example, that many

public areas in Moscow are surveilled with facial recognition cameras. The data

collected was used solely for the benefit of the regime – records which could

prove that charges against protesters have been fabricated were not accepted


-----

REGIONAL SECURITY

Russia accused the West of organizing protests in Moscow and has set up

two parliamentary commissions to investigate this. Their main evidence was

the routine embassy safety recommendations to their citizens about places

to be avoided during protests. The organization of Alexei Navalny, one of the

opposition leaders, that has been most actively involved in organizing the pro
tests has been declared a foreign agent and charged with money laundering

from abroad.

The results of the 2019 regional elections confirmed the trend that popular

support for ‘United Russia’ is declining, but not as sharp as to challenge ruling

party’s dominant position. The opposition has been able to mobilize a small

section of the public for protests but has failed to mobilize voters. The intimi
dation tactics of the ruling regime were also effective – the post-election pro
test movement began to focus on attempts to protect persecuted protesters,

but not on claiming further political rights.

The Russian ruling regime is no longer able to offer its citizens the increase in

prosperity and does not have a clear strategy how to halt declining public sup
port – except to restrict political participation and the last vestiges of freedom

of expression. However, it successfully conveys to citizens the idea that politics

is an evil to be avoided. The situation in Russia is similar to the Soviet period

of ‘stagnation’ with paternalistic politics, ritualized political participation, and

indispensable leaders.

The Kremlin exploits interparliamentary diplomacy
to expand contacts and influence

The importance of interparliamentary diplomacy as one of the Kremlin’s foreign

policy tools has been increasing since 2014. As a result of the annexation of

Crimea, and the aggression in eastern Ukraine, many democratic states have

restricted bilateral relations with Russia, and the Kremlin has begun prioritiz
ing other ways to spread its attitudes and influence. The Kremlin assesses that

governments in many Western countries are dominated by anti-Russian parties,

but political representation in the parliaments is more diverse and often include

persons willing to mend ties with the Kremlin. Interparliamentary diplomacy

enables the Kremlin to convey important messages through these individuals,

h b d di b d d i i i di i


-----

13


More than 800 participants from

132 countries, including 41 speakers

of national parliaments and 14

international interparliamentary

organizations, attended the

Second International Forum on the

Development of Parliamentarism in

Moscow in the summer of 2019.

_“Interparliamentary cooperation_

_can and must become one of the_

_cornerstones of international_

_relations.” Chairwoman of the_

Federation Council Valentina

Matviyenko

_duma.gov.ru_

Interparliamentary diplomacy in Russia is a centralized process serving the

interests of the authoritarian regime and not an independent initiative of par
liamentarians. In Russia, foreign policy is strictly coordinated and controlled

by the Presidential Administration. In terms of the functions it actually per
forms, the Parliament – both the State Duma and the Federation Council – is

the rubber-stamp of decisions made in the Kremlin. This is illustrated by the

fact that in 2019 members of the Duma voted against legislative proposals in

less than one percent of all individual votes. It is therefore highly likely that no

parliamentary initiative, especially concerning foreign policy, is implemented

without the knowledge and consent of the Russian Presidential Administration.

Russia exploits interparliamentary cooperation in its bilateral relations with

foreign countries, as well as through active participation in various interna
tional parliamentary structures and through the organization of conferences on

li t i Th St t D h t bli h d i t li t li i


-----

REGIONAL SECURITY

commissions with foreign countries. The Duma is a member of 17 interpar
liamentary assemblies, including the Inter-Parliamentary Orthodox Assembly,

the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), and the Organiza
tion for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) Parliamentary Assembly.

Russia is inviting foreign parliamentarians to Crimea to justify and legitimize

the results of its aggression against Ukraine and to demonstrate to interna
tional and domestic audiences that at least some political forces in the West

support Russia in this conflict. Interparliamentary diplomacy is also often

used to establish informal contacts and to gain direct influence over foreign

politicians while offering them and their families travel arrangements with

hospitality packages, media publicity, and financial support.

Russia exploits contacts for its own interests, even with foreign politicians

who are critical of Russia’s ruling regime. The Kremlin presents any attempt

to engage in dialogue as an alternative to allegedly ineffective policy of con
tainment and sanctions against Russia and seeks to sow discord among allies.

In 2019, Russia regained voting rights in the PACE, which were suspended in

2014 following Russia’s aggression against Ukraine. Dissatisfied with the sus
pension, Russia has repeatedly stressed that membership of the PACE is not

a necessity and has threatened to withdraw from the Council of Europe. But

its actions did not match its rhetoric – Russia has consistently made diplo
matic efforts to bring together a majority in support of its return. The PACE is

the most representative assembly in Europe and Russia seeks to exploit it for

advancing its foreign policy agenda.

To the Russian domestic audiences the return of full rights to the Russian

delegation in the PACE is presented as actual recognition of the annexation

of Crimea and thus a significant victory for Putin’s policy. The composition of

the new Russian delegation at the PACE is also telling. Of the 18 delegation

members, five have direct links to Russian aggression against Ukraine. Duma

members Leonid Slutskiy, Leonid Kalashnikov, Igor Lebedev, and Svetlana Zhu
rova are currently subject to EU sanctions for their active role in supporting the

annexation of Crimea. The delegation also includes senator Vladimir Kozhin

who, as a former influential official of the Presidential Administration, faces US

sanctions for Russian actions in Ukraine. Another senator, Sergey Kislyak, was

Russia’s ambassador to the US from 2008 to 2017 – his activities were exposed


-----

15


Leonid Slutskiy, a member of the Russian delegation to the PACE and

chairman of the Duma’s Committee on International Affairs, actively

cooperates with radical movements across Europe in favor of the Kremlin.

As head of the Russian Peace Foundation (Российский Фонд Мира) he

organizes election observation missions in annexed Crimea.

_TASS / Scanpix_

Belarus-Russia relations: deeper integration
in exchange for economic support

Russia seeks to increase its influence on Belarus by using its weak, non-di
versified and dependent on Russian energy resources economy as the main

lever. Periodically renewed bilateral negotiations on energy cooperation often

evolve into political pressure and confrontation. Moscow ties its economic

support to Belarus to the implementation of the 1999 treaty regarding the


-----

REGIONAL SECURITY

Negotiations for deeper integration between the two countries are complicated

by divergent positions and interests. Belarus seeks first to resolve major bilat
eral economic problems before negotiating any deeper integration. The main

demands of Belarus are compensation for Russia’s gradually implemented tax

reform in the oil sector; supply of natural gas at the Russian domestic market

price; stable and unrestricted export of Belarusian diary and other agricultural

products to Russia; and refinancing of Belarusian debt with new Russian loans.

Meanwhile, Russia seeks closer political integration by imposing unacceptable

conditions on Belarus.

The envisioned integration program covers energy, industry, agriculture, taxa
tion and customs, monetary, social security and labour policies. The program

is expected to be implemented between 2021 and 2023 thus it is highly likely

that in the mid term Russia’s pressure on Belarus will only increase. So far,

Minsk has succeeded in delaying Moscow’s intentions to develop the political

dimension of the Union State which would include the creation of suprana
tional institutions. Due to the conflicting interests, the complexity of the inte
gration objectives, and the ability of Belarus to delay the implementation of

already signed agreements, at least in the near term the Union State project is

unlikely to make any substantial progress.


-----

17


Although Belarus declares foreign trade diversification as its goal, Russia

remains its main trading partner. In order to reduce its dependence on Russia,

Belarus looks for alternative sources of financing and energy supplies, includ
ing cooperation with China on granting loans and with Kazakhstan and other

countries on supply of oil and petroleum products. Nevertheless, in the mid
term Belarus is unlikely to reduce its financial and economic dependence on

Russia. The increase in Russia’s political influence over Belarus, fuelled by this

dependence, will negatively affect regional security.

100 %

EU

Other countries

50 %

Russia

Belarus’ foreign trade
partners (%).

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||
||||||


-----

An undemocratic political system is at the root
of Belarus’ weakness

As expected the Belarusian parliamentary elections in November 2019 –

a rehearsal for the Belarus presidential election in 2020 – did not meet

democratic standards. From the start of the election campaign, opposition

parties faced with unfavourable and discriminatory conditions, opposition
nominated individuals were not allowed to serve as members of electoral

commissions. Currently, political opposition in Belarus is not capable of

posing a more serious challenge to regime’s candidates. This is due to a

longstanding policy of persecution and control of the political opposition,

as well as a lack of unity among regime-critical political organizations.

Unlike in previous elections, no opposition representatives were ‘admitted’

to the country’s parliament. Real democratic change remains a threat to

Lukashenko’s rule, furthermore, president’s longstanding authoritarian

leadership has not only de facto destroyed civil society and rendered other

authorities ineffective, but has also diminished the importance of politics

in general. Perception of politics in Belarus is reduced to routine

management of economic affairs.

In order to maintain power without democratizing the country, the

Belarusian political regime gradually became hostage of its own policies.

Although the president presents himself as a defender of the Belarusian

sovereignty, his longstanding authoritarian policies and procrastination of

necessary structural reforms have weakened Belarus and reduced its ability

to withstand increasing pressure from Moscow.


-----

19


### MILITARY SECURITY

Russian armed forces are gaining strength

Russia steadily increases its military power and uses it to enable foreign and

security policy endeavours. As a result, Russia’s military and security remains

one of the most generously funded sectors and the pace of strengthening the

armed forces is steady – military infrastructure is being developed, new mi
litary units are being created, and the armed forces are being equipped with

modern weaponry and combat equipment. By 2020, a phase of State Armament

Programme will be complete, with the share of new and modernized arma
ment and combat equipment expected to reach 70 percent. The number of

professional contract soldiers increases, but Russia does not intend to comp
letely abandon conscription.


-----

MILITARY SECURITY

Russia continues to strengthen its conventional capabilities and maintains

the ability to rapidly generate forces in its Western Strategic Direction, which

includes Lithuania. The manoeuvre units (brigades and regiments) are able to

form battalion tactical groups (700–800 soldiers), which are fully manned and

equipped. These groups are fully professional and are capable to operate with

24 to 48 hours’ notice. Russia’s ability to generate forces quickly and its par
ticularly rapid and centralized decision-making would enable (at least in the

early stages of the conflict) it to gain military advantage over its neighbours.

In addition to developing conventional capabilities, Russia focuses on strategic

nuclear forces. Consistent re-arming of the nuclear triad – strategic missile

troops, strategic nuclear submarines and long-range (strategic) aviation – with

new missiles and their carriers is ongoing. Newly developed hypersonic mis
siles are designed to overcome missile defence systems.

Large-scale strategic exercises take place on a regular basis, enhancing Rus
sia’s capability to act simultaneously in multiple conflicts on various scales.

For example, in August 2019, Russia held a large-scale strategic naval forces

exercise Ocean Shield which involved combat and support vessels from

Russian strategic exercise Tsentr-2019


-----

21


several fleets and multiple aircraft. Geographical coverage of the exercise

ranged from the Baltic and North Seas to the North Atlantic and the Barents

Sea in the Arctic.

The biggest strategic exercise of the year Tsentr took place in September.

According to official announcements, it involved 128,000 troops, with about

2,000 of them coming from other members of the Collective Security Treaty

Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. Those were mainly

Chinese troops (about 1,500), while the rest came from Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,

India, Pakistan, Uzbekistan, and Tajikistan. Although the exercise took place not

only in the central part of Russia, but also in Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and Taji
kistan, the participation of many foreign countries in the exercise was rather

a symbolic demonstration of solidarity than a real improvement of interoper
ability with the Russian armed forces. Nevertheless, Russia’s decision to invite

representatives from seven different foreign countries to the exercise demon
strates Moscow’s efforts to become a key mediator in global security issues.

In October 2019, during the nuclear exercise Grom Russia launched ballistic

and cruise missiles capable of carrying nuclear weapons. According to official

figures, approximately 12,000 personnel from Russian strategic missile troops,

long-range aviation and transport aviation, Eastern, Southern, Central and

Western military districts participated in the exercise.

Kaliningrad military grouping is designed to deny
Western access to the Baltic region

Military development in the Kaliningrad region reflects the process ongoing

in all Russian armed forces. In the vicinity of Lithuania, Russia develops its

capacity to create anti-access and area denial A2 / AD effect which would allow

Russia to maintain a favourable balance of forces during the initial phase of

a potential conflict. This set of military measures is designed to isolate the

region and to minimize NATO’s access during a crisis or a war.


-----

Key A2 / AD weapon systems deployed
in the Kaliningrad region


22


Missile systems
Iskander-M (land tar-
gets within 500 km)

Coastal defence system
Bastion (surface targets
within 300 km)

Long range air defence
systems S-400 (air
targets within 250 km)

Coastal defence system
Bal (surface targets
within 130 km)

Battleships equipped
with long-range cruise
missiles Kalibr (ground
targets within 2,000 km)


-----

Consistent strengthening of military capabilities
in Kaliningrad region

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

S-300 (90/120 km).

Bastion / Bal Rearmament: SSC-5 range 300 km; SSC-6

range 130 km; replaced Redut SSC-1 (300 km).

S-400

Bastion / Bal


SS-N-30 Kalibr New capability: range 2,000 km against

ground targets; nuclear capable.

SS-N-30 Kalibr


Su-30SM Rearmament and new capability: multirole

fighterbomber, „air-air“ and „air-ground“.

Iskander-M Rearmament: range 500 km, ballistic and

cruise missiles, nuclear capable.

Su-30SM

Iskander-M


Khrizantema-S New capability: reinforcement of antitank

capabilities.

Khrizantema-S


Msta-S Rearmament and new capability: better

combat characteristics.

Msta-S


T-72B3 New capability: better combat

characteristics.

T-72B3


BM-27 New capability: range 35 km; supplements

BM-21 (20 km).

BM-27


Tor-M2 Rearmament: better combat characteristics.

Tor-M2


Lithuania


Motorifle Brigade (Bde)

Naval Infantry Bde

Artillery Bde


Bastion/Bal Missile Bde

Tank Regiment (Reg)

Fighter Reg


Helicopter Reg

Air Defence Missile Battalion

Baltiysk Naval Base


-----

MILITARY SECURITY

Russia intensively develops and deploys long-range weapon systems capable

of carrying both conventional and nuclear payload. The number of vessels

capable of carrying ‘Kalibr’ cruise missiles is steadily increasing. These Russian

missile systems can strike a potential adversary’s critical infrastructure within

2,000 kilometres range. Kaliningrad witnesses a steady increase of these capa
bilities. Four ships were delivered there in 2016 to 2019 and the fifth ‘Kalibr’

equipped ship should be delivered in 2020. In Kaliningrad, Russia retains the

tactical nuclear weapon capabilities.

In addition, a mixed aviation division with two aviation regiments – fighter

aviation regiment and a bomber regiment – were re-established in Kalinin
grad. A helicopter regiment was also formed. In the Kaliningrad region, modern

Su-30SM / FLANKER-H multi-role fighter jets are deployed and are actively

used in combat training. A new larger military unit – the motorized rifle division

will be established in Kaliningrad. It will increase the capability of forces there

to conduct military operations without reinforcement from mainland Russia.

The development of larger units in the Kaliningrad region demonstrates the

long-term intentions of Russia’s political and military leadership to continue

gradual build-up of military capabilities in this exclave.

Military activity is particularly intense at the Dobrovolsk range near the Lith
uanian state border used for training by the units of the 11th Army Corps and

the Baltic Fleet aircraft. It has a negative impact on Lithuania’s security envi
ronment and increases the risk of unintended incidents.

Baltic national armed forces and NATO Enhanced Forward Presence (eFP)

battalions deployed in the region reduce Russia’s ability to initiate a

potential military conflict and rapidly achieve desirable results, avoiding

a large-scale Alliance involvement. This reduces the likelihood that Russia

will resort to military force against the Baltic States. However, Russia will

further seek to persuade NATO Allies decision-makers and societies that

additional security measures in the Baltic region are increasing tensions.


-----

25


Minsk sees its military integration with Russia as its
security guarantee

Belarus perceives Russia as a key security guarantor against military threats.

Countries conduct combined military exercises to improve interoperability of

their armed forces. Russian military industry remains one of the most import
ant sources of modernization of the Belarusian armed forces.

With certain distinctions the Belarusian threat perception regarding NATO is

similar to Russia’s approach. Belarus, unlike Russia, does not have the ‘super
power’ mentality. Therefore, Belarusians are less critical of NATO enlargement,

even though Minsk regards the Alliance as a risk factor for Belarus. Moreover,

lack of trust between Lukashenko and Putin encourages Minsk to avoid perma
nent deployment of Russian armed forces in Belarus. In the near to mid term,

Lukashenko will highly likely try to maintain his freedom to maneuver despite

the military alliance with Russia. However, Minsk’s security and defence policy

will completely correspond to Moscow’s interests.

Belarus and Russia pay special attention to military interaction. They constantly

renew their plans for military activities and test their effectiveness every two

years alternately in ‘Union Shield’ and ‘Zapad’ exercises. Belarus and Russia

continue to develop and integrate their military elements – the Regional Mili
tary Grouping and the Unified Regional Air Defence System. Interoperability of

respective units is tested through combined smaller-scale exercises. Belarus

and Russia develop and improve the infrastructure ensuring functionality and

improving efficiency of the Regional Military Grouping. Belarus pays significant

effort to develop host country capabilities.

The Belarusian military leadership aims to modernize the Belarusian

armed forces, to provide them with modern armaments and military

equipment. However, Russia remains the primary source of new military

equipment for Belarus. The Belarusian armed forces have acquired from

Russia 12 light attack aircraft Yak-130 / MITTEN and early-warning radars

‘Protivnik’, continues modernization of tanks. In 2019, Belarus received

from Russia its first Su-30SM / FLANKER-H multifunctional fighter jets.

By 2021 Belarus plans to purchase a total of 12 of these aircraft.


-----

26


### ACTIVITIES OF HOSTILE INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY SERVICES

Russian intelligence activity in Lithuania remains intense

Effective counterintelligence measures applied by the Lithuanian intelligence

community make the territory of Lithuania a hard operating environment for

Russian intelligence and security services. However, to offset these limitations

Russian intelligence increased the use of technical means and human intelli
gence from Russian territory. Different counter-intelligence methods are used

to observe and prevent the activities of hostile intelligence services and per
sons related to them against Lithuanian national interests.

In 2019, three Lithuanian citizens were convicted of spying for Russia. Accord
ing to the tasks received from Russian intelligence they collected non-classi
fied but not publicly available information about the Lithuanian armed forces,

military and other infrastructure of strategic importance. This type of informa
tion is used by Russian military for operational planning.


-----

Lithuania carried out its first exchange
of persons convicted of espionage with Russia

In 2019, Lithuania carried out its first exchange with Russia of persons

convicted of espionage. Lithuania handed over to Russia convicted Russian

intelligence officers Sergei Moiseyenko and Nikolai Filipchenko. Russia

handed over a convicted citizen of Lithuania and a dual citizen of Lithuania

and the Russian Federation. Along with them, the exchange also involved

a citizen of the Kingdom of Norway sentenced in Russia. This exchange

became possible when Lithuania and Russia reached a mutually

acceptable agreement.

At the time of his arrest Filipchenko was an officer for particularly

important cases in the Intelligence Division of the FSB Directorate for

the Kaliningrad region. Filipchenko participated in the FSB intelligence

operation aimed at penetrating Lithuanian government institutions,

Lithuanian law enforcement and intelligence services. One of the goals

of this FSB operation was to target officers of the Dignitary Protection

Department under the Ministry of Interior who were responsible for

protection of the President of Lithuania and could tap communications at

both the office and residence of the Lithuanian President in exchange

for payment.

The other person transferred to Russia, Moiseyenko, was a Russian

intelligence officer who conducted long-term espionage in Lithuania and

had formed a circle of trusted persons and agents. In Lithuania,

he recruited a Lithuanian armed forces’ officer who provided national and

NATO, classified and non-classified but not publicly available information

to Russian intelligence.


-----

ACTIVITIES OF HOSTILE INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY SERVICES

A counterintelligence operation resulted in arrest of two individuals – the

head of the meteorological unit of the air operations support squadron and a

reserve captain of the Lithuanian armed forces. The head of the meteorolog
ical unit photographed official documents containing information about the

military infrastructure and equipment deployed at the Lithuanian Air Force air

base. Later, he passed this information to the Main Intelligence Directorate of

the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation (GRU). Mean
while, the reserve captain acted as an intermediary and was exploited for the

transmission of technical means for espionage and instructions, and for the

collection and transportation of collected information to Russian territory.

Another counterintelligence operation led to arrest of a Lithuanian citizen

with no direct links to the national defence system. However, the GRU used

him to execute intelligence tasks at the port of Klaipėda. He collected and

passed information about Lithuanian armed forces and NATO vessels coming

to Klaipėda, military equipment carried by them, as well as information about

other objects located in Klaipėda city and Klaipėda port which are of strategic

importance for the national security.

All of the above-mentioned Lithuanian citizens were recruited by the GRU in

Russia. It is highly likely that the GRU chose the head of the meteorological

unit as a recruitment target because of his position at strategic air force base

and his regular trips to Russia. On the ground of real and alleged violations

of public order, customs, border control, and migration regulations he was

detained on Russian territory, interrogated, and recruited. The recruitment of

the other two Lithuanian citizens was even easer as they both were living

in Russia.

Typical recruitment scheme

Potential target Establishing a Developing Recruitment Exploitation
selection contact friendly for espionage


-----

29


Belarus is Russia’s most important ally in intelligence activities against Lithu
ania. Belarusian intelligence services actively cooperate with Russian intelli
gence and support their operations in Belarus. Recruitment cases on Russian

territory prove that trips to Russia and Belarus can significantly increase the

likelihood of recruitment of those Lithuanian citizens who are of interest to

Russian intelligence.

Free visas to Russia open more opportunities
for Russian intelligence services

In 2019, Russia introduced free electronic visas for the citizens of Lithuania and

52 other countries to the Kaliningrad region, St. Petersburg, and the Leningrad

region. In this way, Russia hopes to promote tourism and generate additional

income. This decision not only provides additional travel opportunities for Lith
uanian residents, but also poses a risk to national security.

Visa facilitation and the consequent increase of foreigners traveling to Russia

are particularly favourable to Russian intelligence services. They systematically

search for foreigners able to provide intelligence on foreign countries or per
form other tasks. The Federal Security Service (FSB) and the GRU develop and

use this foreign intelligence method known as intelligence from the territory.

Majority of Russian espionage cases identified in the Baltic States in recent

years were examples of intelligence from the territory – residents of the Bal
tic States who agreed to cooperate with Russian intelligence were recruited

in Russia.

Russian intelligence services receive information about foreigners coming to

Russia at the moment they submit their visa applications. Among the travelers

Russian intelligence services look for individuals who may possess valuable

information or who are perceived as vulnerable. The Russian intelligence ser
vices pay special attention to former and active politicians, businessmen, law

enforcement officers, military personnel, and journalists traveling to Russia.


-----

ACTIVITIES OF HOSTILE INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY SERVICES

However, Russian intelligence services increasingly tend to recruit anyone they

can and decide later how to use them as agents. For instance, they can be

tasked to collect visual information, disseminate propaganda, act as intermedi
aries or provide operational support.

In Russia the FSB and the GRU operate aggressively, and particularly often use

compromising information and blackmail in their recruitment operations. NATO

security services identified many cases where Russian intelligence services

used aggressive measures when establishing contacts with foreigners. They

simulate incidents with local law enforcement, migration or financial institu
tions threaten to restrict business or personal trips to Russia, initiate acquain
tance with co-optees of Russian intelligence to establish intimate relations.

Those traveling to Russia are advised to avoid traveling alone and violating

public order; to possess valid documents and necessary permits; to provide

truthful information in visa application; to consume moderate amounts

of alcohol; to avoid carrying primary mobile and computer devices; to

critically assess new acquaintances, offers and requests.

Russian intelligence agencies seek to exploit
Russian compatriots in Lithuania

In order to expand its influence in the post-Soviet space, Russia employs ‘soft

power’ means such as influence over the Russian-speaking diaspora, history

policy, promotion of Russian language and culture, strengthening of cultural

cooperation. Plenty of institutions engage in cultivating the Russian ‘soft power’,

including means the Russian Presidential Administration, the Ministry of Foreign

Affairs, diplomatic missions abroad, the federal agency ‘Rossotrudnichestvo’,

multiple foundations and government-controlled ‘non-governmental’ organi
zations (GONGO’s). In addition to these relatively openly operating institutions

and organizations the Russian intelligence services are secretly engaged in Rus

-----

31


Systematic and covert attempts by the Russian FSB to spread certain historical

narratives and to influence the Russian compatriots are observed in Lithuania.

One of the most active individuals in these activities is the FSB officer Pyotr

Chagin. For intelligence activities against Lithuania he uses the cover of ‘Fond

Pobedy’ (Фонд Победы), a non-existent organization in the Kaliningrad region.

In his legend the FSB officer adopted a fictitious identity of Petras Taraškev
ičius and claimed to be representative of ‘Fond Pobedy’ in Lithuania.

FSB officer Chagin who also uses a fictitious identity of Petras Taraškevičius

Operating from the Kaliningrad region, Chagin developed contacts with rep
resentatives of Russian compatriot organizations in Lithuania and exploited

them to organize and fund multiple events. These events were meant to

underline a positive impact the Soviet Union and Russia made on the devel
opment of Lithuania. For example, the FSB officer took a keen interest in the

organization of the ‘Immortal Regiment’ (Бессмертный Полк) campaign in

Klaipėda that corresponded with the overall goals of Russian history policy.

Similarly, without disclosing the true authorship Chagin used his contacts to

publish articles prepared by the FSB in Russian language media in Lithuania.

Through his contacts Chagin not only tried to influence Lithuanian public opin
ion, but also collected intelligence on the situation in the Russian compatriot

community, political situation in Lithuanian municipalities, and showed inter
est in certain Lithuanian citizens. Chagin observed conspiracy typical to intelli
gence officers – he never came to Lithuania, set up meetings with his contacts

only in Russia, communicated with them via multiple electronic means.

Chagin’s case shows that Russian intelligence services try to take advantage


-----

ACTIVITIES OF HOSTILE INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY SERVICES

Events funded by the FSB

11-04-2018 Concert in Vilnius to commemorate the International Day for the

Release of Prisoners of Concentration Camps

29-05-2018 Commemoration of Victory Day in Klaipėda

22-06-2018 Event in Klaipėda to commemorate the beginning of the Soviet

Union war with Germany

12-04-2019 Concert on the Day of the Russian Border Guard in Klaipėda

09-05-2019 Concert of Victory Day in Šiauliai

22-06-2019 Event in Klaipėda to commemorate the beginning of the Soviet

Union war with Germany

However, Chagin’s intelligence activities in Lithuania were short of success. The

events he funded neither attracted nor influenced the intended audiences. On

the contrary, the FSB actions undermined the Russian-speaking community in

Lithuania and discredited their legitimate cultural activities.

We ask Lithuanian residents who know or have information about

Kaliningrad resident Pyotr Chagin or Petras Taraškevičius to contact VSD

on the Trust Line 8 700 70007 or by e-mail pranesk@vsd.lt

Chinese intelligence services look for targets
in Lithuania on LinkedIn

Hostile foreign intelligence services increasingly use online social networks to

find and recruit sources abroad. Chinese intelligence services are particularly

aggressive in this area and they mainly use the opportunities provided by the

social network LinkedIn.


-----

33


Signs of recruitment by Chinese
intelligence services via LinkedIn

 The message is received on LinkedIn platform from a Chinese company,

research center or recruitment company

 LinkedIn account with Western name and Chinese surname; fake

photo, sometimes generated by artificial intelligence; abstract and often

meaningless description of company; usually the company has no history

or does not exist; poor English; high number of account connections

 Proposal to provide consultancy services

 Invitation to China with all expenses covered

 Meeting with a LinkedIn contact and his alleged colleagues in China

 Meetings that resemble regular work interviews in hotels

 Request for an analytical assessment of trends in a given country,

summary of public and non-public political or military information

 Payment in advance

 Request for confidentiality

 Further contacts via mobile apps (such as WeChat) or e-mail

 Agreement on the next meeting in China

 Consistent involvement in espionage activities


-----

ACTIVITIES OF HOSTILE INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY SERVICES

A wide range of private and public sector professionals use LinkedIn to estab
lish professional contacts and find potential employers as well as recruitment

companies look for employees for their clients. Similarly, Chinese intelligence

services exploit opportunities provided by these features.

Chinese intelligence uses LinkedIn to establish contacts with selected tar
gets abroad in the early stages of recruitment operations. The most common

targets are civil servants, information technology specialists, defence sector

employees, scientists, and experts in multiple other fields. The ultimate goal

of the Chinese intelligence is to recruit targets in China. Such operations are

extremely cheap and pose no risk to Chinese intelligence officers.

Thousands of LinkedIn users around the world have received offers from

fictitious Chinese companies – used as a cover for Chinese intelligence – to

become their consultants or employees. Such activities of the Chinese intelli
gence were also identified in Lithuania.

Next-generation technologies expand
opportunities for cyber-espionage

Malicious activity in Lithuanian cyberspace remains high. Russia, China and

other countries gather technical intelligence on Lithuanian information sys
tems. They seek to collect information on vulnerabilities of Lithuanian individ
ual and corporate user systems that can be used for hacking and spying. There

are attempts to gain access to critical infrastructure and private sector infor
mation systems and use it for espionage. The biggest threat to the security

of Lithuanian information systems and the information stored in them is the

cyber espionage of Russian intelligence agencies. It is conducted, for example,

by the GRU group Sofacy / APT28 and the FSB group Agent.btz / Snake.


-----

35


The fifth generation (5G) communication technology which will enable a much

larger number of devices to connect to the Internet and allow new sectors to

manage systems via the Internet may become a new risk factor for the national

security. 5G should contribute to the economy, innovation, and technologi
cal progress in medicine, transport and other areas. However, the 5G-enabled

critical systems will become potential targets for cyber attacks. Such attacks

will be able to intercept information previously unavailable on the Internet

and to disrupt newly created critical infrastructure. Sectors that are new to

connecting their systems online may not have the necessary experience and

knowledge to deal with emerging threats. While the convenience and speed of

5G technology is widely recognized as an offset for its drawbacks, putting its

benefits above security could pose risks to the security of personal data and

critical infrastructure.

Another new and particularly dangerous risk factor is supply chain violations

when a selected target is not attacked directly, but through its supplier net
works, IT products or services. While the common cyberattacks are usually car
ried out by third-party hackers, trustworthiness of providers remains crucial

for protection of sensitive data and the integrity of the information systems.

Evaluation of a provider should not only encompass potential links with well
known hackers, their groupings or hostile intelligence services, but also the

assurance that it is able to ensure security of their products. Vulnerabilities

found in both hardware and software components of information systems

allow hackers to perform malicious activities against these systems, disrupt

them, and exfiltrate information stored on them. Although so far the damage

caused by similar attacks in Lithuania has been relatively insignificant, due to

the global nature of these operations it is possible that in the long term the

impact of these attacks on Lithuanian private companies and critical infra
structure will increase.


-----

Use of the supply chain attack method

 Since 2016 the cyber grouping APT10 conducted operation Cloud

_Hopper which attacked IT service companies remotely controlling the IT_

infrastructure of businesses and government agencies. Through these

companies APT10 sought to penetrate the information systems of their

end targets – customers of those IT companies. One of the targets of

this operation was a foreign-owned enterprise operating in Lithuania.

According to the U.S. Department of Justice, Chinese state authorities were

linked to this operation.

 In the 2017 NotPetya ransomware attacks linked to Russian intelligence

services the malware entered the victims’ information systems through an

accounting software used to access the Ukrainian tax system. The malware

encrypted systems data, the loss of which not only affected Ukrainian state

and private organizations, but also spread to other countries. Although

_NotPetya virus affected only a few dozen companies in Lithuania, the_

impact of the attack worldwide was massive, with damage estimated at

hundreds of millions of euros.

A simplified example of a supply chain attack


Supplier 1

Information

System

Regular
communications


Supplier 2

Information

System


Supplier 3

Information A group of

System hackers

|Malicious code|Col2|
|---|---|


Intercepted
information
Target
information


-----

37


### PROTECTION OF CONSTITUTIONAL ORDER

Russia faces unfavourable conditions to seek
political influence in Lithuania

Russia’s military aggression in Ukraine and its exposed attempts to meddle

in foreign elections mobilized international community. The increased aware
ness of decision-makers and the public of the threats posed by the Kremlin

has considerably reduced its ability to influence Lithuanian political system.

Conditions to impact on strategic political decisions are limited, but Russia

does not abandon its objective to interfere with Lithuania’s domestic political

processes.

Russia monitored the 2019 elections and other political processes in Lithua
nia, however there were no large-scale attempts to influence their outcome or

manipulate public opinion. During the election campaign Russian propagan
dists did not focus on campaigning for any particular candidate, but rather ran

slander campaigns against Lithuanian politicians who were most critical of

actions of Russian authorities.


-----

PROTECTION OF CONSTITUTIONAL ORDER

Russia uses international events to look for
individuals who can represent its interests

In order to reduce its international isolation and to pursue its strategic foreign

and domestic policy goals the Kremlin is interested in developing ties with

decision-makers at all levels of government. International events organized

by Russia provide ample opportunities to recruit their participants and engage

them in a process of non-transparent lobbying of Russian interests.

Lithuanian politicians and public figures also receive invitations to attend

conferences and forums on social and political issues, including those orga
nized in Crimea. The events on the peninsula are aimed at justifying and con
solidating its annexation. For several consecutive years certain Lithuanian

political figures have been invited to attend the International Yalta Economic

Forum in Crimea. Since 2015, the annual forum has been organized by the

Crimean Council of Ministers and the Foundation of the International Yalta

Economic Forum, and sponsored by the Russian Presidential Administration.

The organizing committee of the event is led by the Russia-appointed head of

the annexed Crimea Sergei Aksionov. The Livadia Forum, another large-scale

event in Crimea to which leaders of foreign non-governmental organizations

are invited, is an integral part of the international slavic festival ‘The Great

Russian Word’, organized in Crimea since 2015.

The Kremlin organizes
international events looking for
individuals who can represent
its interests


-----

39


The Kremlin covers all travel expenses for individuals attending such events.

Representatives of the Russian authorities show exclusive attention to for
eign guests and seek to establish and maintain contacts. Therefore, very often

those who attend the event for the first time later receive similar invitations to

other not necessary related events.

By organizing events that correspond to its agenda Russia seeks to create a fic
tion of international solidarity and neutrality. Russia presents the participation

of politicians and other public figures from foreign countries in such events as

alleged evidence of strong international support for the Kremlin’s policies. In

some cases attempts are made to conceal the Kremlin’s links to such events

or their participants’ links to the Kremlin, especially when it concerns interna
tional organizations. For instance, the Kremlin exploits OSCE events to ‘defend’

the rights of allegedly persecuted Russian speakers in the Baltic States and

elsewhere. In these venues individuals acting on behalf of the Russian inter
ests often take the opportunity to disseminate false information and further

Russia’s agenda.


-----

### INFORMATION SECURITY


_Rubaltic.ru distributed a propaganda_
bli i ll d li i l


-----

41


Russia uses propaganda to discredit legal
processes in Lithuania

The Kremlin uses information policy as an instrument of influence against

foreign countries, including Lithuania. Russia’s information policy is coordi
nated at the highest level and is implemented through targeted dissemination

of propaganda and disinformation. The Kremlin’s propaganda creates images

that portray Russia as a better and more credible alternative to the ‘failing

West’. It presents allegedly ‘alternative opinions’ and concurrently aims to sow

distrust in information unfavourable to the Kremlin by immediately providing

a number of ‘alternative’ but false versions of the event.

One of the main goals of Russia’s information policy is to disparage Lithuania’s

statehood and to discredit anti-Soviet resistance (for example, the June 1941

uprising, Anti-Soviet Armed Resistance Movement, dissident movement, etc.).

Therefore, in 2019, the masterminds of the Kremlin’s propaganda spared no

effort to discredit the January 1991 attempted coup case and pre-trail inves
tigations on espionage in favour of Russia. To that end they created and dis
seminated propagandistic narrative about alleged “politically motivated per
secution and fabricated political cases in Lithuania”, which was supposed to

justify the Kremlin’s policy.

The propaganda campaign based on this narrative intensified after the Vil
nius Regional Court announced its ruling in the January 1991 coup case. At the

time of the announcement, representatives of the pro-Kremlin media came to

Lithuania with the purpose to produce propagandistic coverages. In their com
ments on the court ruling Russian officials emphasized allegedly politicized

trial and denied the validity of the ruling.

Propagandists sought to convince foreign and domestic audiences that those

convicted or detained in the January 1991 coup case and in the case concern
ing espionage in favour of Russia were political prisoners. They used differ
ent means to spread this propagandistic narrative. Individuals holding radical

attitudes and acting on behalf of the Kremlin organized propaganda events in

Lithuania and abroad in support of ‘political prisoners’ in Lithuania. Petitions,

articles and videos against alleged political persecution were actively circu
lated online, particularly on the most popular social networks.


-----

Russia’s response to the 13 January 1991 case

Criminal prosecution is one of the instruments used by the Kremlin to

control Russia’s political and economic processes. Opponents of the regime

are prosecuted both directly for their activities and based on fabricated

criminal charges. In addition, criminal pre-trial investigations are initiated as

blackmail on individuals to stop their activities, to transfer assets, or to fulfill

other demands. In case of compliance charges are usually dropped.

Russia started to use this method in its foreign relations. In 2018, the

Russian Investigation Committee launched a pre-trial investigation against

Lithuanian officials who investigated the January 1991 coup case and judges

who heard and decided it. They are accused of illegal persecution of Russian

citizens.

Russia publicly announced the launch of the pre-trial investigation in early

2019, before the announcement of the ruling in the January 1991 coup case

in Lithuania. The Investigative Committee published a propaganda video

titled ‘Lithuanian Justice’ on their official YouTube channel. Defendants

of the January 1991 coup case living in Russia and Belarus speak in the

video. Russia was thus seeking to influence the decision of the Lithuanian

court by indirectly threatening the judges with the actions of Russian law

enforcement, in particular to launch international prosecution.

Russia has not yet taken actions against the citizens of the Republic of

Lithuania, but the investigation of the case gives Russia the opportunity

to put pressure on Lithuania and on the Lithuanian citizens involved in the

January 1991 coup case proceedings, as well as to assert its interpretation of

the January 1991 events.

Following Lithuania’s restoration of independence in March 1990, in January

1991 the Soviet Union tried to suppress it by sending armed forces and

the KGB special units to seize government and other public buildings. The

ensuing clashes in Vilnius between the soviet forces and peaceful civilians

resulted in 14 civilian casualties. In 2019, 67 former soviet officers were

convicted for war crimes and crimes against humanity, most of them in

absentia. Russia denies the soviet occupation of Lithuania, holds the actions

of soviet military in Lithuania legitimate, and considers the trial in Lithuania


-----

43


The dissemination of Kremlin propaganda was accompanied by intimidation

aimed at influencing investigators and judges in these cases. Russian officials

have unequivocally and publicly stated that they will respond to the court

ruling in the January 1991 coup case.

Russia sought to discredit legal proceedings in Lithuania in the eyes of

the international community. On 20 February 2019, rubaltic.ru, a Russian

online propaganda outlet, announced its so called investigation on political

repressions in the Baltic States in the European Parliament. Most of it was

devoted to the January 1991 coup case. Later, Russian GONGOs supporting

Kremlin’s aggressive foreign and domestic policies addressed the OSCE

urging it to draw attention to the alleged political persecution in Lithuania.

Cyber-enabled information operations against Lithuania

Most cyber-enabled information operations target national defence system.

These attacks have the aim of polarizing society, discrediting the Lithuanian

armed forces and Allies, and diminishing trust in state institutions. On average,

4 to 5 incidents of this type are identified in Lithuania every year. Creators of

fake stories strive to be more compelling and sparsely use techniques that

failed in the past. The new attacks differ in quality from the ones in previous

years – stories are more often based on real events, messages are more widely

spread in foreign media, new institutions and social groups are involved, which

facilitates the spread of the disinformation. Publicly available information

about current events in the country as well as contacts of civil servants and

media are actively used. However, these efforts do not bring desirable results

as dissemination of fake stories is low and does not generate much interest.

It is highly likely that the targets of the attacks will not change significantly in 2020.

In the near term, entities in Lithuania and abroad will contribute to organization


-----

INFORMATION SECURITY

Topical issues, for example, environment protection, will be used to provoke

a negative public sentiment. As long as unavailable to a wide range of users,

the advanced technologies (Internet of things, artificial intelligence, deep

fake) contribute to evolution, but not revolution of information manipulation.

A critical approach to information, self-restraint in sharing sensations, and

the security of information networks are among the most effective ways to

increase resilience to various forms of manipulation.

Potential targets of cyber-enabled
information operations in 2020

 Lithuanian Armed Forces’ capabilities (upgrades and funding)

 Allied forces in Lithuania

 International exercise Defender 2020


-----

45


Kremlin aggressively responds to restrictions on
the Russian history policy projects that serves
the spread of Kremlin’s ideology

The most important goal of Russian history policy in Lithuania is to form con
sistently an exceptionally positive image of the Soviet influence on Lithuania’s

development, while simultaneously denying the occupation and annexation of

Lithuania. Such a goal is based on the Kremlin’s geopolitical outlook in which

the Baltic States have always belonged to Russia’s sphere of influence and

therefore cannot be independent states.

The alleged positive soviet influence on the development of Lithuania is

embedded in the propaganda narrative of the Great Patriotic War which is

pivotal in the Russian history policy. In attempts to shape and disseminate

this narrative the Kremlin makes extensive use of the soviet memorial sites in

formerly occupied territories. The Kremlin finances the maintenance of soviet

soldiers’ cemeteries and the restoration of military monuments and other

memorial sites. Russia also provides funding for events that underpin its his
tory policy and are often organized at these sites. Any attempts to challenge

the Kremlin’s ideologically-charged history policy is met with intimidation and

aggressive response. For instance, Russian diplomats threatened Lithuanian

municipal officials who refused to bypass national regulations on the use of

soviet symbols while restoring soviet memorial sites.


-----

RUSSIA WILL COMMEMORATE THE 75[TH] ANNIVERSARY
OF THE VICTORY DAY

Russia portrays the second Soviet occupation which began in the summer

of 1944 with the entry of the soviet armed forces into Lithuanian territory

as ‘liberation from fascism’. In 2019, activists coordinated by Russian

diplomats organized events dedicated to the 75[th] anniversary of the

liberation of Kaunas and Vilnius in Lithuania. In 2019, the Russian Ministry

of Defence also launched a series of 17 events to commemorate the

‘liberation’ of other Eastern European cities.

In 2020, Russia will commemorate the 75[th] anniversary of the Victory Day

which will contain many propaganda events. The Kremlin is interested that

such events fulfill the objectives of Russian history policy and reach out

to the international community. Not only the Russian state institutions,

including the intelligence services or the regime-controlled media, are

used for this purpose, but also international cooperation formats. It is

highly likely that Russia will seek to attract multiple dignitaries and state

officials from abroad to attend these events.

In denial of the soviet occupation, an event dedicated to the 75[th]
Anniversary of the liberation of Vilnius took place in 2019 in Moscow


-----

47


The Kremlin is also in denial of those historical facts that attest to executions,

imprisonments, and deportations perpetrated by the soviet authorities. The

Kremlin restricts initiatives of Lithuanian non-governmental organizations and

individuals to commemorate these events and pay respect to their compatri
ots who perished. For the second consecutive year, Russia did not issue visas

to participants of the ‘Mission to Siberia’ who were planning to take care of

the graves of Soviet repression victims. Russian officials also detained, inter
rogated, intimidated, and later fined Lithuanians in Russia, Perm region, who

were taking care of the graves of Lithuanian and Polish deportees.

In 2019, the Russian Ministry of Defence initiated a draft law and

amendments to the Russian Criminal Code, introducing sanctions and

criminal liability for those responsible for the destruction of Russian

‘combat glory’ sites abroad. The draft law provides for the establishment

of a special list of foreign nationals who have been involved in the

destruction, damage or desecration of monuments, publicly agitated to

do so or made decisions to do so in the exercise of their administrative

powers. Listed persons would be barred from entering Russia, any property

and funds held in Russia would be seized, all real estate and investment

transactions would be banned, and any legal entities owned by them

would be suspended.


-----

### ECONOMIC AND ENERGY SECURITY

_Scanpix Baltics_


-----

49


The risk of incidents at the Belarusian nuclear
power plant is increasing

Stakeholders and contractors of the Belarusian nuclear power plant (BelNPP)

project in Astravyets continue to ignore international nuclear safety stan
dards. In the beginning of 2019, the Meeting of the Parties to the Espoo Con
vention concluded that Belarus commenced the construction of the BelNPP

without proper site selection procedures and environmental impact assess
ment. Experts analysed the BelNPP stress test report and identified significant

deficiencies. Although the Nuclear and Radiation Protection Department of

the Belarusian Ministry of Emergency Situations has announced a plan to

eliminate the deficiencies identified during the stress tests, the construction

contractor, the company Atomstroyexport owned by Rosatom, has taken no

real action. Rosatom gives priority to the on-time schedule over the secu
rity of the BelNPP. At least since mid-2018, Belarusian authorities have been

under pressure to allow the delivery of nuclear fuel, even though BelNPP’s

facilities have not been properly prepared.

Rosatom representatives flippantly consider the demands of the Belarusian

authorities overseeing the construction and ignore the findings of Belarusian

experts. Rosatom considers Gosatomnadzor, the Belarusian agency respon
sible for project oversight, as an incompetent institution that only impedes

smooth construction of the BelNPP. Even when Belarusian experts took a

tougher stance, Rosatom was reluctant to follow their recommendations. On

the contrary, they made claims about allegedly delayed construction, putting

pressure on Belarusian authorities and seeking political leverage.

On the other hand, Gosatomnadzor lacks not only the competence (without

the necessary experience its experts cannot manage without the assistance

from the Russian agency Rostechnadzor), but also the will to properly super
vise the work of Rosatom. Gosatomnadzor often failed to ensure contractor’s

compliance with the requirements and decisions or recommendations of

Belarusian experts. During the implementation of the project the regulations

for drafting documentation and licensing of equipment were constantly vio
lated and the supply of adequate equipment for the BelNPP was not ensured.

Some equipment was not properly certified and in some places equipment

parts were installed that did not conform to the project.


-----

ECONOMIC AND ENERGY SECURITY

Due to the rushed construction work, the negligent approach to nuclear

safety, and the poor work ethics, numerous incidents in the BelNPP have

occurred which could have a negative impact on its safe exploitation. The

most significant incidents occurred in 2016, but incidents and violations con
tinued in subsequent years, including in 2019. At the end of June 2019, work
ers’ negligence caused a fire in Unit 1 of the BelNPP near the reactor building.

Despite the fact that the Unit 1 is already in preparation for loading nuclear

fuel, the Belarusian authorities have not provided information on the inci
dent. This fact shows that the situation in the BelNPP has not changed after

the incidents in 2016 – information about the real situation in the BelNPP is

concealed to avoid publicity. Therefore, it is highly likely that the information

will be further withheld after commissioning the BelNPP.

The approaching deadline for the launch of the BelNPP raises tensions

between the Belarusian institutions, project stakeholders, and representa
tives of Rosatom– they all fear responsibility for potential incidents in the

hastily-built BelNPP. In early July 2019, the construction manager of the Bel
NPP Dmitriy Romaniec, resigned. He quitted and left Belarus in a very diffi
cult period – at the start of major preparations for Unit 1. It is highly likely

that his departure was not accidental – the former construction manager

resigned avoiding responsibility for previous incidents, malfunctions, and fur
ther preparations for commissioning. Moreover, the Belarusian Investigation

Committee had earlier opened a pre-trial investigation into incidents at the

BelNPP construction site. Over the course of that investigation, several peo
ple working for Russian contractors were detained. However, due to Russian

diplomatic pressure, the cases were terminated.

In our assessment, Rosatom favours the approach to hide information about

defects in the BelNPP project, as it fears for its international reputation as a

reliable partner in nuclear power plant construction projects.


-----

51


Russian energy companies strive to secure their
interests in Lithuania

In 2019, Russian energy sector companies actively sought to maintain and

strengthen their position in the Baltic States’ energy market and paid close

attention to strategic energy projects developed by Lithuania.

Since the beginning of 2019, Russian energy company Novatek sought to enter

the Lithuanian liquefied natural gas (LNG) market. The company’s main busi
ness activity is the supply of LNG from Vysock, including to the Baltic States

via the Klaipėda Terminal. Novatek is able to offer low LNG prices only because

of preferential conditions for LNG exports granted by the Russian government.

Therefore, by increasing its trade turnover via Klaipėda Terminal Novatek is

playing a part in Russia’s long-term game to restore its dominant position in

the regional gas market.

Although Novatek presents itself as a private and one of the most transparent

companies in Russia, there is no doubt that its strategy and goals are coordi
nated with Russia’s top authorities. Gennady Tymchenko, a Russian oligarch

belonging to Putin’s entourage and one of the Novatek shareholders, is subject

to US sanctions. State-controlled company Gazprom also owns part of Novatek

shares.

As Lithuania diversified its natural gas supply, Gazprom lost its position in the

Lithuanian market and could no longer manipulate prices. In 2019, Gazprom

refrained from making direct influence, but sought to strengthen its activities

through loyal intermediaries – businessmen with connections to Gazprom and

involved in gas trading schemes via companies registered in Lithuania and

abroad. Those intermediaries receive Gazprom privileges and thus can gain a

competitive advantage. In the hope of even more favourable terms they reward

Gazprom with loyalty by coordinating their activities with Russian represen
tatives and providing them up-to-date information on developments in the

Baltic States’ gas market.


-----

ECONOMIC AND ENERGY SECURITY

Denis Jemelianov

Alexander Ryazanov

Anatoly Oruzhev


In August 2019, a company registered in Lithuania and involved in Gazprom trading
schemes, organized an event – a gala concert which was attended by Ryazanov, the
former Vice-President of the Board of Gazprom; Jemelianov, Deputy Chief for Trade
with CIS and Baltic region of the International Business Department of Gazprom; and
Oruzhev, a former Tymchenko’s business partner.

In 2019, the Russian energy holding Inter RAO UES (IRU) also tried to strengthen

its position in the Baltic States. The holding is not only interested in main
taining its positions in the electricity trading markets, but also in influencing

decisions concerning the synchronization of the Baltic power systems with the

Continental European Network. The IRU has an interest in maintaining and

increasing the volume of electricity traded in the region. IRU representatives

also tried to establish contacts with representatives of the EU institutions hop
ing to win their favour.

Investors who do not conform to the national security
interests try to avoid the restrictions imposed on them

The Law on the Protection of Objects of Importance to Ensuring National Secu
rity contains criteria for assessing the compliance of investors with the inter
ests of national security. In most cases, investors are recognized as non-con
forming with national security interests due to their risky relationships with


-----

53


Entities not conforming to the criteria of national security take the following

actions in order to avoid statutory restrictions on their activities:

 Make fictitious share sale transactions with allegedly unrelated entities;

 Use public relations to announce alleged withdrawals from business in

third countries and / or sale of shares to allegedly unrelated entities;

 Increase the number of shareholders hiding the actual beneficiaries

through offshore structures, mutual funds, and management companies;

 Investors’ partners operating in third countries and posing a direct threat

to national security change their legal entity names and company logos.

**COMPANY X**


CHANGES IN SHAREHOLDER STRUCTURE

BEFORE INITIATION OF SCREENING

Shareholder No. 1 Shareholder No. 2

AFTER INITIATING INVESTOR VERIFICATION

A TRANSACTION
WITH SIGNS OF
FICTITIOUSNESS AFTER INVESTOR SCREENING

Shareholder No. 3 Shareholder No. 2 TRANSACTIONS

WITH SIGNS OF
FICTITIOUSNESS

STRUCTURE OF SHAREHOLDERS BEING CHANGED

NEW STRUCTURE OF SHAREHOLDERS

Final beneficiaries (shareholders) – natural persons

Shareholder No. 3 Shareholder No. 4 Shareholder No. 5 Shareholder No. 6


-----

ECONOMIC AND ENERGY SECURITY

In 2019, the largest flow of potential investors consisted of individuals seeking

to invest in the financial and credit sector. There has been a growing inter
est from third-country investors in setting up financial technology, payment,

and electronic money companies. It turned out that a significant number of

third-country nationals seeking to invest in the financial and credit sectors

were simply testing their capabilities and safeguards applied to foreign invest
ments. Some investors immediately abandoned their investment plans after

learning about an ongoing screening regarding their compliance with national

security interests or following a negative decision by the Commission for Coor
dination of Protection of Objects of Importance to Ensuring National Security.


-----

55


### TERRORISM AND MIGRATION

The threat of terrorism in Lithuania is low

The level of terrorist threat in Lithuania remains low. In 2019, no organized

groups motivated by Islamist ideology with the intent and ability to plot ter
rorist acts have been identified. The risk of international terrorism to Lithuania

may originate from external factors related to the intentions of Islamist ter
rorist organizations and their supporters to carry out attacks against Western

countries. Lithuania is not a direct target for the terrorist organizations ISIL

and Al Qaeda (AQ) or the extremists who support them. However, as an ally

Lithuania supports international anti-terrorist coalitions, which may be suffi
cient to justify an attack. Supporters of extremist ideologies also take advan
tage of the freedom of movement within the Schengen area thus extremists

may intend to use Lithuania for transit, hiding, and planning attacks against

other countries. In foreign countries, especially those where terrorist organiza
tions are active, Lithuanian citizens can become accidental victims of terrorist

acts at tourist venues or other public spaces.


-----

TERRORISM AND MIGRATION

The threat of terrorism to Europe remains high

Since 2018, terrorist attacks by Islamists in the EU have been declining and

this trend has continued in 2019, with five attacks perpetrated by lone extrem
ists inspired by jihadist ideology in France, the Netherlands, and the United

Kingdom. Other attacks planned by extremists, including potentially highly dan
gerous ones, were prevented. In most of these cases extremists autonomously

planned and funded the attacks. Efforts of the EU member states’ law enforce
ment and intelligence agencies to strengthen prevention and counter-terrorism

measures made a positive impact on the security situation in Europe. However,

the threat of international terrorism to the EU member states remains high.

_Reuters / Scanpix_

The death of ISIL commander Abu Bakr Al Baghdadi in October 2019 during a

US special operation was a major symbolic blow to ISIL. For the past 5 years,

he has been the most prominent leader of the ‘Holy War’, having managed to

establish the ‘Islamic Caliphate’ for a short time. In the near term, his death

could trigger a jihadist movement to react vengefully including in Western


-----

57


Chances of the most influential global jihadist groups ISIL and AQ to carry

out coordinated terrorist acts against the EU member states have diminished

in recent years. Home-grown individuals who were radicalized and inspired

by these terrorist organizations pose the main threat to the EU member

states. ISIL’s ideology remains the major source of inspiration for extremists.

It is highly likely that this inspiration has rooted for a long time online, so its

impact on extremists in the EU and in other parts of the world will remain

viable in the long term.

It is possible that in the near term, some foreign fighters and their relatives

will try to return from Syria to Europe. This could negatively affect the security

situation in the EU, as these radicalized individuals may be inclined to conduct

terrorist attacks. In the short term, AQ could attempt to be more active in con
ducting terrorist attacks in the West in order to gain visibility and recognition

as a leader of the global jihadist movement.

There is a growing threat of terrorist attacks
by right-wing extremists in Europe

Over the last few years groups and individuals promoting right-wing extrem
ist ideologies have become more active word-wide. Proponents of these ide
ologies are perpetrating more terrorist attacks and ideologically motivated

crimes. Many attempts to commit such crimes are thwarted by intelligence or

law enforcement agencies and do not gain greater public resonance.

In 2018 and 2019, in Europe the number of individuals sympathizing to one

of the most radical forms of neo-Nazism – the so-called ‘Siege’ ideology –

increased. This trend increases the likelihood of terrorist attacks and other

violent crimes, as ‘Siege’ supporters consider violence, terror, sabotage, and

guerrilla warfare as the only means of achieving their goal of undermining the

democratic order and establishing ‘white supremacy’.


-----

TERRORISM AND MIGRATION

The tactics used by proponents of the ‘Siege’ ideology have many similarities

to the methods used by ISIL. It calls to conduct independent terrorist attacks

and other acts of violence using the ‘lone wolf’ or 'lone cell' tactics. Conspiracy

methods and IT tools enabling anonymity are widely used. The list of potential

targets of ‘Siege’ violence is very broad: and encompasses not only members

of racial, ethnic or religious minorities, but also all those who do not propagate

right-wing extremist ideologies.

The risk to national security posed by illegal migration

Monitoring illegal migration flow and identifying potential extremists remains

a priority security task for countries hosting migrants. Although illegal migra
tion flows to Europe have declined significantly over the last three years, the

risks associated with this phenomenon remain. Small part of foreign fighters

fleeing conflict areas use illegal migration to make their way back.

Persons associated with terrorist organizations, facilitators of extremist move
ments, and third-country nationals posing extremist threat to the EU countries

are constantly seeking ways to enter the EU. They try to make use of various

forms of migration, including fictitiously obtained visas, fake businesses, stud
ies and marriages, forged documents, and fraudulent asylum seeking.

In 2019, Lithuania continued to implement the asylum seeker resettlement pro
gram and Lithuanian intelligence screened 13 applicants – nationals of African

countries – resettled from Italy and Malta. One asylum seeker was denied the

entry to Lithuania. So far, only seven asylum seekers of those screened have

arrived to Lithuania, but have not been granted refugee status.


-----

59


Illegal migration flows to European countries from the Middle East and

North Africa decline for the fourth consecutive year. By 1 December 2019,

more than 117,000 illegal migrants had arrived in Europe (in 2018, over

132,000; in 2017, over 189,000).

The main entry route for illegal migrants in 2019 was the eastern

Mediterranean route from Turkey (more than 73,000). More than 14,000

illegal migrants took advantage of the central Mediterranean route to

Italy and Malta. More than 30,000 illegal migrants used the western

Mediterranean route and arrived in Spain.

SPAIN

73 000


In 2019, in Lithuania the number of asylum seekers, mostly women with minor

children, from Tajikistan and Russian Federation (North Caucasus origin),

increased significantly. Arriving from Belarus territory, some of them used

Lithuania as a transit country and did not wait for decisions in their asylum

cases, secretly leaving the Foreigners’ Registration Centre and departing to

other European countries.


-----

### GLOBAL SECURITY

_Russia is expanding its cooperation with African states_

_AFP / Scanpix_


-----

61


Russia seeks to meet its global ambitions
at the lowest cost

Russia seeks to expand its influence in almost every region of the world in

order to regain its status as a global power.

Although Russia increasingly expands its activity into the global arena, the

Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) has remained its key area of influ
ence. The Kremlin seeks to halt Ukraine’s rapprochement with the West and

return it to the Russian sphere of influence. Russia is trying to realize this

strategic goal by putting pressure on Ukraine to recognize special status to the

_de facto Russia-occupied areas of Donetsk and Luhansk, to negotiate directly_

with representatives of the so-called ‘republics’ and thereby legitimizing them.

A near-term breakthrough in the settlement of the Donbass conflict is unlikely.

There are no indications that Moscow would be ready to withdraw its-con
trolled troops and hand over border control to Ukraine.

In **Moldova, Russia remains an active participant in the domestic political**

process, seeing it as an opportunity to pursue its long-term interest to halt

Moldova’s European integration. In the short term, the Transnistrian conflict

is unlikely to break the deadlock as there is no consensus on reintegration.

Russian armed forces sustain constant tension in Georgia – at the administra
tive borders with the occupied Abkhazia and South Ossetia – and at the politi
cal level, Moscow blocks direct contacts between Tbilisi and the leaderships of

the occupied regions. Moscow purposefully pursues gradual integration of the

occupied regions, but there is no indication that Russia will formally incorpo
rate them. In the short term, it will be more beneficial for Russia to maintain

status quo thereby preserving an important leverage.

In the Middle East, North Africa and South America, Russia pursues a low-cost

strategy, seizing every opportunity to expand its influence. Moscow is well on

its way to developing contacts with all – even conflicting – Middle East states,

taking a seemingly neutral stance. For example, the Kremlin refused to blame

Iran for attacks on Saudi Arabia’s oil infrastructure, but offered to sell Riyadh

Russian air defence systems. Moscow has also been balancing among conflict
ing groups in Libya and Yemen.


-----

GLOBAL SECURITY


RUSSIAN MILITARY POWER PROJECTION

Russian military base/facility

Short-notice access to use the infrastructure

Conflicts exploited by Russia

Russian Armed Forces abroad

Private military companies abroad

Combined military training with Russia (2019)


-----

63


-----

GLOBAL SECURITY 64

Particularly beneficial to Russia is the power vacuum in Syria that emerged

from the diminishing role of the West. Russia took advantage of the withdrawal

of US forces from the Kurdish territories and signed an agreement with Turkey

on control of the Syrian border area. Using Ankara’s disagreement with the US,

Russia began supplying S-400 air defence systems to NATO member Turkey.

Russia exploits unrest in Libya, Sudan, Mozambique, the Central African Repub
lic and other countries and offers to ‘export’ the Syrian model – protection

and support to authoritarian leaders in power. Russia is not only the largest

supplier of arms to this continent, but also deepens political cooperation. This

gives Moscow access to the natural resources of the countries in the region

and provides an opportunity to create the image of Russia as a reliable partner

in fight against terrorism and a ‘security provider’.

In competition with the EU, Russia develops ties with Serbia. To Venezuela,

Russia sends military specialists and mercenaries of private military compa
nies, not officially recognized, but controlled by the Kremlin.

In the Arctic, Russia consolidates its economic and security interests. Melting of

polar ice opens up the Northern Sea Route – a strategic shipping lane that cuts

the distance in half compared to a seaway through the Indian Ocean for Rus
sian LNG vessels that need to travel from Arctic gas fields to Asian markets. The

Northern Sea Route is important to Russia for the export of energy resources

to Asian consumers. Therefore, Russia seeks to impose legal restrictions on the

navigation of foreign vessels along this route. Russia seeks to ensure its long
term military dominance in this strategic direction and strengthens its nuclear

icebreaker forces, air and coastal defence systems, and nuclear capabilities.


-----

The future of arms control agreements
has become blurred

On 2 August 2019, the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty

expired. An agreement signed in 1987 between the US and the Soviet

Union prohibited the use of any mobile ground-based missiles capable of

carrying nuclear or conventional warheads within 500 and 5500 km range.

The US has withdrawn from the Treaty due to Russia’s noncompliance – its

cruise missiles 9M729 are capable of ranges banned by the Treaty. However,

Moscow tried to cast blame for the demise of the Treaty on Washington.

Russian President proposed other parties to join a voluntary moratorium on

the deployment of similar missiles in Europe, but the proposal came after

Russia had already deployed the missiles in the European part of

its territory.

Russia is interested in new medium-range arms agreements, but only if they

restrict the West and are tied to the use of nuclear weapons. Russia seeks

to involve other European countries in the negotiation of a new agreement.

Although China’s involvement in a similar arms control treaty would also

correspond with Moscow’s interests, such an agreement is highly unlikely.

After demise of the INF, the only remaining international arms limitation

agreement is the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New START). The

agreement signed between the US and Russia in 2010 will remain in effect

until 2021, unless both parties agree to extend it for another five years,

or to replace it by another treaty on control of strategic nuclear weapons.

Even before the demise of the INF, Russia threatened not to renew this

agreement. However, the New START is useful to Russia, as it allows to

preserve its nuclear deterrence capabilities and prevent an arms race that

would be too expensive for Russia.





1987 2019

Intermediate Range Nuclear
Forces Treaty (INF)

2001 Strategic 2021

Weapon Reduction Treaty
(New START)

1990 2007

Treaty of Conventional
Forces in Europe (CFE)

1972 2002

Anti-Ballistic Missile
Treaty (ABM)


-----

GLOBAL SECURITY

China’s quest for dominance will change the
global security environment

In the long term, growing expansion of China’s economic and political clout

will lead to major changes in the security environment in EU and NATO mem
bers, as well as other regions of the world.

Through technological development and economic leverage, China increases

its geopolitical influence and creates preconditions for vulnerability of the

states involved in its economic projects. China’s Belt and Road Initiative and

other strategic development projects are aimed at achieving global economic

dominance and technological advantage. State officials, state-owned and pri
vate companies, intelligence agencies and Chinese communities abroad are

involved in this process. The active penetration of Chinese investments in for
eign countries carries the risk of losing control over resources and infrastruc
ture, market manipulation, and political influence.


Strategic development
directions dictated by
the President


5G

Technology
development


Creation of an
alternative political,
legal and economic
space


Increasing
influence in

of financial and organizations

Chinese power
projection
instruments

international
arbitration bodies Strengthening

Communist Party
authoritarian
regime


-----

67


Through economic leverage, China seeks to exert pressure and secure political

support from certain European countries on issues such as the independence

of Taiwan and Tibet; meetings of top state officials with Dalai Lama; reform of

the World Trade Organization granting China market economy status; issue of

Xinjiang Uighurs; and Chinese presence in the South China Sea. Rapid eco
nomic development also enables China to promote its political and social gov
ernance model abroad.

In August 2019, a wave of campaigns in support of Hong Kong and pro
Chinese counter-protests swept through the world and did not bypass

Lithuania. On 23 August 2019, the Chinese Embassy in Lithuania organized

a protest in Vilnius disrupting the rally in support of Hong Kong.

A majority of the participants in the pro-Chinese protest were members

of the Association of Chinese Expatriates living in Lithuania. The Chinese

intelligence services also play their role in arranging and coordinating

such protests.

In the military sphere, China actively defends its strategic interests, partici
pates in the United Nations missions, establishes military bases abroad, and

rapidly develops military-industrial complex. In the long term, it will pave the

way for the projection of military power around the world. In the short term,

China will seek economic and technological dominance in strategic sectors.

Due to partially overlapping strategic interests, China develops political and

military cooperation with Russia and coordinates positions on certain interna
tional issues. Relations between Moscow and Beijing are fuelled by their aspi
rations to reduce the global influence of the West (especially the US), Russia’s

economic needs, and China’s growing military ambitions.


-----

GLOBAL SECURITY

Despite the efforts of the international community,
the situation in the conflict regions is not improving

By sending troops to international military operations and missions Lithua
nia contributes to conflict resolution in geographically remote regions of the

world – Afghanistan, Mali and Iraq. Prolonged conflicts in Syria and Libya also

have a negative impact on the security of NATO and EU countries.

Despite direct talks between the US and the Taliban in 2019, and a nearly

achieved initial agreement, the situation in Afghanistan remains complicated.

Taliban fighters conduct intensive attacks against Afghan security forces in

various parts of the country and carry out attacks in the capital, Kabul. The Tal
iban feels strong enough to continue hostilities and is currently not interested

in negotiations with the Afghan Government. In the short term, the prospects

for ceasefire and peace in the country are vague. Threat of attacks on local and

international forces remains significant.

Despite foreign countries’ efforts, the security situation in Mali continues to

deteriorate. Government forces in the northern part of the country are weak,

while former rebel groups retain their influence. In large uncontrolled areas,

radical groups thrive. They conduct attacks and expand the geography of their

activities. This leads to increased instability in Burkina Faso and in the western

part of Niger. Successful expansion of radical groups is determined by their

ability to establish themselves in local communities, exploit weaknesses of

state institutions, poverty, and ethnic conflicts. Radical groups publicly declare

themselves to be defenders of a marginalized ethnic group thus attracting new

members for rather pragmatic than ideological reasons. The threat of terrorist

attacks in the Sahel is likely to increase.

At the end of 2019, Iraq was shaken by spontaneous protests against the coun
try’s government and the ruling elite. Peaceful demonstrations quickly esca
lated into bloody clashes between protesters and security forces. The gov
ernment fails to get the situation under control as promises about reforms

no longer satisfy protesters. Prolonged unrest threatens the stability of the

country and could be used by ISIL fighters.

In Syria, fighting between the Damascus regime and rebel groups has largely

calmed down. The situation of rebel groups, dominated by radical Islamists, is i


-----

69


term, the end of hostilities between pro-government forces and militant oppo
sition is highly likely. Turkey conducted a military operation in Syria against

the local Kurdish fighters. Following the Russian-Turkish deal, Kurdish fighters

were obliged to leave the Turkish border area and the Syrian regime returned

its troops to north-eastern Syria after more than seven years.

ISIL has lost its last controlled territories in Syria and all fighters have gone

underground. Nevertheless, the group conducted terrorist attacks to show that

it has not been defeated. It is likely that ISIL will continue the intense terror

campaign in Syria and Iraq striving to get stronger.

In 2019, intensified military actions over control of the capital Tripoli further

deteriorated situation in **Libya. Fighting factions are unlikely to come to an**

agreement. Driven by various political and economic interests, foreign assis
tance provided to some warring parties also sustains the conflict. The inter
national community does not have common approach towards the conflict

and does not put pressure on the warring parties to resolve it. It is unlikely

that negotiations will resume and that a united government will be formed in

2020. The instability in Libya will remain a long-term challenge in the region

as it poses security threats to neighbouring countries, impels migration, and

creates enabling environment for radical groups to operate.


-----

NOTES


-----

71


-----

Author and Editor: Second Investigation Department under the Ministry of
National Defence and State Security Department of the Republic of Lithuania

17.01.2020. Circulation: 1000 units. Order GL-10

Layout by the Publishing Section of the General Affairs Department
of the Ministry of National Defence, Totorių str. 25, LT-01121 Vilnius.

Printed by the Military Cartography Centre
of the Lithuanian Armed Forces, Muitinės str.,
Domeikava, LT-54359 Kaunas District.

_www.kam.lt_

ISBN 978-609-412-187-6

© i i f i l f bli f i h i


-----

-----

