**NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY**

**1. GENERAL PROVISIONS**

1.1. The aim of the National Security Strategy of the Republic of Lithuania is to provide a
vision of the state’s development, its national interests and the actions required for their
implementation. The National Security Strategy establishes the basic goals and means of the
national security policy. It encompasses political, diplomatic, defence, economic and other
spheres of the state’s policy.

1.2. The Republic of Lithuania implements its National Security Strategy through a system of
long-term political provisions and means, enabling to preserve the sovereignty of the state, its
territorial integrity, democratic constitutional order, human and civil rights and freedoms, and a
safe environment of individual, by confronting security challenges, dangerous conditions,
threats, crisis situations or military conflicts.

1.3. The Republic of Lithuania perceives its security as preserving its sovereignty and
territorial integrity, internal security and order, democratic foundations, economic security of all
legal entities and population and protection of its natural environment.

1.4. The National Security Strategy defines basic goals of specialised strategies and doctrines
in separate areas of the state policy. These strategies must be directly based on the provisions
of the National Security Strategy of the Republic of Lithuania and they must be revised every
time the National Security Strategy of Lithuania itself is updated.

1.5. The agenda for the security policy of the Republic of Lithuania until the next review of the
National Security Strategy will be determined by the following distinguishing features of the
current security environment:

1.5.1. final preparations for entry into NATO and the EU;
1.5.2. addressing the challenge of international terrorism.

**2. BASIC ASSUMPTIONS OF SECURITY POLICY**

2.1. After five decades of occupation, the Republic of Lithuania restored its independence on
March 11, 1990 and has since been developing as a modern, politically, economically, socially
and culturally mature democracy, actively pursuing integration into the organisations of
democratic states adhering to the same values. Dismantling of the Soviet bloc and the
restoration of freedom and independence have created appropriate conditions for the Republic
of Lithuania to define its security interests and policy.

2.2. The current situation of the Republic of Lithuania within the international security system
is as favourable as at the latter decade. The independence of the Republic of Lithuania is
universally recognised and respected, growth in the economy is improving steadily, friendly
relations and practical co-operation with the neighbours are being maintained, national
minorities have been successfully integrated into Lithuanian society, ten years of experience of
functioning democratic institutions has been accumulated, democratic civil control of the military
has been efficiently established, and integration into the global and Western institutions is
advancing successfully.


-----

2.3. Currently the majority of traditional and new challenges to the security of the Republic of
Lithuania are transnational in nature. Internal political, military, economic, ethnic or other crises
can exert a major influence upon other states both neighbouring and further afield. Therefore,
the Republic of Lithuania considers international security as indivisible and seeks to ensure its
security as an integral and indispensable part of the security of the broader regional, European
and global community of states. Alongside the national efforts to ensure security, in accordance
with its assets and together with the international partners, the Republic of Lithuania contributes
to security and stability in other regions of Europe, and she is resolved to accept the assistance
of international partners if a crisis would arise in Lithuania. Therefore, the Republic of Lithuania
pledges by mutual political, military and economic commitment, to ally with states that adhere to
the same political, social, cultural, and moral values. At the same time, the Republic of Lithuania
attaches particular importance to cooperation with all neighbouring countries with the objective
of assuring the stable functioning of democracy, civil society and free market economies in
these countries. Joining and participating in those international bodies that recognise and
promote these values is an essential element of the National Security Strategy of the Republic
of Lithuania. In this regard NATO and the EU occupy a special place among such institutions
with Lithuanian membership in each as the highest priority.

2.4. At present, the Republic of Lithuania does not observe any immediate military threat to
national security and as a result does not regard any state as its enemy. The security policy of
the Republic of Lithuania is open, transparent and non-confrontational. It is not directed against
the legitimate interests of any other state.

2.5. Globalisation in relation to the national security of the Republic of Lithuania is considered
as objective process, which is inevitable due to the scientific, technical, economical and other
progress of mankind civilisation, the intensification of mutual interdependence of various
countries and regions, and international economical, political and cultural integration processes,
at large extent stipulated by above mentioned factors. The main result of globalisation in the
area of security – internationalisation of factors determining world’s security and stability. In
seeing its future as a part of secure Europe and secure world, Lithuania is open to the
globalisation processes. Globalisation does not mean automatic and total levelling of national
identity. On the contrary, it gives opportunity to enrich national culture, civilisation and societal
political practice by most valuable world’s achievements in the corresponding areas, and, the
other way round, to make best achievements of Lithuania an integral part of world’s cultural and
civilisation heritage. Therefore the Republic of Lithuania does not consider globalisation as a
threat to the national security.

**3. SECURITY INTERESTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF LITHUANIA**

3.1. Vital interests. The security of the Republic of Lithuania is based on protection of national
interests. To secure vital interests, every possible means of protection are employed. A basic
precept of national security is that failure to protect vital interests will result in _immediate and_
_serious threat to the existence of the state of Lithuania and its people. Vital interests are the_
following:

3.1.1. sovereignty of the Republic of Lithuania, territorial integrity and democratic constitutional
order;

3.1.2. respect and protection of human and civil rights and freedoms;


-----

3.1.3. peace and prosperity of the state.

3.2. Primary interests. These are the interests that if not protected, could eventually affect the
vital interests of the Republic of Lithuania. Primary interests are the following:

3.2.1. global and regional stability;

3.2.2. freedom and democracy in Central and Eastern Europe and the Baltic States;

3.2.3. open and predictable security policy of all countries in the Euro-Atlantic area;

3.2.4. ensuring alternative energy supplies and supply of resources that are of strategic
importance;

3.2.5. a region free of environmental dangers.

**4. CHALLENGES, DANGERS AND THREATS**

4.1. Challenges, dangers and threats that are non-military in nature arise as a consequence
of globalisation, therefore, individual states cannot respond to them alone. Such transnational
factors as terrorism, organised crime, arms proliferation, drug traffic, the illegal migration, and
the spread of epidemics defy state borders and become international security challenges,
dangers and threats. The probability that they will continue to spread is increasing.

4.1.1. Terrorism poses a serious security threat to the global community, and therefore to
Lithuania as well. However, this threat is largely external to the Republic of Lithuania.
The internal situation and the historical heritage of Lithuania do not provide conditions
for the formation of a broad domestic network of terrorism. This danger stems primarily
from abroad:

4.1.1.1. The Republic of Lithuania may become a potential target of international
terrorism. Acts of terrorism may be directed against infrastructure or other
objects of strategic importance to national security as well as the objects of
foreign states in Lithuania.

4.1.1.2. The Republic Lithuania may become a transit country for international
terrorism focused on the other countries. The following circumstances could
intensify the threat of domestic terrorism:

4.1.1.2.1. occurrences of political extremism in the Republic of Lithuania;
4.1.1.2.2. social and economical differentiation may trigger conditions for
social terrorism (acts of such terror may be directed against either
state or private institutions, if they are perceived by groups with
grievances as the source of their worsening social situation);

4.1.1.2.3. expansion of globalisation around the world and strengthening of
anti-globalist movements may fuel the activities of local elements of
these movements and create conditions for specific terrorism (under
cover of opposition to globalisation, environment pollution, and other
related issues).


-----

4.1.2. While the likelihood of direct military confrontation in the region is low, demonstrations of
military force, provocations, and the threat to use force remain a danger to the security of
the Republic of Lithuania.

4.1.3. Overwhelming dependence of the Republic of Lithuania on the strategic resources and
energy supplies of one country or the concentration of foreign capital representing
economy, in which free market is not secured or unstable, in one or several economic
sectors of strategic importance to national security is a potential danger not only for
economic prosperity but also for the security of the country.

4.1.4. Certain economic conditions may constitute dangers to the security of the Republic of
Lithuania, the well being of its population, independence of the state or constitutional
order. These could be the following:

4.1.4.1. succession of assets and control over sectors and objects of strategic
importance to national security, while pursuing political goals, as well as acting
in a manner that violates economic security;

4.1.4.2. inferior functioning of economic and energy sectors and deranged functioning
of the objects that are of strategic importance to national security, their
improper usage or non-usage, interfering with the interests of the state.

4.1.5. Uneven social and economic development that increases the gap in living standards
between different social groups may present a dangerous condition. It may become
apparent as a result of a decline in the living standards of certain social groups,
accompanied by an increase in unemployment, and it may at the same time trigger social
and political extremism. This danger may also cause the growth of crime, which is a
factor of danger to national security.

4.1.6. The spread of theories, religious doctrines, and ideologies that are inhumane, racist,
instigate ethnic or religious hatred, assault the values of human rights, or propagate and
justify violence or genocide constitute a threat that is a precondition, or source, of many
other security challenges.

4.1.7. Corruption poses a particular danger, because it damages legitimate individual and
national interests and discredits the rule of law and the confidence of the citizens in the
values of democracy and democratic institutions of government.

4.1.8. Activities of groups of organised and financial crime constitute a major threat to the state
and society. Of particular concern are activities related to the proliferation of drugs and
arms, trade in people, illegal business and corruption.

4.1.9. Activities of foreign intelligence agencies directed against the Republic of Lithuania
constitute a serious threat to national security. These activities are characterised by the
use of traditional and unconventional methods as well as new technologies to obtain
information, compromise and influence military capabilities, political processes, and other
areas of social and economic life. The disclosure or leaking of classified information to
other countries would not only pose a threat to the security of the Republic of Lithuania
but would also undermine the credibility of the Republic of Lithuania.

4.1.10. Weapons of mass destruction, their components and technologies for their production
remain a global danger. The growing number of group of states and subjects in


-----

possession of such weapons, or who seek to acquire them, and the possibility that
nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons may be used as a means of blackmail or terror
is of particularly serious concern.

4.1.11. The uncontrolled migration poses a challenge to national security, although the Republic
of Lithuania currently is not the main target of migration flow. A wave of migration may
occur as a result of regional conflicts, which could evolve into a source of instability for
the whole of Europe and at the same time could pose a danger to the interests of the
Republic of Lithuania.

4.1.12. Industrial accidents, natural calamities, epidemics, or ecological disasters are also
dangers to security of the Republic of Lithuania.

4.2. The above listing of threats and dangers is dynamic and is therefore subject to change
dependent on internal, regional and global events and conditions.

**5. SECURITY POLICY OF THE REPUBLIC OF LITHUANIA**

5.1. Major Goals and Objectives:

5.1.1. The principal goals of national security of the Republic of Lithuania are to secure the vital
and primary national interests, neutralise threats, and prevent dangerous conditions
developing into threats. Among these, protection of vital interests has the highest priority.

5.1.2. The major objectives are friendly relationships with foreign countries, regional stability,
peace and integration into the Euro-Atlantic area.

5.1.3. In the short term, the major objective is to become a member of NATO, upon invitation
during the Alliance Summit that will be held in Prague in November 2002, and a member
of the European Union.

5.2. Strategic concepts and implementation guidelines:

5.2.1. The fundamental strategic concept of the Republic of Lithuania is to consolidate the
accomplishments and the positive changes of the last decade and make them
irreversible. In this regard the Republic of Lithuania considers NATO and EU
enlargement, by extending invitations to join to all countries prepared for membership,
including the Republic of Lithuania, as the most appropriate and credible means to
consolidate these historical achievements. Membership of the Republic of Lithuania in
NATO and EU, as well as membership of the other two Baltic states, Estonia and Latvia,
will ensure their long-term security and will also enhance the security and stability of the
whole Baltic region and therefore it will be a long-term security gain for all states in the
region.

5.2.2. The security policy of the Republic of Lithuania provides for the use of military force in
cases of individual or collective self-defence against external aggression in accordance
with Article 51 of the United Nations Charter, the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania
as well as other laws and international commitments, or as part of international peace
operations in support of Chapter VI or VII of the United Nations Charter in accordance
with the rules of the use of armed force in operations.


-----

5.2.3. Following the approval of the National Security Strategy, specialised strategies and
doctrines must be prepared and revised. In this regard, the main principles in the areas
of diplomacy (foreign policy), military affairs and intelligence (defence policy), internal
security (public security, economic policy, social security, environment and cultural
heritage), are the following:

5.2.3.1. Domestic stability and prosperity. Internal and foreign policies of the Republic of
Lithuania are focused on fostering internal social and economic stability. This
involves boosting public security, as well as stability of fiscal and monetary
policies, intensification of foreign trade, encouragement of economic
development, privatisation, social support, campaigns against corruption,
reinforcement of civic society, development of culture and civilisation, and fullfledged integration into international economic and cultural organisations.
Priorities of security policy are:

5.2.3.1.1. Internal security. One of the highest priorities in ensuring the national
security of the Republic of Lithuania is the fight against organised
crime and corruption. These threats to social stability have a negative
impact on public security as well as economic development;

5.2.3.1.2. Human and Civil rights. The Republic of Lithuania guarantees to
comply with international law regarding the rights of citizens and
persons within its territory. These include full respect for the rights of
minorities and ethnic groups;

5.2.3.1.3. Legitimate interests of society. The Republic of Lithuania guarantees to
protect the legitimate interests of individuals within its territory against
criminal offences. This involves establishing and implementing
effective policies of crime control and prevention;

5.2.3.1.4. Stable economic growth. A strategic priority for national security of the
Republic of Lithuania is the formation of conditions for economic
growth so as to ensure a higher quality of life for its citizens;

5.2.3.1.5. Social security and stability. An important element of security is to
eliminate negative consequences of structural economic reforms and
external impact on employment level of population, as well as to
reduce illegal employment. Every citizen is entitled to have sufficient
conditions for social, cultural and economic development. The
formation of a socially self-supporting, unified and at the same time
stable society is a basic element of the security of the Republic of
Lithuania.


5.2.3.2. Deterrence and reliable defence. State defence consists of military security, as
well as civil resistance. It is one of the main instruments of state security policy.
More detailed defence policies and strategies have to adhere to these four
strategic principles:

5.2.3.2.1. Democratic control of the military to include fostering citizenship and
patriotism, and ensuring mutual trust and confidence between the
military and the civilian population.

5.2.3.2.2. Deterrence based on defence rather than offence to include
reinforcement of defence system and capabilities of the Republic of
Lithuania.

5.2.3.2.3. Total and unconditional defence.


-----

5.2.3.2.4. Euro-Atlantic solidarity and collective defence to include fulfilment of
international commitments and active international military cooperation (diplomacy, assistance to the armed forces of the other
states).

5.2.3.3. Euro-Atlantic stability and integration: The security system of the Republic of
Lithuania is being developed as a part of common European security and
transatlantic defence system. Therefore, foreign and internal policies are
focused on full-fledged and comprehensive integration into the Euro-Atlantic
area. Within their areas of responsibility, all State institutions must prepare
policies aimed at ensuring the objectives of stability and integration into the
Euro-Atlantic region:


5.2.3.3.1. Integration into NATO and EU: membership in NATO and EU, to
include full support to the enlargement process, are two equally
important priorities of security policy of the Republic of Lithuania. The
processes of integration into NATO and EU strengthen and
complement each other. Membership in one of these two organisations
(NATO or EU) does not substitute for the membership in the other.

5.2.3.3.2. Active participation in maintaining peace and international stability: the
Republic of Lithuania gives priority to conflict prevention, diplomacy,
and international legal measures. Of particular importance is the
priority given to participating in international crisis management,
preventing the proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction,
participating in international arms control regimes, and establishing
policies and legislation to address new security challenges, dangers,
and threats.

5.2.3.3.3. Promotion of good neighbourly relations and regional co-operation: the
Republic of Lithuania gives priority to co-operation throughout the
Baltic Sea Region, Northern Europe, and with the Russian Federation.
Lithuania develops and strengthens multilateral and bilateral relations.
Specific policies have also been established such as the policy of
pragmatic selective co-operation with Belarus.

5.2.4. Legislation: systemic efforts are being made to harmonise the national legal base with
the legal acts of the EU and NATO. Legal and institutional mechanisms for
implementation of membership commitments have been identified. Upon the analysis of
implementation of the National Security Strategy, the Government initiates the adoption
of new, or amendments to existing, laws.

5.2.5. General resource priorities: with regard to distribution of resources in the various areas
that directly affect overall security of the Republic of Lithuania, priority is given to
activities, that enhance economic growth, social stability, fostering of civil society and
threat response capabilities with particular attention to activities associated with
integration into NATO and the EU.

**6. PRIMARY ACTIONS AND MEANS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF STRATEGY**

6.1. Shaping the security environment. In shaping and implementing security policy
Lithuania strictly adheres to the universally accepted principles of international law, established
by the United Nations Charter of 1945, the Helsinki Final Act of the Conference for Security


-----

and Co-operation of 1975, and other documents of international law. Major actions and means
in shaping security environment are:

6.1.1. Integration into NATO. The Republic of Lithuania considers NATO membership as a
principal means of ensuring both internal and regional security and stability in the future.
The Republic of Lithuania has allocated certain assets for the actions aimed at
qualifying for the membership in NATO. Key among these are the following:

6.1.1.1. Membership Action Plan. The Republic of Lithuania continues to implement the
Annual National Programme of Integration into NATO, updated every year
according to the initiative of the Membership Action Plan until membership of
the Alliance is achieved. The Republic of Lithuania continues to allocate
necessary share of state’s expenses for strengthening national defence and
interoperability with NATO in accordance with the political consensus of the
parliamentary parties on the goal of membership in NATO and their Agreement
on the defence policy. In co-operation with non-governmental organisations and
the media, the Government keeps the Lithuanian public constantly informed
about the issues of NATO policy, the advantages of membership of the
Republic of Lithuania in this organisation, and her future responsibilities as a
member of the Alliance.

6.1.1.2. NATO activities. The Republic of Lithuania furthers an active co-operation with
the Alliance and the applicants for membership within the framework of the
Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council, Partnership for Peace (PfP), and Planning
and Review Process (PARP) and uses this co-operation as a part of
preparation for the membership in NATO. In accordance with available
resources, the Republic of Lithuania continues to make an active contribution to
NATO led international peacekeeping operations.

6.1.1.3. Cooperation with NATO Member states. In pursuit of NATO membership, and
to further strengthen regional security, the Republic of Lithuania continues
expanding and developing bilateral and multilateral political, security, and
defence cooperation with NATO member states, in order to:

6.1.1.3.1. consolidate the national security system of the Republic of Lithuania;
6.1.1.3.2. reinforce national and international crisis management capabilities;
6.1.1.3.3. implement NATO standards in various areas;
6.1.1.3.4. encourage political support of the Governments and Parliaments of
NATO member states for membership of the Republic of Lithuania in
NATO.

6.1.1.4. Strategic Partnership with the United States of America. The Republic of
Lithuania continues to develop its relations with the United States of America as
a strategic partner. The Republic of Lithuania considers the United States of
America as the main partner of European security. The implementation of the
1998 Charter of Partnership between the US and the Baltic States continues to
be instrumental in the development of the strategic partnership with the US.
The Republic of Lithuania also maintains its historical and cultural links with the
Lithuanian minority in the United States, which is the largest Lithuanian
community abroad, and develops these links as an important aspect of its
strategic partnership with the United States. The Republic of Lithuania
continues to provide political and practical support for the antiterrorist campaign


-----

of the US, after they became the target of terrorist attacks on 11 September
2001.

6.1.1.5. Co-operation with NATO Aspirant countries. The Republic of Lithuania
continues to develop political and defence co-operation with countries, which
pursue similar security policy objectives: Estonia, Latvia, and other states of
‘Vilnius process’, i.e. those, who are seeking membership in NATO and are
implementing Membership Action Plans. The Republic of Lithuania seeks to
develop military projects, created under trilateral military co-operation together
with Estonia and Latvia, including joint military units, education institutions, and
defence infrastructure, as future integrated part of NATO military structure.

6.1.1.6. Strengthening representation in NATO institutions. During the process of
integration into NATO and taking into account that membership may soon be a
reality, the Republic of Lithuania is increasing and strengthening its diplomatic
representation, and the representation of institutions, forming and implementing
security policy, at the NATO Mission, specialised committees and agencies, as
well as in the Headquarters and Commands.

6.1.2. Integration into the European Union. As a part of the on-going work associated with
membership in the EU, an important objective for the Republic of Lithuania is to close
accession negotiations by the end of the year 2002 and to be ready for membership by
1 January 2004. To this end, the Republic of Lithuania seeks to harmonise its legal
system and procedures with those of the EU _acquis communautaire, by implementing_
administrative and economic reforms. The Lithuanian Government informs the public
about EU objectives, achievements, distinct policies, as well as the consequences and
responsibilities that will arise as a result of Lithuania’s future EU membership. Other
important actions for the Republic of Lithuania are:

6.1.2.1. solidarity with the EU’s Common Foreign Policy and participation together with
the EU in the process of developing a European Security and Defence Policy
(ESDP) that complements and strengthens the transatlantic partnership
between Europe and the United States;

6.1.2.2. cooperation with EU members and institutions, efficient use of assistance
provided by the EU and its member states to Lithuania;

6.1.2.3. administrative adjustment inside the state;

6.1.2.4. strengthening Lithuanian diplomatic and institutional representation in EU
institutions and specialised agencies.

6.1.3. Strengthening international cooperation and good neighbourly relations. The Republic of
Lithuania is carrying out a range of activities and means focused on improving the
strategic environment of neighbouring regions. The most important actions are as
follows:

6.1.3.1. Cooperation in the Baltic Sea region. The Republic of Lithuania seeks to
promote stability and prosperity in the Baltic Sea region. The security
dimension of this cooperation consists of the following actions:


-----

6.1.3.1.1. trilateral security cooperation with Estonia and Latvia, including joint
military projects;

6.1.3.1.2. close multilateral and bilateral cooperation with Northern Europe
states: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden, which
assist Lithuania in its preparation for NATO and EU membership;

6.1.3.1.3. participation in multilateral initiatives to include strategic partners
into cooperation of the region, especially the EU and its separate
member states and the United States, and to promote inclusion of
Russia in practical and mutually beneficial cooperation with the
West;

6.1.3.1.4. active participation in the work of the Council of Baltic Sea States.

6.1.3.2. Strategic Partnership with Poland. The Republic of Lithuania develops cooperation with Poland as a strategic partner. This co-operation continues at
all levels: between the parliaments of the two countries, their governments,
various institutions, universities, local and municipal authorities, and nongovernmental institutions, which foster interpersonal contacts. The Republic
of Lithuania seeks to learn from the experience of Poland (and other new
NATO members) gained by joining NATO and adapting to its requirements.
Due to her geographical location, Poland is considered an indispensable link
in the process of integration of the Lithuanian economy, information,
communications, transport, energy and infrastructure into Western European
systems, and in the process of inclusion of her defence infrastructure into
NATO’s integrated military structure.

6.1.3.3. Relations with the Russian Federation. One of priorities of the Republic of
Lithuania is to enhance mutual confidence with Russia in the area of
international security. The Republic of Lithuania makes constructive use of
the multinational arms control system and confidence and security building
measures; implements bilateral confidence and security building measures
agreed with Russia; and takes unilateral security and defence policy initiatives
to increase openness with respect to Russia and other neighbours. The
Republic of Lithuania supports multinational initiatives that seeks to include
Russia more closely in relevant practical co-operation with the North Atlantic
Alliance, and participates actively in such initiatives. The Republic of Lithuania
cooperates with Russia in assuring her military transit to and from the
Kaliningrad region through the territory of the Republic of Lithuania in
accordance with mutually acceptable and legally regulated measures. This
transit is executed in accordance with regulations approved by bilateral
agreement, reviewed on an annual basis, and conforming to the laws and
requirements of other normative acts of the Republic of Lithuania. The
Republic of Lithuania is satisfied with the current military transit
arrangements. The approach of NATO and EU membership of the Republic
of Lithuania does not alter its inclination to cooperate with Russia, and to
ensure that Russian civil, commercial, and military transit through the territory
of Lithuania on the terms that do not contradict to Shengen acquis.

6.1.3.4. The Republic of Lithuania is particularly interested in political, social,
economic and ecological stability in the Kaliningrad region. Instability can
cause serious problems associated with smuggling, organised crime,
uncontrolled migration and pollution of the neighbouring countries, including

10


-----

the Republic of Lithuania. Other interests of the Republic of Lithuania with
regard to the Kaliningrad region include the promotion of good neighbourly
relations, and economic, trade and cultural partnership, and improving
economic development and the standard of living so that it compares more
favourably with neighbouring countries, particularly those approaching the EU
membership.

6.1.3.5. Relations with Belarus. The Republic of Lithuania, as a democratic country
and neighbour of Belarus, is interested in the establishment of democratic
norms and principles in this country, together with prosperity for its people
and internal stability. The Republic of Lithuania implements tactics of
pragmatic selective cooperation at a practical level. This tactics beside other
issues encompasses cooperation on border protection and border control
institutions, application of confidence and security building measures,
cooperation with non-governmental organisations of Belarus and
representatives of media. The Republic of Lithuania would expand the area of
cooperation upon the strengthening of democratic trends in Belarus.

6.1.3.6. Interregional cooperation. The Republic of Lithuania takes an active role in
sharing the experience gained from security cooperation in the Baltic sea
region with interested states in other regions, in particular Central Europe, the
Balkans, the Transcaucasus, and Central Asia.

6.1.3.7. Participation in international peace operations, crisis management and
prevention. The Republic of Lithuania gives priority to participation in
operations led by organisations that acquire the mandate of the United
Nations Security Council. The Republic of Lithuania is developing its military
and civil police forces, which are included in the UN register, as permanent
standby forces. The Republic of Lithuania also intends to take part in
international agreements that constitute the basis of the multinational Standby
High Readiness Brigade (SHIRBRIG), assigned to carry out operations of the
UN, and take an active part in the activities of this brigade. The Republic of
Lithuania will continue to contribute to conflict prevention, peace making,
peace-building initiatives, and other diplomatic, civil police and monitoring
missions led by the UN, OSCE and other international organisations.

6.1.3.8. Weapons of Mass Destruction. The Republic of Lithuania cooperates with
foreign partners and international organisations, and strictly applies all
regulations and conventions defined in international agreements limiting
proliferation or prohibiting Weapons of Mass Destruction, their components
and technologies for their production. The same applies to limiting
proliferation or prohibiting of nuclear, chemical and biological materials.

6.1.3.9. International arms control. The Republic of Lithuania regards international
arms control regimes and confidence and security building measures as
important element of the world’s and particularly European security. The
Republic of Lithuania takes an active part in UN and OSCE arms control
regimes. While participating in multilateral regimes, the Republic of Lithuania
also consults with the individual countries on application of bilateral
confidence and security building measures and actively prepares for the
possibility of joining international arms control regimes and confidence and

11


-----

security building measures, such as the adapted 1990 Conventional Forces in
Europe Treaty and 1997 Open Sky treaty. The Republic of Lithuania supports
and already adheres to the provisions of the Ottawa Convention on the
prohibition of anti-personnel mines, and seeks to prepare as efficiently as
possible for the future ratification and full implementation of its provisions.

6.1.4. Responding to international security challenges and dangers. The Republic of Lithuania
places the highest priority on taking specific measures in the fight against terrorism,
corruption, organised crime, trade in people, drug trafficking, illegal migration,
smuggling, and responding to other challenges of modern society such as crime related
to informational technologies and telecommunications. Together with foreign partners
and international organisations, the Republic of Lithuania creates, ratifies, and
implements instruments of international law, paying special attention to the resolutions
of the UN Security Council, promotes inter-institutional cooperation of police forces,
border control services, customs and special services on a bilateral basis as well as
through international organisations such as Interpol and Europol.

6.1.5. Prevention of terrorism. The anti-terrorism program includes:

6.1.5.1. participating in the fight of the international community against terrorism;

6.1.5.2. developing general anti-terrorist legislation;

6.1.5.3. protecting potential targets against terrorist attack – including critical
infrastructure;

6.1.5.4. identifying individuals involved in ordering and executing possible terrorist
acts;

6.1.5.5. identifying and removing potential sources of terrorist funding;

6.1.5.6. establishing clearly defined procedures for investigating acts of terrorism;

6.1.5.7. constant preparedness for eliminating crisis situations caused by acts of
terrorism;

6.1.5.8. reinforcing counter-terrorist intelligence capability.


6.2. Strengthening internal, economic and social security:

6.2.1. Crime control and prevention. A new model for a crime control and prevention system is
being formed in Lithuania, the application of which will allow consistent and complete
elimination of the main causes and conditions of development of crime and rational use
of the allocated resources. The role of local authority institutions is reinforced in the
process of creating a safe living environment. Activities of pre-judicial investigation
institutions are being strengthened in investigating and revealing crimes and their
efficient intercommunication and interaction with prosecution office is being ensured.
Smooth implementation of the new Criminal Code and Criminal Process Code is being
pursued. Priority in the sphere of crime control is given to the fight against organised
crime and corruption. Measures are taken in order to destroy the economic potential
that has been illegally accumulated by the criminal structures thus reducing organised
crime. Prevention of money laundering conforming to the international standards is
being implemented and protection of witnesses and victims is being reinforced. The
fight against corruption is executed through implementation of measures of corruption
prevention, comprehensively eliminating causes of this phenomenon: the national legal
basis is being improved (National anti-corruption programme has been adopted) by
harmonising Lithuanian legal acts with EU legal acts, and by including the norms of the
international law. In order to prevent illegal migration and cross-boarder expansion of

12


-----

crime, the development of state border protection system is being continued by means
of implementing the EU requirements for state border control, introducing the control of
individuals and vehicles crossing the border in conformity with international
requirements, and forming professional State border protection service. Besides, the
national Shengen information system is being established.

6.2.2. Protection of information. In accordance with international standards, legal regulation of
security of informational technologies is being improved, protection of the critical
informational systems of the state is being strengthened, appropriate control of
implementation measures for security of information technologies and data is being
ensured.

6.2.3. Environmental protection. The main sources of atmospheric pollution in Lithuania are
the transport, energy, and industry sectors. Lithuania is implementing agreements on
requirements for air protection in order to prevent injurious effect of improper quality of
air on the health of people and the ecosystems. To achieve this goal, measures such as
transport pollution reduction, energy saving measures and technologies of progressive
production and purification of pollution, and the use of local and renewable energy
sources, are to be introduced rapidly and effectively. International requirements
regulating the management of chemical materials and preparations are being
implemented in order to avoid harmful effects of such materials on the health of
population and environment. Protection from the danger of radiation is a priority of
national security in Lithuania, because there is a potential source of nuclear pollution –
_Ignalina Nuclear Plant. In accordance with the laws and other legal acts of the Republic_
of Lithuania, control of nuclear waste material and monitoring of the environment of
nuclear energy sites are being implemented. The management and disposal of nuclear
waste and used nuclear fuel is priority action in ensuring secure environment.

6.2.4. Social security. In order to ensure social security of the inhabitants of the country, an
effective labour, social insurance and social support system is being created and
implemented in accordance with the EU law.

6.2.4.1. Implementation of the Programme to increase employment allows to overcome
the negative consequences of economic restructuring and the external impact
on the employment of population and the labour market, increase employment
of population and balance the labour market. Regional policy allows overcoming
imbalances in regional development with regard to the labour market,
employment and social development.

6.2.4.2. The measures of the Labour code, the State programme for safety and health
of the workers and other programmes are being applied in order to ensure the
necessary requirements of labour relations, payment, safety at the workplace
etc. so that the working conditions would considerably improve as a result.

6.2.4.3. In order to maintain internal security, social partnership is being improved by
inclusion of non-governmental organisations into the decision-making process.
Coordination of measures of social insurance and social support ensures that
all citizens are provided with social protection, and measures of social support
are guaranteed for the people who need it the most.

6.2.4.4. The goal of the reform of the pension system is to provide an opportunity to the
population of the Republic of Lithuania to acquire greater social guarantees.
With the final implementation of the reform of the pension system, a three-level

13


-----

pension system will become operational, consisting of current financing,
compulsory accumulation and voluntary accumulation levels.

6.2.4.5. Programme of Implementation of strategy for poverty reduction in Lithuania
seeks to reduce poverty and social isolation and overcome extreme poverty.
With the reform of monetary social support, the creation of a common monetary
social support system based on the principle of income and property evaluation
is being pursued. This system will enable the reduction of poverty and will
ensure that family members receiving social support also have the incentive to
return to the labour market and thus enhance economic activity. Institutional
development and allocated financing are aimed at ensuring the implementation
of reforms and programmes listed above.

6.2.5. Economic security. In order to ensure the national security of Lithuania in the economic
sectors that are of strategic importance, it is established which strategic objects will
belong to the state by ownership right and in which objects private national or foreign
capital will be allowed, provided that the controlling decision power is retained by the
state. A single national investor, or an investor from a foreign state, is not allowed to
dominate in one or several economic sectors that are of strategic importance. Capital of
unclear origin is prevented from penetrating into the economic objects of the country.
The state attaches a high priority to the actions that are planned to strengthen the
economy of the country. Such actions are focused on creating conditions for stable
economic growth, ensuring a higher quality of life for the citizens of Lithuania, and
increasing the competitiveness of the economy. The main activities for ensuring
sustainable economic development of the Republic of Lithuania are related to smooth
integration into the single market of the EU. Priority has been given to the following
actions:

6.2.5.1. further implementation of structural reforms;
6.2.5.2. assurance of conditions of macroeconomic stability;
6.2.5.3. creation of favourable environment for the investment and business, benefiting
to economic development;

6.2.5.4. implementation of employment policy, encouraging small and medium seized
business and regional development;

6.2.5.5. export incentives;
6.2.5.6. establishing obligatory energy reserves;
6.2.5.7. ensuring stable fiscal and monetary policy;
6.2.5.8. diversification of sources of energy supply;
6.2.5.9. preparing the economic infrastructure and transport for operation under
extreme and critical conditions.


6.2.6. Protection of cultural heritage. The Republic of Lithuania observe the provisions of the
UNESCO’s Convention concerning the protection of the World Cultural and Natural
Heritage stating that the risk of cultural and natural heritage destruction increases not
only for traditional reasons, but also because of changes of social and economic
conditions. It is important to the Republic of Lithuania to join the international agreements
and other global efforts to preserve cultural heritage while in particular focusing on the
protection of heritage during periods of possible conflicts. The Republic of Lithuania
seeks to create economic, technological, informational, legal, cultural and educational
conditions ensuring the creativity of the society, enabling to transfer common European
and global cultural values to the cultural context of Lithuania, and preserving unique
national character enriching the culture of the world.

14


-----

6.3. Enhancing response and readiness capabilities:

6.3.1. Improving military capabilities. As a result of positive changes in the strategic
environment of the Republic of Lithuania, ongoing economic growth and taking into
account the requirements and readiness levels necessary to meet international
commitments, the Republic of Lithuania continues to revise its defence structures and
capabilities. The main focus in this work is directed at:

6.3.1.1. optimally balanced capabilities, necessary to address dangerous situations and
threats and to carry out international commitments must be compatible with the
available resources enabling creation of these capabilities;

6.3.1.2. creating and exercising on a regular basis highly qualified, well commanded
and properly trained armed forces. These capabilities are developed primarily
to meet the internal security needs of the defence of the Republic of Lithuania.
At the same time their interoperability with NATO is pursued, the capacity to
fulfil international commitments being the main criterion. These capabilities are
based on analysis of military threat, evaluation of actual resources and risk
assessment. Priority is given to the development of effective, reliable and
mobile land forces;

6.3.1.3. further development of host nation support capabilities.


6.3.2. Strengthening intelligence, counter-intelligence and protection of classified information.
Intelligence and counter-intelligence is carried out by the national security institutions,
operating in accordance with the law. The Republic of Lithuania is implementing and
improving measures for the protection of the state and military secrets. Particular
attention is focused on the verification system for confirming the suitability of personnel
who will be working with confidential state and service information in compliance with
NATO requirements and the new technologies as well as other areas related to
protection of communications and informational systems.

6.3.3. Improving Crisis Management and Response Capabilities. In order to ensure national
security in the area of crisis management, their detection and prevention, the crisis
management system is being established in Lithuania. This will improve the ability of the
Republic of Lithuania to take part in international crisis management. The crisis
management system is being prepared for efficient functioning in the pre-crisis
situations, ensuring comprehensive monitoring of dangerous situations and threats,
crisis detection, preparation and implementation of preventive measures. The main
means and measures for improving crisis management and response capabilities are
the following:

6.3.3.1. priority is given to enhancing the preventive role of the crisis management
system in order to detect dangerous situations and threats and eliminate the
possibilities of their occurrence and development;

6.3.3.2. to establish, in compliance with international standards, civil safety and rescue
institutions capable of managing crisis extreme situations and to meet the
needs of society in this sphere – to ensure immediate emergency aid in the
case of fire, industrial disaster or another incident.

6.3.4. Strengthening civil resistance system. Establishment of a high quality mobilisation
system ensuring regular training of the reserve, and capabilities including those

15


-----

necessary for organisation of civil resistance in the case of foreign military aggression.
This aspect of national security is directly linked to the principle of total and
unconditional defence. This principle commits each and every citizen to resist
aggression by all means possible, including military defence and guerilla actions, nonconformity of civilians, non-collaboration with occupation administration and other
methods. Civil resistance stems from the determination of the nation to fight for its
freedom and the determination of every citizen to resist the aggressor in every possible
way. The system of civil training for civil resistance is organised by the Government of
the Republic of Lithuania and the law regulates its functioning. On a regular basis
citizens are trained in various means of resistance and civil safety. Fostering of
patriotism and training in resistance means and skills will remain a constituent part of
compulsory education.

**7. FINAL PROVISIONS**

7.1. At present, the Republic of Lithuania is in the process of becoming fully integrated in the
Western security structures. The Republic of Lithuania is fully prepared to undertake the
commitments inherent in NATO membership. Membership in this organisation will give
Lithuania an unprecedented level of military, political and economic security.

7.2. Membership in the EU will provide the Republic of Lithuania with conditions for
improvement of the level of economic prosperity and provide non-military guarantees of
security. Integration into the democratic Western societies stimulates economic growth,
internal stability and pave the way for the new opportunities of cooperation to counteract
organised crime and to respond to natural or industrial calamities.

7.3. It is anticipated that the conditions, which could affect the vital interests of the Republic
of Lithuania, will remain stable in the future. However, the global dynamic development will
present new challenges, dangerous conditions and threats and therefore in the future the
Republic of Lithuania must be prepared to adapt accordingly. Long-term strategies will
continue to be pursued in compliance with political, economic, social, military and cultural
interests based on values acknowledged and respected by the democratic world.

7.4. The National Security Strategy is a flexible and open document regularly adjusted to the
major changes in the internal or external security environment.

7.5. The procedures for preparation, adoption, implementation and review of the National
Security Strategy are established by the Law on the Basics of National Security of the Republic
of Lithuania.

16


-----

