M I N I S T R Y O F N A T I O N A L D E F E N C E O F T H E R E P U B L I C O F L I T H U A N I A


-----

#### INTRODUCTIONINTRODUCTIONINTRODUCTIONINTRODUCTIONINTRODUCTION

_The “White Paper” of Lithuanian defence is aimed at familiarising_
_Lithuanian society and foreign partners with the main aims_
_of Lithuanian defence policy, measures for its implementation and the_
_structure of the Lithuanian Armed Forces and their development plans._

_This is the second edition of the “White Paper” in Lithuania._
_Although only three years have passed since its first edition, significant_
_changes have occurred in Lithuania and within the National Defence_
_System during this period._

_Public support for NATO integration is increasing: over 68% of our_
_population support the country’s membership in the Alliance._

_Lithuania’s course towards NATO accession is supported by a wide_
_range of political powers. Their will was demonstrated in the Defence_
_Agreement signed by 12 parliamentary parties of Lithuania in the_
_spring of 2001. This document established the provision for_
_Lithuania’s NATO accession and included an understanding in_
_connection with national defence system priorities, undertaking to_
_allocate not less than two percent of the gross domestic product to_
_meet the needs of the national defence system._

_Following to intensive consultations with NATO and Lithuania’s_
_partners, and taking into account the international obligations and_
_economic situation of the country, we have revised the structure of the_
_Lithuanian Armed Forces adjusting, modifying and modernising our_
_capability so that it is responsive to change in the security environment_
_and is consistent with the country’s resources._

_Lithuania is rated as one of the best-prepared candidate states for_
_NATO accession. Therefore, we are looking forward to the NATO_
_Summit in Prague, in autumn 2002, where prospective new members_
_to the Alliance shall be named, and haste to execute the remaining_
_homework_
_assignments. Lithuania must continue to reinforce its military_
_potential, improve the system of reserve preparation and training,_
_and, in case of need, prepare for hosting of partner forces._

_Although a candidate for membership in the Euro-Atlantic security_
_organisation, Lithuania does not intend to be an encumbrance to the_
_more powerful states and only seek protection and backing of more_
_powerful nations._

_Lithuanian military personnel, participating in international_
_peacekeeping missions in the Balkans, for six years have proved they_
_are capable of being equal partners in joint operations._

_Linas Linkevièius_


-----

LITHUANIANLITHUANIANLITHUANIANLITHUANIANLITHUANIAN
SECURITY ANDSECURITY ANDSECURITY ANDSECURITY ANDSECURITY AND
DEFENCEDEFENCEDEFENCEDEFENCEDEFENCE
POLICYPOLICYPOLICYPOLICYPOLICY

INTERNATIONALINTERNATIONALINTERNATIONALINTERNATIONALINTERNATIONAL
DEFENCEDEFENCEDEFENCEDEFENCEDEFENCE
CO-OPERATIONCO-OPERATIONCO-OPERATIONCO-OPERATIONCO-OPERATION

LITHUANIA’SLITHUANIA’SLITHUANIA’SLITHUANIA’SLITHUANIA’S
INTEGRATIONINTEGRATIONINTEGRATIONINTEGRATIONINTEGRATION
INTO NATOINTO NATOINTO NATOINTO NATOINTO NATO

DEFENCEDEFENCEDEFENCEDEFENCEDEFENCE
MANAGEMENTMANAGEMENTMANAGEMENTMANAGEMENTMANAGEMENT
AND THE ARMEDAND THE ARMEDAND THE ARMEDAND THE ARMEDAND THE ARMED
FORCESFORCESFORCESFORCESFORCES


#### CONTENSCONTENSCONTENSCONTENSCONTENS

55555

**Lithuanian Security Policy** **/5**
**Risks and Threats to Lithuania’s Security /6**
**Lithuanian Defence Policy and Fundamental Principles**
**of Lithuania’s Military Defence Strategy /7**
Deterrence /8
Total and Unconditional Defence /8
Euro-Atlantic Solidarity and Collective Defence /9
**Crisis Management System /9**
**Actions of Fight against Terrorism /10**
Participation in Global Coalition against Terrorism /10
National Measures /11

1 21 21 21 21 2

**Directions of Strategic Partnerships /13**
**Lithuania’s Participation in International Projects /14**
Common Baltic States’ Battalion (BALTBAT) /14
Baltic Air Surveilance Network (BALTNET) /15
Baltic Naval Squadron (BALTRON) /15
Baltic Defence College (BALTDEFCOL) /16
Lithuanian-Polish Battalion (LITPOLBAT) /16
BALTMED Project /17
BALTPERS Project /17
NORBALTPERS Project /17
**International Support /18**
**Multilateral Co-operation /19**
Integration into the European Union /19
United Nations Organisation /19
Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) /20
Confidence and Security Building Measures /20
Arms Control /21

2 42 42 42 42 4

**Partnership for Peace /24**
**Planning and Review Process /24**
**Individual Partnership Programme /26**
**Membership Action Plan /27**

3 133 12 9

**Democratic Civilian Control /29**
**Chain of Command of the Lithuanian Armed Forces /31**
President of the Republic /31


-----

DEFENCE ANDDEFENCE ANDDEFENCE ANDDEFENCE ANDDEFENCE AND
SOCIETYSOCIETYSOCIETYSOCIETYSOCIETY

PERSONNELPERSONNELPERSONNELPERSONNELPERSONNEL
MANAGEMENTMANAGEMENTMANAGEMENTMANAGEMENTMANAGEMENT

BUDGETBUDGETBUDGETBUDGETBUDGET

DEFENCE INDUSTRYDEFENCE INDUSTRYDEFENCE INDUSTRYDEFENCE INDUSTRYDEFENCE INDUSTRY

SOCIETY AND THESOCIETY AND THESOCIETY AND THESOCIETY AND THESOCIETY AND THE
ARMED FORCESARMED FORCESARMED FORCESARMED FORCESARMED FORCES

AGREEMENTAGREEMENTAGREEMENTAGREEMENTAGREEMENT


State Defence Council /31
Ministry of National Defence /32
Commander of the Armed Forces /32
Defence Staff /33
The Armed Forces /34
**The Structure and Tasks of the Armed Forces /34**
Armed Forces Reform /35
Land Forces /37
Air Force /39
Naval Force /41
Logistic Board /43
Procurement of Armament and Equipment /44
Military Training System /45
Active Reserve /45
The Army Ordinariate /47

4 74 74 74 74 7

**National Mobilisation System /48**
Mobilisation System of the Armed Forces /48
Civil Part of the Mobilisation Preparation System /49
Civil Part of Mobilisation Planning Organisation /49
Mobilisation Department /49

5 05 05 05 05 0

Rotation /51
Assessment /52
Leaving for reserve /52
Civil personnel /53
Personnel Training System /54
Conscription /59

6 06 06 06 06 0

**Planning, Programming and Budget System (PPBS) /60**
**National Defence Expenditures /62**
**2002 Programmes /64**

65

6 76 76 76 76 7

**MND Activities in Strengthening Links Between the Armed Forces**
**and the Society /67**
**Civil Protection /68**
**Riflemen Union /69**
**Civil Resistance Centre /69**

7 07 07 07 07 0

**Between the parliamentary parties**
**of Lithuania on the Defence Policy**


-----

#### LITHUANIAN SECURITY AND DEFENCE POLICYLITHUANIAN SECURITY AND DEFENCE POLICYLITHUANIAN SECURITY AND DEFENCE POLICYLITHUANIAN SECURITY AND DEFENCE POLICYLITHUANIAN SECURITY AND DEFENCE POLICY

Lithuanian Security PolicyLithuanian Security PolicyLithuanian Security PolicyLithuanian Security PolicyLithuanian Security Policy

The Law on the Basics of National Security and the National Security Strategy maintain
that the independent and democratic Republic of Lithuania must ensure safe living conditions for the nation, and its distinctive and free development. The main objective of
national security policy is to guarantee the vital security interests of the Republic: national sovereignty, territorial integrity, a democratic constitutional system, human and
citizens’ rights and freedoms, and a safe personal environment in situations when security
is threatened, risk factors escalate, hazards, crisis situations and military conflicts arise.
The main national security standpoint is that, inability to protect the vital interests would
directly and markedly affect the Lithuanian State and its society.

Lithuanian national security strategy comprises not only vital but also primary security
interests.

Primary interests include:

  - Global and regional stability and friendly relations with neighbours;

  - Euro-Atlantic integration, NATO and EU membership;

  - Freedom and democracy in Central and Eastern European countries and the Baltic States;

  - Ensuring supply of strategically important raw materials and alternative sources of
energy;

  - Regional environmental security.

It is obvious that a failure to defend the primary interests would also impair Lithuania’s
vital interests.

Implementing its security policy, Lithuania follows the concept that security now encompasses not only military, but also economic, cultural, ecological and other aspects. Lithuania considers international security as indivisible and seeks to ensure state security as a
component of the security of the broader regional and global community of states.

The current agenda of Lithuanian security policy is determined by its final preparations for
NATO and EU membership and the response to the challenge of international terrorism.

Guaranteeing freedom and independence to its citizens, Lithuania seeks to create the
most favourable conditions for their economic activities and for improving their welfare.
The basis of state national security is a strong, healthy and confident nation, confiding in
its state. Lithuania shall defend the interests of the state and of its citizens not only within
the country, but also on the international arena.

Potential positive changes in the international environment, that contribute to the imple

-----

mentation of Lithuania’s primary national interests lie within Lithuania’s national interests,
and include European integration, NATO expansion, reduction of tensions, international
peace and stability, ensuring appropriate roles and equal rights to small and medium countries. The increase of the number of democratic countries and increasing confidence and
stability in the Euro-Atlantic region, and in the world, creates an environment favourable
for Lithuania and its national interests.

The accession of the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland to NATO in 1999 within
the framework of the first stage of NATO expansion is a factor that improves Lithuania’s
geo-strategic position. Lithuania now has a common border with NATO and seeks an
invitation to join NATO in 2002.

Lithuania allocates its resources towards a number of initiatives directly aimed at NATO
accession, since it sees NATO membership as the main tool, ensuring both internal and
regional security and stability. Participation in the activities and operations of the EuroAtlantic Partnership Council, Partnership for Peace and especially participation in the
Membership Action Plan and the Planning and Review Process are considered as the
most important initiatives.

As a future EU member state Lithuania supports the extension of the EU defence dimension, as far as it does not challenge the role of NATO. The determination of the EU
to regulate crises on its own behalf through establishing Rapid Reaction Forces is indicative of its members’ objective to take greater responsibility for ensuring stability and security in Europe. Lithuania identified and submitted a list of its forces that will in the future
become part of the Rapid Reaction Forces.

Lithuania participates in initiatives of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE) aimed at boosting pan-European confidence and security building
measures, which were renewed in 1999 and continue to operate successfully. Lithuania’s
neighbouring countries – Belarus, Russia and Poland are parts of the Conventional Armed
Forces in Europe (CFE) Treaty, which was renewed in 1999. Lithuania has also expressed interest in the treaty and is preparing to join it in the near future.

Risks and Threats to Lithuania’s SecurityRisks and Threats to Lithuania’s SecurityRisks and Threats to Lithuania’s SecurityRisks and Threats to Lithuania’s SecurityRisks and Threats to Lithuania’s Security

The current assessment of Lithuania’s security environment and the possible development of security situation in Europe and in the world demonstrates that occurrence and
development of military risks have significantly decreased. However, the probability of
risks and threats of a non-military nature has a tendency to increase.

Globalisation creates challenges of a non-military nature, threats and dangers for national security, and it is impossible for states to effectively react to these individually.
Trans-national phenomena like terrorism, illegal trade in arms, drug trafficking, illegal
migration, and the spread of dangerous diseases transcend national borders and become


-----

challenges, threats and dangers on an international scale. As a member of the global
community, Lithuania cannot distance itself from the continuing processes and must be
prepared to react to the upcoming challenges and risks, in co-operation with other states.

Although there is little likelihood of military confrontation in the region, this possibility
cannot be rejected altogether. Besides, the demonstration of military power, initiating
provocations and mock internal conflicts as well as implementation of other means of
exercising economic and political pressure or threatening to use force continue to endanger Lithuania’s security.

The global threat posed by terrorism is, to a great extent, of external character for Lithuania, since its internal situation does not create conditions for development of a large-scale
internal network of terrorist organisations. This threat primarily arises from abroad due
to the fact that Lithuania may become a potential target for international terrorism or a
transit country for international terrorism against the other countries.

Overwhelming dependence of Lithuania on the strategic resources and energy supplies
of one country or the concentration of foreign capital in one or several economic sectors
that are of strategic importance to national security is a dangerous condition not only for
economic prosperity but also for the security of the country.

External threats of primary importance include the illegal proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, their components and their manufacturing technologies as well as activities and operations of foreign special services directed against the Republic of Lithuania, uncontrolled migration resulting from regional conflicts, which can become a
destabilising factor for the whole Europe, including Lithuania.

Not only external, but also internal factors may pose a threat. Unequal social and economic growth, increasing differences in living conditions between different social groups
is considered a risk. Lack of economic stability would affect the interests of every citizen as
well as the state. Social threats are becoming increasingly important: unemployment,
inflation, and devaluation of citizens’ savings. In addition, corruption and money laundering, organised crime, illegal drug and weapon trafficking, illegal trade in people,
illegal businesses, etc. pose a special threat.

Industrial accidents, natural disasters, epidemics or ecological catastrophes also pose a
threat to Lithuania’s security. Structural and technological economic shortcomings, insufficient development of the information society, and currency instability are direct risks
and threats to Lithuania.

Lithuanian Defence Policy and Fundamental PrinciplesLithuanian Defence Policy and Fundamental PrinciplesLithuanian Defence Policy and Fundamental PrinciplesLithuanian Defence Policy and Fundamental PrinciplesLithuanian Defence Policy and Fundamental Principles
of Lithuania’s Military Defence Strategyof Lithuania’s Military Defence Strategyof Lithuania’s Military Defence Strategyof Lithuania’s Military Defence Strategyof Lithuania’s Military Defence Strategy

Lithuania seeks accession to NATO, because only membership in NATO’s collective
defence system will assure long-term security and stability for Lithuania. Lithuania con

-----

tinues to support and, at present, is preparing to participate in EU Common foreign and
security policy.

The Republic of Lithuania currently does not perceive any direct threats to its national
security nor considers any foreign state to be its enemy. Therefore, Lithuania’s defence
policy is open, transparent and non-confrontational and it is not directed against the
legal interests of any other state. Its objective is to protect the country against threats of a
military nature arising from the international environment.

The main goals of Lithuanian defence policy defined in the Military Defence Strategy of
Lithuania are:

  - to ensure state defence;

  - to integrate the country with Euro-Atlantic structures;

  - to encourage confidence and friendly relations with neighbouring countries;

  - to contribute to strengthening international peace and stability.

Lithuanian defence policy is based on the following principles:

**Deterrence**

This principle is based on a demonstration of determination and preparedness to defend the
country at times of peace and possession of a reliable and effectively controlled defence system.
Lithuania seeks to create an effective defence system in order to avoid war and guarantee
peaceful state development. The basis of deterrence is best explained by the provision that in
case of attack Lithuania shall defend itself paying no regard to the nature of aggression and the
magnitude of the attacking forces and regardless of whether international assistance will or
will not be provided. Lithuania’s deterrence strategy is based on the principle that the Armed
forces of the country must be prepared for resistance of unlimited duration.

In the event of an armed attack, Lithuania shall not allow the enemy to attain its goals, i.e.
active control of the state territory, control of its infrastructure and resources, establishment of invading offices and institutions. Resistance will not cease until the complete
state sovereignty and territorial integrity is reinstated, even if the goals of the enemy are
partially achieved.

The potential aggressor must know that in attacking Lithuania it will encounter armed
resistance as well as national opposition and shall incur huge losses disproportional with
the desired objectives.

**Total and Unconditional Defence**

The principles of total and unconditional defence established by the Law on the Basics of
National Security, Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania, the Law on Armed Defence and Opposition to Aggression are obligatory.


-----

The nature of total defence implies that the state’s Armed Forces shall provide armed
defence of Lithuania, state resources shall be used for defence and the nation and every
citizen shall oppose the aggressor or the invader in all possible ways. The unconditional
defence principle implies that defence of Lithuania shall not be limited by any conditions, apart from the norms set by international law, and that no one shall restrict the
right of the nation and every citizen to oppose the aggressor.

Preparation for total defence shall include:

  - preparing the active reserve forces of the Armed Forces;

  - developing a human and material resources mobilisation system and adjusting state
institutions and economic infrastructures to the needs of defence;

  - preparing the society for defence.

**Euro-Atlantic Solidarity and Collective Defence**

The main and most effective measures for ensuring stability, security and welfare in Europe
are based on intensifying Euro-Atlantic integration processes. The collective defence obligations of Alliance’s member states express Euro-Atlantic solidarity. Lithuania considers
NATO integration to be one of the most significant ways of protecting its interests and sees
it as the best security guarantee of internal stability that meets external challenges as well as
creates welfare within the country. Lithuania is aware of the fact that becoming a NATO
member state the country shall not only receive security guarantees, but must also fulfil
certain obligations. Therefore it is determined to share responsibilities within the organisation and perform its tasks and aims as determined in the Strategic Concept of the Alliance.

Lithuania already plans to make an appropriate contribution, in both political and military terms, towards ensuring NATO collective defence, after it becomes a full-fledged
NATO member. Lithuanian defence policy emphasises the state’s main defence task at a
time of peace, which is preparing the state for defence and preparing to execute international obligations of collective defence and peace operations. Therefore, the development of the Lithuanian national defence system shall be directed towards the development of military forces for state defence that are interoperable with NATO or as its
component.

Crisis Management SystemCrisis Management SystemCrisis Management SystemCrisis Management SystemCrisis Management System

The main goal for creating the Lithuanian Crisis Management System (CMS) is to ensure national security and make a contribution towards enhancing international stability
and security. The main objective of the Lithuanian Crisis Management System is to prevent crises by collecting information concerning the ongoing processes, analysing them
and informing superior authority institutions about the current situation, possible threats
and submitting proposals as to actions and operations needed for managing crises. The
Crisis Management System (CMS) also maintains the readiness of the necessary integral


-----

infrastructure and keeps in preparation all the offices, institutions and procedures necessary for control of crisis management actions and operations.

The Lithuanian CMS is being prepared in order to integrate the efforts of Lithuanian
state institutions within the crisis management area. The strategic task of the CMS is to
improve information exchange between various offices and departments.

The CMS encompasses prognosis, prevention and control of a wide range of threats. It is
especially important to extend the mechanisms for crisis prognosis and prevention that
enable detection of crises in their primary stages.

In 2000 the Government of the Republic of Lithuania approved measures for implementation of the national crisis management concept. This includes the creation of a
crisis management system by the end of 2002.

The Crisis Management System is composed of three levels:

  - strategic level: President, Prime Minister and ministers;

  - operational level: Crisis Management Centre;

  - tactical level: operational crisis management offices in all ministries and departments.

The Crisis Management Centre is responsible for the following tasks:

  - execute integrated monitoring of risk factors and threats, forecast possible crises;

  - co-ordinate activities of state institutions and offices within the area of crisis prevention;

  - ensure effective crisis management infrastructure;

  - ensure constant exchange of information on crisis management between institutions;

  - develop international co-operation within the field of crisis management.

Actions of Fight against TerrorismActions of Fight against TerrorismActions of Fight against TerrorismActions of Fight against TerrorismActions of Fight against Terrorism

**Participation in Global Coalition against Terrorism**

Lithuania denounced terrorist attacks against the US and expressed its solidarity and
support for US and NATO, and articulated its determination to join the fight against
terrorism as a member of the international community. Lithuania gave support for the
decision of the North Atlantic Council to apply Article 5 of the Washington Treaty in
response to the terrorist attacks on the US. Lithuania also supported the EU Council
decision and action plan. The Government of Lithuania passed a decision measures to
_inter alia_
implement UN Security Council resolutions 1333 and 1373. This decision,,
encourages states to intensify exchange of information relating to terrorist activities.

Lithuania has signed eight of twelve conventions relating to anti-terrorism, of which seven
have already been ratified, and measures have been taken to enhance signing of the
remaining four conventions.


-----

At the regional level, Lithuania is prepared to transfer all BALTNET collected data to
allies while integrating BALTNET with the NATO airspace monitoring system.

At the national level, Lithuania has proposed the following measures and resources to
help the US:

  - two military medical units;

  - a subdivision for victim identification;

  - one epidemiologist;

  - other resources for removing damages, if required.

Information concerning this proposal was forwarded to the NATO Euro-Atlantic Disaster Response Co-ordination Cell (EADRCC). In addition, the Government of Lithuania
contributed 50 000 Litas financial assistance for Afghan refugees.

The Government of Lithuania gave consent to the US Government for its military aircraft to use Lithuania’s airspace and airports until termination of the counter-terrorist
campaign. The staff of 4 military medical personnel is prepared to participate in UN led
peace support operation in Central Asia as a component of the field hospital of the
Czech Republic. Ten soldiers are also preparing to participate in the operation “Enduring Freedom” as part of military units of Denmark, Norway, and the Netherlands.

**National Measures**

The national programme for the fight against terrorism, enforced in 2002, has identified
short-term and long-term anti-terrorist measures. The Programme is composed of over
50 measures including legal, criminal, financial, intelligence and strategic operation
mechanisms. Implementation terms from three months to two years have been set for
medium-term and long-term measures.

The programme encompasses the following areas:

1. participating in the fight of the international community against terrorism;
2. developing general anti-terrorist legislation;
3. protecting potential targets against terrorist attacks;
4. identifying suspects ordering and executing possible terrorist acts;
5. identifying and eliminating financial sources and ways of funding terrorism;
6. establishing clear procedures for investigating terrorist acts;
7. preparing for elimination of crisis situations caused by acts of terrorism;
8. reinforcing counter-terrorist intelligence capabilities.

The Government of Lithuania and other state institutions have already taken individual
measures aimed at terrorism prevention: protection of strategic objects has been rein_Ignalina_
forced; prohibited air navigation zone over the Power Plant has been extended;
and more attention is dedicated to defence of other possible terrorist targets, e.g. embas

-----

sies; civil aviation administration introduced additional measures for protecting air transport and ensuring airport security; institutions of justice investigate whether there are
any criminal groups operating in Lithuania that have ties with terrorists; the control of
importing and transporting suspicious persons and goods into and within the territory of
Lithuania has been reinforced.

#### INTERNAINTERNAINTERNATIONAL DEFENCE COINTERNAINTERNATIONAL DEFENCE COTIONAL DEFENCE COTIONAL DEFENCE CO-OPERATIONAL DEFENCE CO-OPERA-OPERA-OPERATION-OPERATIONTIONTIONTION

International defence co-operation is a very important element of Lithuanian defence
policy. Defence co-operation results in:

  - strengthening defence capabilities;

  - increasing interoperability with NATO;

  - enhancing confidence and security among states;

  - contributing to international peacekeeping operations.

Lithuania seeks co-operation with all states sharing similar values within the Euro-Atlantic region. The main principle of co-operation is transparency of relations and their compliance with Lithuanian defence policy objectives, which are preparation for defence of
the country and NATO integration. Therefore, the main co-operation priorities are relations with NATO and EU members and the other countries seeking membership of
these organisations.

Lithuania has concluded defence co-operation agreements with 25 countries. Bilateral
co-operation plans with largest number of those countries are signed every year.

The network of Lithuanian defence attachés is also expanding. Lithuania has accredited
8 defence attachés to the 16 members of NATO, 9 – for partner countries, and has
military representatives at NATO and EU.

Directions of Strategic PartnershipsDirections of Strategic PartnershipsDirections of Strategic PartnershipsDirections of Strategic PartnershipsDirections of Strategic Partnerships

The US remains a very important participant in the security processes in Europe, and is
committed to strengthening security of the Euro-Atlantic community including the Baltic region. The US-Baltic Charter signed in 1998 stresses that security of the Baltic States
is closely linked with security of the Euro-Atlantic community members and that the US
supports the security policy goals of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.

The security and defence policies of Lithuania and the US are characteristic of a common
goal, which is to expand and develop co-operation within the Baltic Sea region, to avoid the
establishment of “grey zones” and to enhance the Euro-Atlantic integration processes.

In the process of integration into NATO, Lithuania has maintained strong bilateral co

-----

operation with Poland. Political consultations, mutual support and joint exercises comprise only a few areas in which a strategic partnership is being developed. It is very important to share Polish experience of preparation for NATO membership. The defence cooperation agreement signed by the Lithuanian and Polish Defence Ministers in 1993
was renewed with an intergovernmental agreement in 2001. This Agreement reflects
new realities such as Poland’s membership in NATO and support to Lithuania on the
way to NATO. A joint Lithuanian-Polish battalion LITPOLBAT is one of the most significant outcomes of this practical co-operation.

Trilateral co-operation projects between Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania (BALTBAT,
BALTRON, BALTNET, and BALTDEFCOL) reflect their joint efforts to integrate
into Euro-Atlantic structures. Joint military co-operation projects of the Baltic States
help Lithuania not only to develop her Armed Forces in conformity with NATO standards and to receive significant support from the countries of the West, but also to
acquire experience in co-operation, project co-ordination and management and to
demonstrate to the countries of the West that we are ready to act together on the
international stage. In future these projects will become valuable input into the military structures of NATO.

An intensive dialogue with Estonia and Latvia is taking place in the sphere of policy
planning, focusing attention on implementation of NATO integration measures. Lithuania
takes the view that Estonia and Latvia, as well as Lithuania, will eventually become members of NATO and the EU. Therefore, co-operation with Estonia and Latvia is viewed in
the context of NATO and EU integration.

The successful development of Baltic projects cannot be imagined without support from
the Nordic countries. Due to their historic links, geographic closeness and sharing of
common values, these countries are particularly interested in the development of security
of the Baltic States and stability within the Baltic Sea region. An intensive dialogue is
taking place in the sphere of defence - Denmark, Sweden, Norway and Finland are
reliable partners in bilateral relations and consistent supporters of Lithuania’s interests in
the international arena.

Co-operation with the Czech Republic is being successfully developed as well. As a member of NATO, the Czech Republic is providing advice on preparation for NATO membership issues and is rendering considerable technical assistance.

Co-operative relations with Germany, France, Italy and other EU and NATO members
are becoming especially important as these countries have a great impact on EU and
NATO development dynamics as well as on Lithuania’s foreign and security policy.

Lithuania is aware of the importance of relations with the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and seeks co-operation with these countries. Lithuania maintains military
co-operation relations with Georgia, Ukraine and Armenia. These countries support


-----

Lithuania’s ambition to become a member of NATO and have concluded defence cooperation agreements with Lithuania.

Lithuania’s security policy with regard to Russia is to ensure equal and mutually beneficial neighbourly co-operation. In 2001, the Presidents of Lithuania and the Russian
Federation recognised by their joint declaration “each state’s right to choose its own
security means at the same time committing to avoid strengthening their own security at
the expense of another state’s security”.

Lithuania seeks to enhance measures ensuring confidence and security as well as transparency of security and defence policy. Russian military observers are invited to military
exercises taking place in Lithuania. In 2000 an agreement was reached on exchanging
military information related to additional verification measures in accordance with the
1999 Vienna document and the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE).
In 2001 a similar agreement was reached with Belarus.

Lithuania’s Participation in International ProjectsLithuania’s Participation in International ProjectsLithuania’s Participation in International ProjectsLithuania’s Participation in International ProjectsLithuania’s Participation in International Projects

International projects remain one of the most important fields of Lithuania’s international
co-operation. Joint projects are implemented together with Estonia, Latvia, Poland and
other countries. Those projects receive support from Western countries and help to enhance the visibility of Lithuania on the international stage. The main tasks of projects are to
strengthen national defence capabilities and to enhance interoperability with NATO.

**Common Baltic States’ Battalion (BALTBAT)**

In 2000, reorganisation of BALTBAT from a peacekeeping to an infantry battalion was
completed. This reorganisation aimed to prepare the Baltic battalion for participation in
a wider spectrum of international operations and to establish the basis for BALTBAT’s
long-term participation in these operations. When compared to the former BALTBAT
structure, the infantry companies have been reduced, the staff and logistic companies are
combined, and anti-tank and mortar platoons were introduced. The total personnel of
the battalion is reduced from 742 to 666. The battalion is trained in compliance with
NATO requirements.

Since 2001, following the BALTBAT model and experience acquired in the course of
implementation of the BALTBAT project, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania are developing
national battalions – ESTBAT, LATBAT and LITBAT - which are to ensure continuous
training of BALTBAT personnel and logistic support for the national BALTBAT units.
LITBAT is formed on the basis of the Great Duke Algirdas motorised infantry battalion,
which is located in Rukla.

Along with the formation of national battalions, the Baltic States are ready to continue
participation in international operations by sending BALTBAT infantry companies to sup

-----

port them. The project is supported by a number of Western countries under the chairmanship of Denmark, which also acts as a co-ordinator of LITBAT development project.

The three Baltic States have identified BALTBAT national units for NATO PFP in the
PARP process. Therefore, these national units will have to implement a number of Partnership Goals, which will in future enable BALTBAT to participate in NATO-led
operations even more effectively together with military units of NATO members.

**Baltic Air Surveilance Network (BALTNET)**

In 2000, a Regional Airspace Surveillance and Co-ordination Centre (RASCC) was opened
in Karmëlava, Kaunas region. RASCC together with other three national nodes in Estonia,
Latvia and Lithuania, which are linked by radar and communication network, comprise
the Baltic Air Surveillance Network (BALTNET). The RASCC personnel is internationally manned, which means that all three Baltic States are represented in RASCC.

This system, which was implemented with the assistance of a number of Western countries (especially, Norway and the US) allows the creation of a consistent air image over the
Baltic States as well as its transfer to the national nodes that are responsible for airspace
security and defence.

In 2000, the BALTNET training centre started functioning. It was established with
assistance provided by Norway and the US. The training centre will train airspace training specialists for Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and other countries.

The BALTNET system has been implemented in compliance with NATO requirements,
and in the future it will be integrated into the NATO airspace surveillance and defence
system. Technically BALTNET could be integrated immediately. BALTNET is developed according to the requirements of Partnership Goal.

**Baltic Naval Squadron (BALTRON)**

BALTRON consists of 3-4 Estonian, Latvian and Lithuanian ships that are to perform
mine clearance operations.

An international staff authorised by the Commanders’ Committee of Estonia, Latvia and
Lithuania commands the Squadron. The BALTRON Commander’s and other international staff positions are assigned to one of the Baltic States in accordance with the rotation principle.

Subject to the Political Guidance approved by the Baltic States’ Ministers of Defence,
attention in the BALTRON development plan will be focused on BALTRON‘s conformity with Partnership goals agreed between NATO, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
The implementation of BALTRON Partnership goals will be focused on strengthening
of the Squadron’s combat capabilities and readiness and improvement of communica

-----

tion and information, logistic and training systems. Each of the Baltic States has
developed national plans and measures for achievement of Partnership goals.

Since 1999, the Naval Communication Operator Training Centre started functioning
in Tallinn, Estonia. In 2000, a mine-hunting simulator was installed in Liepaja, Latvia. In
2001, a BALTRON diver-training and a “Lindau” type mine-clearing equipment
service and repair centres were also opened in Liepaja.

**Baltic Defence College (BALTDEFCOL)**
In 1999, an international military training institution, BALTDEFCOL, was opened in
Tartu, Estonia. Its aim is to train senior staff officers of the Baltic States who are going to
serve within their Ministries of Defence, the Armed Forces and international headquarters,
to work as defence attachés or instructors at the national military education institutions.

Most of the teachers at BALTDEFCOL are military experts from Western countries sent to
BALTDEFCOL by the project leader Sweden as well as Denmark, United Kingdom, the
US, Norway, Finland, Switzerland, and Germany. These states support the functioning of
the College by providing computer equipment, literature and transportation. Representative from Lithuania started work at the BALTDEFCOL since the autumn 2001.

The curriculum at BALTDEFCOL is adjusted to the specific conditions of the Baltic
States, taking into account their geostrategic environment and their current Armed Forces.
The training process is based on maximum application of NATO procedures and standards as well as modern computer technologies and training methods.

Officers from Bosnia-Herzegovina, the Czech Republic, Denmark, United Kingdom,
the US, Canada, Poland, Romania, Finland, Sweden, Hungary, and Germany are studying at BALTDEFCOL as well as students from the Baltic States.

**Lithuanian-Polish Battalion (LITPOLBAT)**
LITPOLBAT is the most important Lithuanian-Polish defence co-operation project. It is
the only military unit that Lithuania shares with another NATO country.

The battalion was established on the basis of existing Lithuanian and Polish military units.
The official language of the battalion is English. The battalion’s personnel consists of
784 servicemen, 351 of whom are Lithuanian and 433 - Polish.

The battalion headquarters is located in Orzysz, Poland. Lithuanian and Polish components of the battalion are formed and trained separately in Lithuania and Poland and are
joined together during joint exercises and training or when leaving for peace operations.

In 2000, LITPOLBAT was identified as a component of the Rapid Reaction Forces
formed by the EU. Another battalion’s objective is also to be included in NATO-led
multinational forces for implementation of international peace operations.


-----

**BALTMED Project**

In 1999, a trilateral project BALTMED was introduced in Lithuania. Sweden, which is reducing its Armed Forces, initiated the project and is transferring surplus medical and field
equipment. With the help of Sweden, a medical dispensary was opened in Rukla garrison. By
the year 2003, four military health care points will be established in Lithuania.

By 2005, the Armed Forces of Lithuania will be fully equipped with mobile medical
support units (medical platoons, companies and a field hospital). In addition to material
and technical support and in accordance with the provisions of the BALTMED project,
Sweden arranges training courses at all levels for the military medical personnel of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.

The project will enable completion of medical support elements of the Baltic States’
combat units with standard medical equipment, to ensure provision of a higher standard
of medical service, and a wider range of participation of military medical staff in various
international missions.

**BALTPERS Project**

The aim of the BALTPERS project is to develop a reserve and personnel management
and mobilisation system. BALTPERS covers five personnel accounting and management
stages, which include registration of personnel, call-up for military service, performance
of military service, wartime assignment and mobilisation. A common database is used
through all personnel management stages. Subject to the agreements signed by the Ministry of National Defence of Lithuania and the National Military Service Administration
of Sweden, the Swedish Government has allocated funds for implementation of this
project. The project is to be completed by the end of 2002.

**NORBALTPERS Project**

Subject to agreements between the Armed Forces of Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia and Norway, implementation of the NORBALTPERS project began in the summer of 2000.
The project consists of three principle stages:
1. representation system for conscripts (under implementation since the spring of 2001);
2. concept of a reserve officer (under implementation since the second half of 2001).
It has been decided to develop a computerised distant training system for reserve
officers to meet NATO standards, with a centre at BALTDEFCOL, and with the
further view of transforming it into autonomous centres within the Baltic States’
Military Academies;
3. personnel career management (under implementation from first half of 2002).

Completion of the project is scheduled for the end of 2002.


-----

International SupportInternational SupportInternational SupportInternational SupportInternational Support

Increasing international defence assistance provided to Lithuania demonstrates other
countries’ support to reforms implemented in Lithuania that aim to develop the defence
potential of the country. Since 1991, Lithuania has received support from nearly all
Western countries.

By way of bilateral and multilateral co-operation Lithuania aims to achieve more coordination at national and international levels. In this context, the BALTSEA forum is of
special importance as its goal is to co-ordinate assistance provided by western countries
to the Baltic States to ensure their security and defence, to match this assistance with the
needs of the Baltic States’ Armed Forces, and to discuss essential security issues of the
region. The support provided by other countries is linked with implementation of the
national Armed Forces development plans and NATO integration programmes.

Countries place particular emphasis on training of military and civilian personnel. Mention should be made here of efforts made by the Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, UK, US and to pass their military knowledge to the developing Armed Forces
of Lithuania.

Material support, which is often being implemented through specific projects, requires a
special mention. Denmark’s support to the establishment of an Artillery battalion and
the LITBAT project should be highlighted as being of particular importance because it
will enable Lithuania to establish a battalion in conformity with NATO requirements by
the end of 2002.

Assisted by Sweden, Lithuania is currently developing an air defence battalion, and equipment and armaments of two air defence battalions were transferred to Lithuania. In
addition, Sweden has donated to Lithuania and trained to use the entire equipment and
armaments for the headquarters of infantry battalion, equipment and armaments for an
engineer company, the majority of which were assigned to the Western military region.
Equipment and armaments of two motorised infantry battalions and one engineer company will be donated additionally by the year 2005.

The Lithuanian Navy has received significant support from Germany and Norway. Germany donated two mine-hunters to Lithuania (assigned to BALTRON). Norway donated two fast patrol boats and one for spare parts. Some of the armoured vehicles transferred to Lithuania by Germany may be used by the “Iron Wolf” Reaction Brigade,
which is trained for NATO Article 5 operations.

The US remains one of the largest supporters. Financial support provided by the US
continues to grow: from 4.7 mil USD in 1999 to 7.5 mil USD in 2002. The funds
provided by the US, alongside the funds from the National Defence budget are mostly
concentrated on implementation of the Lithuanian Armed Forces development projects.


-----

Lithuania has also received a large shipment of M-14 rifles with ammunition, communication and other equipment from the US.

At the end of 1997, a group of the US experts assessed the Lithuanian Armed Forces,
which added impetus to defence reform. It was followed by a study of the communication system and harbour and airport infrastructure. Denmark and the United Kingdom
have provided similar support. In 2001 the US undertook another assessment of the
Lithuanian Armed Forces.

A shipment of machine-guns, rifles and optical equipment was received from France.

The Czech Republic, the Netherlands, Poland and Switzerland have also provided Lithuania with material support.

Multilateral Co-operationMultilateral Co-operationMultilateral Co-operationMultilateral Co-operationMultilateral Co-operation

**Integration into the European Union**

Lithuania’s integration into the European Union (EU) as well as into NATO is based on
acknowledgement of common values such as democracy, primacy of personal freedom
and rights, rule of law and a free market. Lithuania’s integration into the EU is also an
effective response to newly emerging threats and challenges.

Lithuania supports the EU members’ decision to establish the EU military dimension
and to create a Common European Defence and Security Policy, which will give the EU
an independent role in prevention of conflicts and management of crises. However, this
should in no way replace NATO as a collective defence organisation.

Lithuania identified contribution to the EU Rapid Reaction Forces with units of up to a
company level (100-150 men) from the selection of capabilities: three infantry battalions, two “Lindau” type mine-hunting ships, an engineer platoon, a military medical unit
(2 ambulances, 2 physicians and 7 paramedics), two helicopters Mi-8 for search and
rescue operations, two aircraft AN-26 and two training areas.

**United Nations Organisation**

Lithuania actively supports the United Nations and emphasises strengthening the
UN’s role in the world. Currently, the Lithuanian Armed Forces do not take part in
UN peace support operations. However, Lithuania has identified the forces that
could be employed in such operations.

In 1998, the Government of the Republic of Lithuania and the UN signed a Memorandum of Mutual Understanding concerning Lithuania’s participation in the UN Standby Forces system. The UN Stand-by Forces are formed of national forces available for


-----

participation in UN peace support operations in accordance with the conditions agreed
in advance.

In accordance with the Memorandum, Lithuania’s obligations with regard to the UN
Stand-by Forces system remain the same as those defined when the document was signed,
i.e. Lithuania has made a commitment to maintain at high readiness a group of 24 officials (20 policemen, 4 staff officers and military observers). Additionally contribution of
8 medical officers was made to the UN Stand-by Forces system, which in the future will
be assigned to the Stand-by High Readiness Brigade (SHIRBRIG). At the end of 2001
Lithuania expressed its willingness to become a candidate for membership in SHIRBRIG
with medical unit mentioned above. This was regarded positively, and bilateral dialogue
is taking place.

**Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)**

Development of confidence and security building measures and arms control mechanisms under the auspices of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) should be viewed as the main achievement of this Organisation.

Lithuania supports OSCE efforts directed at finding peaceful means for resolution of
crises in Europe. Lithuania participates in the OSCE election monitoring missions, border-monitoring mission in Georgia and is always ready to contribute to any other efforts
with the aim of enhancing stability in Europe.

**Confidence and Security Building Measures**

Confidence and Security Building Measures (CSBMs) promote the development of a
secure and stable environment in Europe and help to preclude unexpected and sudden
aggression and to discourage the use of armed forces with the purpose of exerting political pressure. Lithuania takes an active part in CSBMs and supports OSCE initiatives
directed at ensuring peaceful coexistence of the European states and does not approve a
regional approach in regard to these measures.

In 1999, at the OSCE Summit meeting in Istanbul, Turkey, the renewed Vienna Document on CSBM’s was adopted. This document remains one of the major instruments,
which helps to enhance confidence and military transparency among the signatory states.

The document provides for different initiatives that help to build confidence between
the states participating in the OSCE and includes the following:

  - the annual exchange of military information about the size of the Armed Forces,
planning of defence, including the military budget;

  - assessment visits and regional inspections;

  - preliminary provision of information about military operations of the size and scope


-----

defined in the 1999 Vienna document;

  - development of interstate contacts in preparing visits to the air bases and demonstrating new weapons and their systems;

  - military contacts and co-operation programmes, specifying the fields of co-operation and permission to visit military sites, or observe military operations, to take part
in seminars on military co-operation and other activities.

Lithuania, in carrying out the policy of good relations with the states of the region and
seeking to maintain a constructive dialogue in ensuring a peaceful and safe environment
in that part of Europe, initiates the implementation of the new confidence and security
building measures.

The Ministry of National Defence, in accordance with the schedule established by the
OSCE, on the basis of the requirements laid down in the 1999 Vienna document, annually provides data to the OSCE about the Armed Forces of Lithuania, the military budget,
planning of defence and planned military exercises.

In 2000, Lithuania and Russia, on a bilateral basis agreed to exchange one additional
quota for the assessment visit in Lithuania and the Kaliningrad region of the Russian
Federation. Such a possibility was provided for in the 1999 Vienna document. In this
way Lithuania and Russia will be able to make one assessment visit per year. It was also
agreed on a bilateral basis to exchange information about the Armed Forces of Lithuania
and military units of the Russian Federation in the Kaliningrad region in accordance
with the requirements laid down in the CFE Treaty. At the beginning of 2001 Lithuania
and the Russian Federation exchanged military information according to the requirements of the CFE Treaty.

In 2001, Lithuania and Belarus, also on a bilateral basis, agreed to implement additional
initiatives that strengthen confidence and security. The agreement was made with Belarus
to annually exchange an additional quota for an information assessment visit and inspection in accordance with the 1999 Vienna document of the OSCE. It was also agreed to
exchange information about the Armed Forces of Lithuania and the Armed Forces of
Belarus in accordance with the requirements laid down in the CFE Treaty. It has been
decided to provide information annually, on a bilateral basis, about the largest military
operations, which do not reach the limits of the notified events, provided for in the 1999
Vienna document. Each year bilateral meetings of experts will be organised to assess the
implementation of the initiatives agreed upon to strengthen security and confidence.

**Arms Control**

Lithuania, seeking to contribute to security and stability, supports and carries out the
policy of arms control and non-proliferation of arms. Lithuania’s internal and foreign
policy in this sphere is pursued, first and foremost, taking into account the national


-----

interests of the state, as well as the policy carried out by the UN, the OSCE, the EU, and
NATO.

Lithuania perceives arms control and non-proliferation as a necessary condition to ensure international and national security and has signed and ratified the following international agreements on control and non-proliferation of arms:

  - on 25 June 1991, the 1968 Agreement on Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
was ratified;

  - on 10 June 1997, the 1972 Convention on Biological and Toxic Weapons was
ratified (since 2000 Lithuania has been presenting national reports);

  - on 24 February 1998, the 1993 Convention on Chemical Weapons was ratified
and in September of the same year the Law on Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
of the Republic of Lithuania was adopted;

  - on 26 March 1998, Lithuania ratified the 1980 Convention on Certain Conventional Arms that can be regarded as extremely harmful or act indiscriminately, and its
four protocols whose two amended protocols regulate the use of anti-personnel mines
(each year national reports are presented in accordance with this Convention);

  - on 26 February 1999, the 1997 United Nations Ottawa Convention on Prohibition of the Use, Accumulation, Manufacture and Handing over of Anti-Personnel
Mines and their Destruction was signed;

  - on 28 October 1999, the 1996 Agreement on Universal Prohibition of Nuclear
Tests was ratified.

At the time of signing the Ottawa Convention Lithuania submitted a declaration in
which the provision has been set that ratification will depend on the fulfilment of corresponding terms of the implementation of its regulations. Lithuania, as a signatory of the
Convention, observes the spirit of that document and does not violate commitments
related to it.

Taking into account the position of the EU on the joint export of anti-personnel mines,
the Government of the Republic of Lithuania adopted a second memorandum prohibiting export of anti-personnel mines. By these actions Lithuania demonstrates its’ support
and resolution to implement the EU initiatives.

Minor military conflicts, which take place in Europe, create conditions for the distribution of small arms and light weapons (SALW) in a criminal way without any control. This
contributes to instability and impedes conflict resolution.

Lithuania supports the initiative of the United Nations, the OSCE and NATO in the
sphere of small arms and light weapons. Lithuania also approves of the EU directive on
armament acquisition and storage. In its national law, Lithuania has adopted and implemented laws and secondary legislation that regulate export, import and transit of weapons, their manufacture, repair, sale and storage.


-----

In 1999 the decision about the adapted CFE Treaty was taken at the meeting of the Heads
of the countries of the OSCE held in Istanbul. Efforts of the states to review and upgrade
the CFE Treaty signed in 1990 were determined by the importance of that document to
the balance of conventional forces in Europe and stability and security in the region.

The Government of the Republic of Lithuania recognises the importance of the CFE
Treaty as one of the main arms control and disarmament mechanisms in Europe. Therefore it will consider the possibility of joining the adapted CFE Treaty after the latter has
come into effect. In the event of such a political decision Lithuania’s conditions for joining the treaty would become the subject of negotiations with all the present participants.

#### LITHULITHULITHUANIA’S INTEGRALITHULITHUANIA’S INTEGRAANIA’S INTEGRAANIA’S INTEGRATION INTO NAANIA’S INTEGRATION INTO NATION INTO NATION INTO NATOTION INTO NATOTOTOTO

One of the main objectives of Lithuania’s foreign policy is membership in the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO). The importance of this objective has remained
unchanged since 1994 when Lithuania applied for membership of the Alliance and
started to participate intensively in the Partnership for Peace Programme.

Lithuania and a group of nine other Central and Eastern European countries seeks to be
invited to join the Alliance at the meeting of the Heads of NATO member countries to
be held in Prague in 2002. Lithuania hopes that the second stage of NATO enlargement
towards Central and Eastern Europe will be marked with the “Baltic” dimension and
will cover all three Baltic States.

Membership in the alliance of collective defence is the best way for Lithuania to ensure
its security. Firstly, NATO has proved its effectiveness and readiness in case of military
aggression to take measures to ensure the security of its members. Furthermore, collective
defence is more cost-effective than attempting to ensure security on a national basis.
Practical readiness of NATO and its readiness to ensure security of its members require
high levels of readiness of the armed forces of the countries. Effective forces and the
political will of the member states to contribute to operations headed by NATO ensure
that guarantees provided by the Alliance are credible.

Lithuania understands the importance of preparation for membership and, according to
the assessment of NATO experts, has already achieved significant progress in the sphere
of integration into NATO. Lithuania is preparing to contribute to possible future collective defence operations by preparing one battalion for participation in such operations
and providing it with all necessary armaments and military equipment by the end of the
year 2002, and preparing the Reaction Brigade which will be able to carry out tasks
together with NATO forces within the Lithuanian territory by the year 2006. Lithuania
has undertaken to continue its participation in international peace operations led by
NATO, the EUand the United Nations.


-----

Public support for Lithuania’s membership in NATO increases: 68.1 per cent (according to the data survey conducted in May 2002) of the total population of Lithuania
would support Lithuanian’s membership in the Alliance. The approval of the main political parties of the country to seek Lithuania’s membership in the Alliance was confirmed in May 2001 by the agreement of 12 political parties on the defence policy of
Lithuania, 2001-2004, in which not only the key directions of security and defence
policy have been approved but also 2 per cent of the GDP has been guaranteed for
allocation to defence spending. This agreement of the political parties ensures continuity
of security and defence policy of Lithuania.

Lithuania hopes that the decision taken by NATO member states about the development of the Alliance will be based on actual preparedness of the candidate countries to
contribute to the functions carried out by the Alliance, assessing each of them individually. Therefore Lithuania will continue to participate in the Membership Action Plan
process and initiatives of the Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme. Lithuania is ready
to assume the commitments provided for in the Washington Treaty and share the responsibility and advantages of common security and collective defence.

Partnership for PeacePartnership for PeacePartnership for PeacePartnership for PeacePartnership for Peace

The Partnership for Peace (PfP) Programme, which Lithuania joined, was presented at
the Summit meeting in Brussels in 1994. PfP is considered to be one of the most successful NATO initiatives because it co-ordinates interests of states with different foreign policy
objectives: for some countries it is a form of political dialogue, for others, including Lithuania, it is a mean to prepare for future NATO membership.

PfP constitutes a practical basis of co-operation between NATO and the partner states.
The partnership programme seeks to extend and intensify political and military
co-operation in Europe, strengthen stability, consolidate peace and establish closer relations through practical co-operation.

With the passing of time, PfP was developed and supplemented with new co-operation
initiatives. In 1997 the PfP Programme was strengthened: its activity was extended by
providing more specific political consultations and more favourable possibilities were
given to partners to participate in the decision making and PfP planning activities.

Lithuania takes an active part in different NATO initiatives of PfP, seeking to comply
with NATO standards in all fields of political, civil and military life. Furthermore, participation in the PfP Programme enables Lithuania to contribute to the processes of ensuring transatlantic security and stability.

Planning and Review ProcessPlanning and Review ProcessPlanning and Review ProcessPlanning and Review ProcessPlanning and Review Process

Lithuania joined the PfP Programme in 1994 and started its practical co-operation with


-----

NATO in preparing to participate in planning NATO collective defence through the
PfP Planning and Review Process. The Planning and Review Process (PARP) was established as the mechanism enabling countries that co-operate under the PfP Programme to
establish and assess the forces necessary for partner-states to carry out multilateral training, peacekeeping, rescue and humanitarian operations together with the forces of the
Alliance, as well as to increase interoperability between the partners and NATO military
forces and exchange information about defence and financial plans.

At present the PARP is one of the most important parts of the PfP Programme in developing Armed Forces in Lithuania that meet NATO standards and are capable of acting
in unison with the Armed Forces of NATO and its member states.

PARP is implemented in 6 years (Partnership Goals (PG’s) package also include partnership goals, which have to be implemented in the period of 1-6 years), every second year
new stage begins – according to the information provided by Lithuania on the progress
made and plans for six years, NATO prepares Assessment Report and new PG’s package.

The first stage of the Planning and Review Process was scheduled for the period 19951997. During that stage, Lithuania selected 13 out of 20 interoperability objectives (from
interoperability in the area of communication equipment to logistics and language training). During the second stage of PARP in 1997, NATO proposed 45 interoperability
objectives and Lithuania selected 33 out of them.

1999 was the year of transition for PARP. During the Washington Summit it was decided to
“deepen” PARP in the direction of approaching NATO Capabilities planning process. One
of the changes – corrected and detailed IO’s (Interoperability Objetives) and afterwards renaming of them into Partnership Goals (PG’s). In 1999 by seeking to improve the preparation of new package of PG’s, second stage of PARP, including the implementation of IO’s was
prolonged until 2000, and additionally Lithuania committed to implement 9 initial PG’s,
which were reviewed and added to the package of PG’s of the next stage.

The third stage of PARP, which began in 2000, meant that Lithuania committed to seek
interoperability by implementing 66 PG’s by 2006, which by their nature correspond to
the NATO members fulfilled Force Goals (FG’s). That stage is important not only by the
quantity and quality of PG’s, but also because they are prepared taking into account the
implementation of Membership Action Plan (MAP), which started in 1999, therefore
includes such new areas like law.

PARP Partnership Goals can be divided into two categories: partnership goals that have
to be implemented only in units, that are being prepared to the joint operations with
NATO (usually specific requirements), and partnership goals, that have to be implemented in the whole Armed forces (for example, C3 system, structure of headquarters,
tactics doctrine, training, etc.).

At present, the basic areas of interoperability are as follows:


-----

  - Specialised teaching of the English language;

  - NATO doctrines, procedures and standardisation;

  - Command, control and communications (C3);

  - Logistics;

  - Surveillance and control of air space.

On the whole, progress made by Lithuania and its achievements in the field of national
defence are given a very positive assessment, Lithuania is mentioned as one of the candidate countries that is best prepared for NATO membership. Since the meeting of NATO
Heads in Prague in 2002 is approaching, where several countries are expected to be
invited to join NATO, all the countries seeking membership have been offered the opportunity to present information about their armed forces and to fill in an extraordinary
PARP questionnaire in the end of 2001. The questionnaire was submitted to NATO
member states, which will have to take the decision on the enlargement of the Alliance
and specify which of the candidate countries should be invited to join.

In November 2001 the document “Lithuania’s Response to the Survey of Overall PfP
Interoperability – 2001” was submitted to NATO. PfP and PARP Assessment 2001 was
prepared on the basis of this document and a part of it was included in the Progress
Report of Lithuania.

Individual Partnership ProgrammeIndividual Partnership ProgrammeIndividual Partnership ProgrammeIndividual Partnership ProgrammeIndividual Partnership Programme

On 30 November 1994, in reply to the NATO PfP initiative, the first Individual Partnership Programme (the IPP) between Lithuania and NATO was signed.

The IPP is one of the parts of the PfP Programme. The IPP consists of many events,
which take place either in NATO states or in NATO candidate countries. These events


_Scheme of_
_co-operation_
_with NATO_


-----

can be divided into two parts: some of them can be attributed to political co-operation
and other events can be attributed to military co-operation. Different meetings of high
officials, conferences and workshops constitute political co-operation. Military co-operation means different exercises, courses and meetings of officers. The IPP is formed every
year and each year it embraces a two-year period: those events, which correspond to the
established priorities of the development of the Lithuanian Armed Forces and NATO
integration are selected from the Partnership Work Programme (PWP). Of late, in forming the IPP full account is taken at whether or not the events help to implement practical
partnership objectives.

The following are priority areas in the IPP for Lithuania:

  - air defence;

  - air surveillance and airspace control;

  - the development of logistics;

  - English language training;

  - implementation of command, control and communications (C3) system;

  - military education and doctrine.

Exercises constitute especially important area of the IPP. Apart from the PfP exercises,
Lithuania takes an active part and organises international exercises, which do not constitute a part of the PfP Programme, but corresponds to its objectives. Lithuania participates in about 140 events, including exercises. 60% of them are directly related to the
implementation of the MAP and PARP. Since the very beginning of the IPP Lithuania
has sought to strengthen co-operation and gradually increased the amount of the IPP
activity. However, at present more attention is being paid to quality rather than to quantity and therefore the number of the Lithuanian IPP events has decreased.

Membership Action PlanMembership Action PlanMembership Action PlanMembership Action PlanMembership Action Plan

During the 1999 Washington Summit agreement was not reached on which countries
would become new NATO members at the second stage of NATO enlargement. However, guidelines were drawn up about how to “come closer” to NATO membership, i. e.
the mechanism of the Membership Action Plan (the MAP) was approved. Lithuania,
together with other countries seeking NATO membership joined the mechanism of the
MAP. This process must help the candidate countries fulfil the requirements necessary
to become full-fledged NATO members.

In principle, the MAP is not a new NATO initiative. Rather it is an attempt to rationalise
all NATO initiatives and programmes that have been in existence thus far. The new
development is that NATO undertook to assess integration plans submitted by the countries seeking to become NATO members for the first time.

The results of that initiative are as follows:


-----

  - countries participating in the PfP Programme have been divided into two groups:
candidate countries (seeking membership in the Alliance) and other countries-partners whose aim is to co-operate with the Alliance, however, that co-operation will
not lead to immediate membership;

  - candidate countries had additional outlet to intensify preparation for membership;

  - candidate countries had to generalise NATO integration efforts of the whole country.

The whole MAP mechanism is as follows: the states, having decided to participate in the
MAP process, prepare their annual NATO integration plans and submit them to NATO.
NATO considers and assesses them carefully. During the meetings with the country
seeking membership, NATO presents its assessment, observations and questions. Later
the countries improve these plans and implement them. A year later the Alliance is
familiarised with the results and it prepares annual assessments of individual countries.

Lithuania’s first annual NATO integration programme was prepared in 1999. The
NATO Integration Co-ordination Commission consisting of representatives of different
ministries draws up this programme annually. The Government approves the programme.
The National NATO Integration Programme of Lithuania consists of 5 parts:

  - The political and economic part. This part comprises political and economic aspects of integration into NATO, such as basic principles and objectives of the country’s foreign policy and economic development;

  - The defence (military) part. This part deals with Lithuania’s military integration
into NATO, participation of the Armed Forces in the PfP Programme, preparation for membership in the Alliance, annual and long-term plans for the development of the Armed Forces are presented;

  - The resource part. Resources available, which are necessary to implement the objectives related to Lithuania’s integration, are presented in this part. Particular attention is paid to the defence budget of Lithuania;

  - The security part. The issues related to protection of information (checking the
reliability of national defence employees, transmission of secret and confidential
information, registration and storage of classified documents);

  - The legal part. The country must provide information on how its legal system meets
NATO requirements.

Lithuania, in participating in the MAP, can ask the Alliance to provide consultations on
different issues of integration into NATO. Lithuania has already consulted the Alliance
on issues of the implementation of the Crisis Management System, CFE Treaty, protection of information and other issues. Apart from these consultations, NATO experts
annually arrive in Lithuania at the beginning of the year and their visits are aimed at
assessing Lithuania’s progress in seeking membership. Following these visits NATO prepares the Progress Report which is submitted to Lithuania. NATO presents an assessment of Lithuania’s achievements and recommendations in that Report. In preparing
another annual report Lithuania takes these recommendations into consideration.


-----

#### DEFENCE MANAGEMENTDEFENCE MANAGEMENTDEFENCE MANAGEMENT ANDDEFENCE MANAGEMENTDEFENCE MANAGEMENT AND AND AND   THE ARMED AND THE ARMEDTHE ARMEDTHE ARMED FORCESTHE ARMED FORCES FORCES FORCES FORCES

The national defence system is developed according to the regulations of the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania and the Law on the Basics of National Security of the
Republic of Lithuania. The principle of democratic civilian control applies to national
defence institutions.

Democratic Civilian ControlDemocratic Civilian ControlDemocratic Civilian ControlDemocratic Civilian ControlDemocratic Civilian Control

The concept of democratic civilian control is based on several essential principles:

  - subordination of the military to civil authorities by legal and institutional mechanisms;

  - political neutrality of the military, established by regulations and the internal (professional) ethics of the organisation;

  - non-interference of civil authorities with activity of a military nature, which is related to clearly professional military preparation.

Democratic civilian control is one of the basic principles of the national defence system of
Lithuania, which is enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania and the
laws regulating national security and defence issues. The 1996 Law on the Basics of
National Security states that “all decisions on defence policy and the Armed Forces shall
be adopted by the democratically elected civil authorities”.

_Seimas_
After the Parliament of the Republic of Lithuania ( ) had adopted the Law on
Organisation of the National Defence System and Military Service the legal basis was
completed for implementation of democratic civilian control. The latter Law specifies
the functions of the Minister of National Defence and Commander of the Armed Forces
the chain of command and control in peacetime, crisis or wartime. The Constitution of
the Republic of Lithuania and the Law on the Basics of National Security establishes the
sphere of competence of the Parliament, the Government, the Ministry of National Defence and the Defence Staff.

The Parliament of the Republic of Lithuania is one of the main institutions carrying out
functions of democratic civilian control. The Parliament of the Republic of Lithuania by
creating the legal basis for national security and defence, regulates the following spheres
by law: the protection of the country in peace time; total defence and resistance to aggression; preparation and participation of the Ministry of National Defence and the
Armed Forces in national defence; rights, obligations and responsibility of the military;
disciplinary statutes establishing the basics for arrest and legal procedures, intelligence,
counter-intelligence and the fight against subversive activities and other.

Parliament by law establishes the total annual number of the regular Armed Forces personnel and the active reserve taking into account the defence structure, as well as the
number of officers of each higher rank. The Chairman of the Parliament is a member of
the State Defence Council. The State Defence Council considers the basic principles


-----

and directions of national security policy and defence of the Republic of Lithuania, considers and submits recommendations to the President of the Republic of Lithuania, the
Parliament and the Government for conclusion, signing and ratification of international
treaties and agreements on defence and other issues.

The Committee on National Security and Defence in the Parliament has the right, within
its competence, to:

  - consider and draw up draft laws and other legal acts on issues of the national defence system;

  - co-ordinate the work of interested state institutions in drawing up draft laws ;

  - analyse the necessity for new laws and their amendments;

  - put forward proposals for the formulation of national defence policy, as well as
creation and improvement of related structures;

  - carry out parliamentary control of institutions of the national defence system, consider the reports of ministries and other state institutions about how laws and other
acts in the sphere of national security and defence adopted by the Parliament are
being implemented, submit proposals and recommendations for improving the
activity of these institutions.

Democratic civilian control established by law clearly defines the hierarchy of command
and control. According to the principle of democratic civilian control the chain of operational command of military operations and other defensive actions begins with the President of the Republic of Lithuania who is the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces.
The President of the Republic of Lithuania has the right to adopt decisions on distribution of the Armed Forces in peace time, approve places for permanent distribution of
military divisions in peace time and territorial boundaries of manoeuvring. The President of the Republic of Lithuania and the Minister of National Defence constitute the
civil authorities of the state defence.

The Government of the Republic of Lithuania has the right to make decisions on the
provision of the Armed Forces, procurement of armament and its material basis. The
Minister of National Defence is responsible for the implementation of defence policy,
the development of the national defence institutions and their preparation for defence, international co-operation in the sphere of defence, adopting decisions about
personnel policy, formulating resource policy, recommending candidates for Commander of the Armed Forces and the Commander of the Land Forces to the President
of the Republic. The Commander of the Armed Forces is directly subordinated to the
Minister of National Defence. In peace time the Commander of the Armed Forces
formulates the State’s military defence strategy and is responsible for the preparation
of military defence plans in the event of unexpected attack and other circumstances;
sets tasks of control and defence of the state territory, territorial sea, the economic zone
and air space to the Armed Forces.


-----

Chain of Command of the Lithuanian Armed ForcesChain of Command of the Lithuanian Armed ForcesChain of Command of the Lithuanian Armed ForcesChain of Command of the Lithuanian Armed ForcesChain of Command of the Lithuanian Armed Forces

Chain of command of the Lithuanian Armed Forces and defence planning are based on
the following legal acts: the Law on the Basics of National Security, the Law on Organisation of National Defence and Military Service, the Law on Conscription, the Law on
Mobilisation and Mobilisation Reserve, the Law on Armed Defence and Resistance to
Aggression, the Martial Law of the Republic of Lithuania.

Chain of command of the state defence consists of three levels: strategic, operational and
tactical.

  - At the strategic level the President of the Republic of Lithuania, the State Defence
Council, the Minister of National Defence and Commander of the Armed Forces
adopt decisions and set tasks to the Armed Forces to conduct defence operations
and other actions.

  - At the operational level the planning of and training for the execution of military
operations is performed by the Commander of the Land Forces, in wartime – commanders of the Naval Force and Air Force forces support him.

  - At the tactical level military units operate, operations are planned and carried out,
commanders of military units carry out tactical command.

**President of the Republic**

Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania the President of the Republic
of Lithuania is the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces.

In the event of an armed attack which threatens the sovereignty of the State or its territorial integrity, the President of the Republic of Lithuania shall immediately authorise
measures for defence against such armed aggression, shall impose martial law throughout the country or in separate parts thereof, shall declare mobilisation, and shall submit
these decisions to the Seimas for approval.

The President of the Republic appoints, upon the approval of the Parliament, the Commander of the Armed Forces.

**State Defence Council**

The State Defence Council, consisting of the Prime Minister, the Chairman of the Parliament, the Minister of National Defence and the Commander of the Armed Forces
considers and co-ordinates the most important matters of the state defence, including
the activity of state institutions with regard to issues of ensuring state security and defence. The President of the Republic heads the State Defence Council. The Director
General of the State Security Department is usually invited to take part in the meetings of
the State Security Council.


-----

_Chain of_
_Command of_
_Armed Forces_


**Ministry of National Defence**

The Ministry of National Defence directs the implementation of the defence policy, is
responsible for the development of the national security system and its preparation for the
defence of the State, manages financial resources allocated for the protection and defence
of the country, procurement of armament and technology for the Armed Forces, pursues
international co-operation in the defence area, as well as the policy of personnel.

The Ministry of National Defence keeps records and carries out the drafting of conscripts and conscription for the primary compulsory military service, as well as for alternative service. To this end, the Ministry establishes civil territorial drafting commissions.
The records of the active reserve of servicemen are kept and their training is organised by
the headquarters of the Armed Forces.

The Minister of National Defence monitors and controls the readiness of the Armed
Forces. The Inspector General, subordinated to the Minister of National Defence, exercises this control.

**Commander of the Armed Forces**

Commander of the Armed Forces is the highest ranking State military official and has
the right to represent the Lithuanian Armed Forces on military issues within his competence. In peacetime, the Commander of the Armed Forces is directly subordinated to
the Minister of National Defence.


-----

_System of National Defence – 2002_


In peacetime, the main task of the Commander of the Armed Forces is to prepare the
regular Armed Forces and the active reserve of the Armed Forces for the armed defence
of the State, to be responsible for the territorial security of the State, as well as territorial
sea, economic zone and air space control and security.

The Commander of the Armed Forces is responsible for the operational plans of the
Armed Forces against unexpected attack and other contingencies.

In the event of armed attack or during martial law the Commander of the Armed Forces
by decree of the President of the Republic will be appointed the Commander of all
armed forces of the Republic of Lithuania, subordinated to the civil authorities for defence.

**Defence Staff**

The Defence Staff is the general staff of military national defence subordinate to the
Commander of the Armed Forces. The Defence Staff prepares plans for armed defence,
co-ordinates the activities of the headquarters of different services of the armed forces
and the territorial defence headquarters, organises combat preparation of the armed
forces and material procurement (logistics).

The structure, functions and responsibility of the Ministry of National Defence and the


-----

Defence Staff are established by the laws and other legal acts in accordance with the
principle of integrity of command of the National Defence System.

The Chief of Defence Staff is appointed by the Minister of National Defence on the
recommendation of the Commander of the Armed Forces. The Commander of the Armed
Forces appoints the high officials of the Defence Staff in co-ordination with the Minister
of National Defence.

**The Armed Forces**

The Armed Forces is loyal to the Republic of Lithuania, its Constitution, serve the State
and the society, and obeys the state government democratically elected by the Lithuanian citizens.

The training of the Armed Forces is designed to develop a soldier’s personality, his civil
awareness and patriotism, professional skills and military ethos. Commanders must foster
mutual understanding and trust between servicemen and the civilian population.

The Structure and Tasks of the Armed ForcesThe Structure and Tasks of the Armed ForcesThe Structure and Tasks of the Armed ForcesThe Structure and Tasks of the Armed ForcesThe Structure and Tasks of the Armed Forces

The Lithuanian Armed Forces consist of the regular forces and the active reserve. The
Regular Armed Forces consist of:

  - Land forces;

  - Air force;

  - Naval force.

The Minister of National Defence establishes the structure of the Armed Forces, establishes, reorganises or closes military units and divisions following the Principle structure
of the Armed Forces approved by the Parliament of the Republic of Lithuania. Field
forces are established to carry out military operations. They consist of military units of
land forces as well as military and other units of other forces, assigned to the operational
command of the Land Forces Commander.

In peacetime, the main tasks of the Armed Forces are as follows:

1) to protect the territory of the State, control and protect the air space, the territorial
waters and exclusive economic zone in the Baltic Sea;
2) to train the active reserve of the Armed Forces (its personnel and combat units);
3) to improve interoperability with NATO forces;
4) upon the decision of the Parliament of the Republic of Lithuania, to take part in
humanitarian and peace operations and missions beyond Lithuanian borders;
5) to provide assistance to the public in the event of emergencies; in cases and conditions established by laws to provide assistance to the police.


-----

In wartime, the basic task of the Armed Forces is armed defence of the Lithuanian State.

In the procedure established by law, the Armed Forces carry out tasks in compliance
with international commitments of the Republic of Lithuania.

**Armed Forces Reform**

Taking into account positive changes in the strategic environment of Lithuania, the economic development and international commitments assumed by Lithuania, Lithuania
started a reform of its Armed Forces by reviewing defence structures, long-term programmes for strengthening state security, as well as short-term plans for the development
of the Armed Forces.

The main objective of this reform is to find an optimum balance between the resources
available and capabilities necessary for Lithuania to meet its international commitments.

The reform, with completion scheduled in 2006, encompasses the following:

  - the Land Forces organisation, capabilities, objectives, combat training,

  - the organisation of the National defence volunteer forces (NDVF), capabilities,
objectives, combat training,

  - the Air Force organisation, capabilities, objectives, combat training,

  - the Naval Force organisation, capabilities, objectives, combat training,

  - preparation, mobilisation, capabilities and training of the reserve,

  - the development of the infrastructure necessary to receive Host Nation Support (HNS).

In developing Lithuanian defence capabilities priority is given to the Land Forces. Military units of the Land Forces will be small, mobile, well trained and equipped with modern armament. Lithuania will retain a small, well-trained and properly equipped Air
Force and Naval Force.

By 2003 the NDVF will become an integral part of the Land Forces and will be responsible for the protection and defence of infrastructure necessary for the HNS.

Flexibility of the Armed Forces, as well as simplicity of their command, is sought through
the creation of two military regions (Western and Eastern) and the creation of a Reaction
Brigade (RBde). Combined regular and territorial units are deployed in the military
districts and commanded by the Military district commander.

In the development of the Land Forces, the following guidelines should be highlighted:

  - a reorganisation of the Motorised Infantry Brigade “Iron Wolf” into a Reaction Brigade is taking place. The Brigade will be mechanised and will consist of two mechanised (Grand Duke Algirdas (Rukla) and King Mindaugas (Panevëþys))
battalions and one motorised battalion (Duchess Birutë Motorised Infantry Battalion
(Alytus)). RBde will be able to carry out tasks together with NATO forces within the


-----

Lithuanian territory in compliance with the requirements set out in Article 5 of the
North Atlantic Treaty. Separate battalions – Alytus battalion by 2004, Panevëþys
battalion by 2005 – must be ready to carry out the tasks assigned to them.

- by the end of 2002 the Grand Duke Algirdas (Rukla) Mechanised Infantry Battalion (BALTBAT/LITBAT) must be trained so as to carry out operations together
with NATO forces in accordance with the requirements set out in Article 5 of the
North Atlantic Treaty;

- continued formation of the Land (Field) Forces headquarters until full readiness is
attained (i. e. the Land Forces Headquarters will be ready to assume wartime tasks
of the Field Forces Headquarters);

- reorganisation of the Motorised Infantry Brigade “•emaitija” into the Western
military district;

- by 2004 the Artillery battalion will be ready to carry out tasks assigned to it.


_Lithuanian_
_Armed_
_Forces – 2007_


-----

After the completion of this reform, in peacetime, the Lithuanian Armed Forces will
consist of about 18 000 personnel (including civilians). In wartime, the projected reserve
would amount to about 25 000 personnel.

After the reform, by the end of 2006, Land Forces will consist of:

  - Headquarters of Land Forces;

  - Reaction Brigade (RBde) “Iron Wolf”: the Grand Duke Algirdas Mechanised Infantry Battalion (Rukla); King Mindaugas Mechanised Infantry Battalion
(Panevëþys); Duchess Birutë Motorised Infantry Battalion (Alytus); Artillery and
Logistics battalions in Rukla and combat support and supply units;

  - Two Military Regions – **Eastern:** the Grand Duke Vytenis Motorised Infantry
Battalion (Marijampolë) and the NDVF formations in the districts of Vilnius, Alytus,
Panevëþys, Utena, and Kaunas; **Western:** the Grand Duke Butigeidis Dragoons
Battalion; the Grand Duke Kæstutis Motorised Infantry Battalion (Tauragë); the
Duke Vaidotas Motorised Infantry Battalion (Ðiauliai); the NDVF formations in
the districts of Telðiai, Klaipëda, Ðiauliai, Marijampolë and Tauragë.

  - Two separate specialised battalions: Juozas Vitkus Engineer Battalion (Kaunas) and
Vytautas the Great Jaeger Battalion (Kaunas);

  - Grand Duke of Lithuania Gediminas Headquarters Battalion (Vilnius).

**Land Forces**

Land Forces, in wartime strengthened by the reserve units, constitutes the main military defence force. Their mission is the military protection of the territory and defence of the State.

Following the example of the Armed Forces of NATO countries it is planned to form a
common basis for the command system, which would encompass three levels: strategic,
operational and tactical. Formation of the Land (Field) Forces Headquarters will be completed, command and training procedures will continue to be standardised on the basis
of requirements of the command and control system of NATO.

Currently Land (Field) Forces consist of the following:

  - ••• “Iron Wolf” RBde:

− Grand Duke Algirdas Motorised Infantry Battalion (Rukla);

− Duchess Birutë Motorised Infantry Battalion (Alytus);

− King Mindaugas Motorised Infantry Battalion (Panevëþys).

  - ••• Eastern Military Region:

− Grand Duke Vytenis Motorised Infantry Battalion (Marijampolë);

− NDVF formations in the districts of Vilnius, Alytus, Panevëþys,
Utena and Kaunas.

  - ••• Western Military Region:

− Duke Vaidotas Motorised Infantry Battalion (Šiauliai);


-----

− Grand Duke of Lithuania Kæstutis Motorised Infantry Battalion (Tauragë);

− Grand Duke of Lithuania Butigeidis Dragon Battalion (Klaipëda);

− NDVF formations in the districts of Telðiai, Klaipëda, Ðiauliai, Marijampolë
and Tauragë.

- ••• Four separate specialised battalions:

− Grand Duke of Lithuania Gediminas Headquarters Battalion (stationed in Vilnius)
is directly subordinate to the Armed Forces Commander. Its main purpose is to
support the military command in commanding the Armed Forces. The Battalion is
a light infantry battalion, which carries out combat provision, protection and defence of the command posts of the Armed Forces, organises protection, distribution and account of the reserve means of communication of the Armed Forces.

− Vytautas the Great Jaeger Battalion (stationed in Kaunas). The main role of the
battalion is conducting a non-traditional war, combat actions behind enemy lines,
special tactical intelligence. The Battalion carries out intelligence and submits information collected to the headquarters of a higher level. In peacetime, the tasks of
the Battalion are as follows: to assist the civilians in cases of natural disasters, emergencies, to assist in eliminating consequences of natural disasters and accidents, to


_Land Forces -_
_2002_


-----

take part in search and rescue operations and the United Nations missions. Since
1999 this Battalion has been taking part in the peacekeeping mission in Kosovo
(KFOR).

− Juozas Vitkus Engineer Battalion (deployed in Kaunas). The main tasks of this Battalion are obstacle constructions, mining works, building of roads and maintenance
of their condition, building of pontoon bridges, neutralising enemy defensive positions. It transports the armed forces across the river, performs explosion, underwater engineering works. In peacetime the soldiers are trained to take part in the
search and rescue works, the Engineer Battalion trains the mobilisation reserve of
engineering specialists for the Lithuanian Armed Forces.

− The Artillery Battalion (stationed in Rukla). At present the core of this Battalion is
being formed.

**The National Defence Volunteer Forces (NDVF) are a constituent part of the Land**
Forces. In wartime, the units of the NDVF will carry out the tasks of territorial defence
assigned to them. In peacetime the functions of the NDVF are as follows:

  - training of volunteer soldiers;

  - training of the reserve of the Armed Forces;

  - training of NDVF units for defence within their territory and to carry out general
defence tasks;

  - exercising Host Nation Support (HNS);

  - protection of defence infrastructure and strategic objects as well as allies’ support
infrastructure;

  - assistance in the event of accidents and natural disasters.

NDVF consists of 10 formations, divided in accordance with the territorial-administrative division of Lithuania, about 12,000 volunteer soldiers, 2,000 soldiers of professional
military service and civil servants serve in the NDVF.

The structure of the military (territorial) NDVF units must correspond to the structure
of regular military units.

**Air Force**

The purpose of the Air Force is control, protection, defence and constant surveillance of
the airspace.

The Air Force consists of:

  - the Headquarters of the Air Force;

  - First Aviation Base;

  - Second Aviation Base;

  - Airspace Surveillance and Control Board;


-----

_Naval Force –_
_2002_



  - Air Defence Battalion;

  - Air Force Training Centre.

The Flight Safety Department of the Lithuanian Armed Forces, Regional Airspace Surveillance and Co-ordination Centre maintain close co-operation with the Air Force,
Medical Service is assigned to the Air Force.

The national airspace surveillance system within the Air Force is comprised of
radiolocation stations and the microwave communication network for data transmission. This system is integrated in the regional airspace surveillance and control system.
In the near future it is planned to expand the airspace surveillance and control system,
first of all taking into account the requirements set in the BALNET project (this project
is discussed in more detail in the Chapter on the Baltic States’ trilateral co-operation).
In accordance with the established operational and technical requirements for the radar system, radars will be installed in the selected sites meeting national airspace surveillance and control needs and corresponding to the control systems used by NATO
countries. This must eventually result in joining the NATO collective air surveillance
and co-operation system. In 2001 a contract for the procurement of three-dimension
mid-range radar was signed.

In 2000, an Air Defence battalion was established and equipped with anti-aircraft artillery and target detection radars.

The Air Force has two aviation bases – the First Aviation base (combat aircraft) in
Šiauliai and the Second Aviation Base (helicopters) in Panevëþys. The First Aviation
base can be used both for civilian and military purposes, it can handle all types of
aircraft. This aviation base was identified as capable of accepting the HNS therefore
the priority is given to its development. Transport aircraft An-26, An-2 and L-410,
light combat aircraft L-39C, L-39ZA are stationed in this base. Transport aircraft convey soldiers and cargoes and carry out NATO mission. The unit of light combat aircraft is in constant readiness and carries out air police functions. In the Second Avia

-----

tion base Mi-2, Mi-8T and Mi-8MTV helicopters are stationed. Search and rescue
helicopters Mi-8 are on constant alert in two search and rescue posts.

The main tasks of the Air Force in peacetime are as follows:

  - Surveillance of the airspace of the Republic of Lithuania and its approaches;

  - control of the airspace of the Republic of Lithuania and assurance of its sovereignty
by means of Quick Reaction Alert (QRA);

  - search and rescue missions;

  - airlift of cargoes and troops.

In wartime, the main tasks of the Air Force are as follows:

 - Implementation of HNS;

  - defence of HNS Infrastructure;

  - surveillance of the airspace of the Republic of Lithuania and its approaches;

  - defence of the airspace of the Republic of Lithuania with partners’ support;

  - air traffic control within the airspace of the Republic of Lithuania;

  - transportation support to the Land Forces and the Naval Force;

  - medical evacuation and search and rescue missions.

**Naval Force**

The basic mission of the Naval Force is to control, protect and defend the territorial
waters and the exclusive economic zone of Lithuania.

In peacetime, the functions of the Naval Force are as follows:

  - control, protection and defence of the territorial sea and exclusive economic zone;

  - surveillance and control of underwater and surface environment within the territorial sea;

  - protection of navigation and protection and control of the sea routes within the
territorial sea and exclusive economic zone;

  - carrying out search and rescue operations.

Taking into account the functions of the Naval Force and tasks assigned to them, the
following structure of the Naval Force has been approved:

  - Headquarters of the Naval Force;

  - Flotilla of warships (part of the ships of the flotilla is assigned to the Baltic squadron
(BALTRON):

− Squadron of combat ships;

− Squadron of mine vessels;

− Squadron of patrol boats;

− Unit of motor boats;

  - Sea and Coast Surveillance Service;


-----

_Air Force -_
_2002_



  - Logistic Service;

 - Harbour Defence Unit;

  - Training Centre.

It is not planned to increase the Naval Force combat capabilities in the future. The Naval
Force will develop and implement wartime functions alongside their allies by supporting
their planned objectives. In wartime, the functions of the Naval Force will be as follows:

  - ensure HNS at the seaport of Klaipëda;

  - sea surveillance and reconnaissance;

  - contribute to joint efforts with regard to planning, co-ordination and execution of
coastal and lagoon anti-airborne defence;

  - contribute to joint efforts to defend the seaport of Klaipëda from the sea and lagoon approaches;

  - contribute to joint efforts to implement limited scope anti-air, anti-sea and antisubmarine defence and mine clearing missions.

The Naval Force protects and controls the territorial sea and exclusive economic zone of
the Republic of Lithuania by means of coastal radar system and patrol boats. Seeking to
control the territorial waters as efficiently as possible, the coastal video surveillance system


_Flotilla_
_of Warships_


-----

is being implemented. The Naval Force co-operates closely with other state structures of
the Republic of Lithuania. Constant relations are maintained with the Coastal Protection Formation of the State Border Protection Service, the Customs Department, Environmental Protection Inspection, the national port of Klaipëda and other interested institutions. In order to successfully carry out rescue operations constant contacts are maintained with the Air Force.

Foreign countries provide significant assistance in developing the Naval Force capabilities. Harbour tugboat H22 was received from Sweden, two mine-hunters M51 (“Kurðis”)
and M52 (“Sûduvis”) were received from Germany and three patrol ships P31 “Dzûkas”,
P32 “Sëlis” ir P33 “Skalvis” – from Norway. Germany has also trained both Lithuanian
crews for the donated vessels.

**Logistics Board**

The system of supply, provision, repairs, servicing and health care of the Lithuanian
Armed Forces is currently being developed, which would ensure timely provision of
combat divisions and their sustainability during operations of established duration.

In creating the logistics system, projected Armed Forces missions, structure, distribution
of troops, as well as tasks set by transatlantic and European integration processes, are
taken into consideration. About one third of partnership tasks assumed by Lithuania are
closely related to logistics.

In the process of Armed Forces logistics planning, the principle that the system of logistics of the Lithuanian Armed Forces will be centralised, with clear subordination and will
constitute an integral structure is followed. The essence of this principle is the creation of
the logistics system that is uniform for all units and services of the Armed Forces.

In assessing the role of logistics, as the complex of specific functions, for the functioning of
the Armed Forces and taking into account the resources available, it was decided to establish logistics capabilities at the operational level of the Armed Forces – the Logistics Board.
Its objective is to plan and conduct logistic operations of the operational level for the units
of all forces. The formation of Logistics Board was started at the beginning of 2001. All
previously established units of logistics of different subordination have been transferred
under centralised subordination. This was the first step in creating a modern system of
logistics. Operational level divisions and services, which carry out the functions of logistics
(transportation, repair works, supply, health care services, etc.) now constitute an integrated
system which enables us to ensure proper fulfilment of these functions and, if necessary, to
redistribute them to avoid duplication, costs of additional funds and increasing efficiency.

The Logistics Board consists of the following:

  - Provision Department;

  - Arsenal;


-----

  - Transportation Service;

  - Military Medicine Service;

  - Military Medicine Battalion;

  - The Centre of Military Cartography;

  - Military Police.

In 2003, after restructuring of the Logistics Board is complete, it will comprise the following services:

  - Material Service of the Armed Forces;

  - Armed Forces Depots Service;

  - Military Medicine Service;

 - Movement Control Centre;

  - Transportation and Supply Battalion;

  - Maintenance Battalion;

  - Medical Battalion.

At the tactical level of the Armed Forces, logistics units within the composition of combat
units are being strengthened.

**Procurement of Armament and Equipment**

It is planned to provide the Armed Forces with reliable armament and combat equipment
meeting NATO requirements. Several factors influence the procurement policy of the
Lithuanian Armed Forces. Due to the financial situation and limitations of the defence
budget, procurement of equipment is based on clearly defined priorities and key projects.

The procurement policy of the Lithuanian Armed Forces is based upon the following
three principles of quality:

  - rationalising and reducing equipment and ammunition holdings;

  - saving funds of the defence budget;

  - increasing interoperability with NATO: implementation and adaptation of NATO
STANAG constitute an essential precondition of the modernisation process.

In connection with the development of the RBde, the following long-term projects are
being implemented:

  - procurement of a mid-range anti-tank weapon system;

  - procurement of a short-range anti-air weapon system;

  - procurement of mid-range mobile radars and tactical means of communication;

  - procurement of vehicles;

  - procurement of logistic equipment.

In December 2001, the Ministry of National Defence authorised by the Government of the
Republic of Lithuania, signed a contract with the US Government on procurement of the


-----

JAVELIN mid-range anti-tank weapon system. The ministry expects to receive the system by
the end of 2002. Lithuania is the first country in Europe to purchase the JAVELIN system.

Seeking to increase airspace surveillance and control capabilities, the Ministry of National Defence has signed a contract on procurement of three-dimension mid-range mobile
radar systems TRML-3D/32 with the international company EADS.

Lithuania continues to provide its military units with modern tactical communications
system equipment manufactured by HARRIS CORPORATION and with portable radio stations manufactured by the ELSIS company in Lithuania.

At the end of 2001, a modern Centre of Military Cartography was opened in Kaunas.
This project was implemented together with the US Government. The latter funded the
installation of the Centre and training of personnel.

About 20-25% of the National Defence System budget is to be allocated to the procurement of armament and equipment and about 60-65% out of this figure will be assigned
to the RBde procurement projects.

**Military Training System**

The main objective of military training is to train and implement the doctrine of military
training and preparation, to train and prepare the soldiers of the initial compulsory military service, sergeants, non-commissioned officers, officers as well as other specialists for
the Armed Forces of Lithuania. For the training of Air Force, Naval Force, military medicine specialists the Air Force, the Naval Force and the Military medicine service training
centres are being created. Currently the military training system consists of Lithuanian
General •emaitis Military Academy and the Lithuanian Armed Forces Training and
Doctrine Command, which encompasses the following:

  - Grand Hetman of Lithuania Jonuðas Radvila training regiment and Gaiþûnai training area;

  - Division General Stasys Raštikis Non-Commissioned Officers School and Kazlø
Rûda training area;

  - Lithuanian Army General Adolfas Ramanauskas Military advanced professional training centre;

  - Military Engineer School;

  - Central training area;

  - Jaeger school.

**Active Reserve**

Military force of Lithuania is based on the conscript army and the active reserve of the
Armed Forces. This system allows the State with a small population to maintain comparatively large military forces in the event of threat. Every soldier who has undertaken mili

-----

_Structure of_
_Military_
_Training_


tary service or undergone training is assigned to the active reserve of the Army. The active
reserve is civilians who can be called up to serve in the Armed Forces if necessary (in the
event of training, as well as in case of partial or total mobilisation).

The active reserve is composed of:

  - reserve personnel one year after the completion of the compulsory military service;

 - NDVF volunteers;

  - Reserve personnel of university students trained at the Training and Doctrine
Command (TRADOC).

The reserve personnel are assigned to the RBde or battalions and they form a reserve
company within a battalion. The reserve personnel are usually assigned to the battalions,
where they previously served compulsory military service. The training lasts for 14 days
after which the reserve personnel join the territorial defence forces. After the age of 35
reservists are assigned to the individual reserve. Members of the active reserve personnel,
who missed training, are also assigned to the individual reserve after 2 years.

At the start of their service in the NDVF, volunteers undergo a 20-day basic course.
After completion of the course volunteers serving in their companies participate each
year in 12-days training for the reserve personnel. The whole programme of volunteer
training is divided into four years.

All reserve personnel assigned to territorial defence regions, every third year gather for a
14-day training at training centres.


-----

TRADOC organises a three-year reserve preparation programme for students of the
higher educational institutions. In 2001 the first group of 170 students completed the
course for reserve personnel and is included in the record of the active reserve personnel
as reserve lieutenants. TRADOC also organises 6-month reserve personnel and NonCommissioned Officers course for university graduates and trains 80 students per year.

**The Army Ordinariate**

Referring to the agreement between the Holy See and the Republic of Lithuania on
_,_
pastoral education of Catholic soldiers serving in the Lithuanian Armed Forces in 2000
_Christi discipuli_
the Bishop Congregation of the Holy See issued a decree “ ” establishing
_._
the Army Ordinariate in the Republic of Lithuania

The Army Ordinariate is comparable to a parish in ecclesiastical law. The Bishop, the
Army Ordinary, appointed by the Pope heads it. He is a member of the Lithuanian
Bishop Confederation.

The Army Ordinariate is managed in accordance with the norms of ecclesiastical law,
_Spirituali militum curae”_
Pope John Paul II’s Apostolic Constitution “ of 21 April 1986,
_Agreement between the Holy See and the Republic of Lithuania on Pastoral Education of_
the
_Soldiers Serving in the Lithuanian Armed Forces_
and the norms of the Statute.

The objective of the Ordinariate is to take care of pastoral education of the soldiers serving
in the Armed Forces of the Republic of Lithuania. Catholic soldiers, their family members,
the Catholics studying in military institutions, working in military hospitals and other military institutions regularly fulfilling the tasks assigned to them by the Army Ordinary or with
consent of the Army Ordinary, belong to the jurisdiction of the Ordinariate.

The clergy of the Army Ordinariate consists of parish priests and priests-monks appointed
by the Ordinary to be responsible for pastoral work in the Armed Forces of the Republic
of Lithuania. These priests are chaplains of the Army Ordinariate. Laymen who are properly prepared spiritually and professionally can also be engaged in that work.

#### DEFENCE AND SOCIETYDEFENCE AND SOCIETYDEFENCE AND SOCIETYDEFENCE AND SOCIETYDEFENCE AND SOCIETY

The main factor in maximising the total defence potential is close and constant co-operation between the military and civilians. The activity that is carried out to train Lithuania
for mobilisation and war is called preparation for total defence. This is not exclusively a
military activity (training for military defence). Non-military activity is an equally important part of total defence, that is, preparation of the State and the society to mobilise and
adapt to working and living in war conditions, as well as to support military defence. The
State’s activity consists of different social functions. Appropriate state institutions are re

-----

sponsible for preparing to fulfil each of these functions in mobilisation and wartime. The
Department of Mobilisation under the Ministry of National Defence is the institution
authorised to co-ordinate preparation of the non-military part of total defence and mobilisation.

National Mobilisation SystemNational Mobilisation SystemNational Mobilisation SystemNational Mobilisation SystemNational Mobilisation System

Mobilisation is the reorganisation of the state government, municipalities and national
economy system after the introduction of martial law, transition of the armed forces and
their reserve, as well as general and special-purpose civil safety formations from peace to
combat readiness and the call-up of reservists to the regular military service.

The mobilisation system is being created in accordance with the Law on Mobilisation
and training of the mobilisation reserve. There are two main parts in the preparation of
the mobilisation system: military and civilian.

**Mobilisation System of the Armed Forces**

The mobilisation system of the Lithuanian Armed Forces has been gradually reorganised
ensuring drafting of reservists, their assignment to military units and their individual, as
well as collective training. The reorganised mobilisation system of the Lithuanian Armed
Forces will be adapted to regular military units by supplementing them with the mobilisation reserve, as well as to form reserve military units. The principles of organising the
mobilisation system are laid down in “The Doctrine of the Mobilisation System of the
Lithuanian Armed Forces”. The mobilisation system is to be implemented through the
structures of its main components – the Defence Staff and military units, the Conscription Administration Service at three levels: strategic, operational and tactical. The Mobilisation Department under the MND takes part in ensuring utilisation of civil resources
in the mobilisation of the Armed Forces.

The doctrine of the creation of the mobilisation system of the Armed Forces defines the
interaction between the above-mentioned national defence institutions by establishing
corresponding mobilisation tasks for each of them at the strategic level, as well as the
procedure for their implementation at operational and tactical levels. The Defence Staff
estimates the demand for personnel, equipment, transport and other resources for the
wartime structure of the Armed Forces, by drawing up plans-schedules for training and
military exercises of reservists and preparing the strategy for providing personnel, transport and other resources in wartime. The Conscription Administration Service plans and
keeps records and accounts of the reservists and carries out the drafting and appointment processes in wartime. At the operational level the mobilisation system encompasses
the wartime formation and training of divisions (regular and reserve). The formation and
training of reserve divisions is carried out in military units of regular forces depending on
the mobilisation tasks assigned to them. At the tactical level the mobilisation system in

-----

cludes carrying out mobilisation in military units in accordance with mobilisation plans
by forming mobilisation organisations. They will be headed by mobilisation officers appointed to each military unit, which has been assigned to carry out the mobilisation task.

**Civil Part of the Mobilisation Preparation System**

The mobilisation preparation system is designed to reorganise the state government and
its economy in the event of martial law and prepare the society to function in the situation of crisis or war. The main priority of the mobilisation preparation system is readiness
for systemic utilisation of civil resources in wartime so as to support military defence and
meet the needs of society.

The basic principles of the mobilisation preparation system are laid down in the State
Mobilisation Programme. The fundamental principle – “principle of responsibility” –
establishes that institution responsible for the exercise of society function in peacetime is
also responsible for this function in the event of crisis or war.

**Civil Part of Mobilisation Planning Organisation**

Mobilisation planning is carried out in two directions: the first encompasses all levels of
management (central, county and municipal), the second encompasses ministries and
governmental institutions responsible for functions of particular importance to the State
and society.

Mobilisation planning encompasses the readiness to carry out all the functions of vital
importance to society during mobilisation and in wartime.

Organisation of mobilisation planning is divided into two parts.

**Territorial responsibility. This is the responsibility for mobilisation planning on a cer-**
tain territory (the state, county, municipal). A Mayor is responsible for mobilisation planning on the municipal territory, a county governor in the county, and the Mobilisation
Department under the MND is in charge of mobilisation planning in the State. The
Mobilisation Department also co-ordinates mobilisation planning at all the above-mentioned levels.

**Functional responsibility.** This is the responsibility for mobilisation planning in carrying
out certain functions (provision with foodstuffs, transportation, telecommunications, etc.)
at all levels (central, county and municipal). Ministries and governmental institutions are
responsible for that planning. Mobilisation Department under the MND commands and
co-ordinates mobilisation planning of these ministries and state institutions.

**Mobilisation Department**

Mobilisation Department established under the MND is authorised by the Government


-----

of the Republic of Lithuania to organise and control readiness for mobilisation and preparation of the mobilisation reserve in the State.

Mobilisation Department carries out the assigned tasks by drafting the State Mobilisation Plan, issuing mobilisation tasks and instructions to enterprises, institutions and organisations of all forms and types of ownership, exercising control over accumulation and
storage of material resources of the mobilisation reserve in the ministries and governmental institutions, planning transport requisitions etc.

Mobilisation Department maintains close relations with the Swedish Crisis Management
Planning Agency. Joint training is carried out, seminars and other events are organised.

#### PERSONNEL MANAGEMENTPERSONNEL MANAGEMENTPERSONNEL MANAGEMENTPERSONNEL MANAGEMENTPERSONNEL MANAGEMENT

The objective of personnel policy is to ensure that the needs of the National Defence
System for personnel are met and effective use is made of the personnel available.

Soldiers of compulsory and professional military service, volunteers, statutory personnel
serving as civil servants and other civil servants serve in the National Defence System.

**Initial compulsory military service. In accordance with the Constitution of the Re-**
public of Lithuania, Lithuanian citizens must serve a 12-month compulsory military service to which they are called up from the age of 19 to 27.

**Voluntary military service. This is voluntary non-regular military service of the citizens**
of the Republic of Lithuania. Volunteers are being trained for defence within their territory in the event of an armed attack and to provide assistance in the event of a natural
disaster or emergency.

**Professional military service. This is a permanent military service voluntarily under-**
taken by the citizens of the Republic of Lithuania in the Armed Forces or other institutions of the National Defence System. Citizens of Lithuania who have undertaken compulsory military service or the basic course of military preparation, have at least secondary
education, know the state language and conform to physical, medical and moral requirements can be admitted to the professional military service in accordance with selection
and voluntariness principles. Those who have not completed the compulsory military
service or completed the initial course of military preparation, but are specialists required
by the Armed Forces, under the age of 32 and have higher or secondary education, can
be admitted to the professional military service and sent to the basic course for the military preparation.

Candidates for professional military service are selected on a centralised basis in public
and closed competitions. Candidates who are completing compulsory service and wish to


-----

serve as reenlistees can be selected in closed competitions. In open competitions, every
citizen of Lithuania may take part.

Candidates selected by the Commission established by the order of the Commander of
the Armed Forces sign a contract for professional military service, they are admitted to
the professional military service and are sent to the units, services or other institutions of
the National Defence System in accordance with the service needs.

Contracts on professional military service are signed with the graduates of the Lithuanian
Military Academy or military training schools of foreign countries until the age when they
leave for the reserve. The contract term with other professional personnel must not exceed
5 years. After this term expires, the contract may be extended again for up to 5 years.

The rank of private soldier is given to a citizen who is starting military service. The rank of
lieutenant is the first rank of an officer. It is granted to the graduates of Lithuanian or
foreign military schools, as well as graduates of universities and officers’ courses with at
least a bachelor’s degree. Physicians and lawyers entering the professional military service
may be granted the rank of 1[st] Lieutenant or a Captain.

Granting of higher military ranks is subject to a selection principle. The main selection
criteria are service duration, duties carried out in the National Defence System, professional potential, education, knowledge of foreign languages, assessment results, state of
health, physical preparation and age.

To select higher rank officers, advisory commissions are formed which, after having discussed all the candidatures, make a list of officers to whom the commission recommends
granting a higher rank. The final decision about granting the higher rank to junior
officers is made by the Commander of the Armed Forces, and to senior officers by the
Minister of National Defence. The President of the Republic grants the ranks of Colonel
(Captain Navy), General and Admiral upon recommendation of the Minister of National Defence.

In accordance with the Law on Organisation of the National Defence System and Military Service, the Minister of National Defence follows the Principle structure of the Armed
Forces approved by the Seimas, establishing the structure of divisions and staff, as well as
the limiting numbers of senior officers, generals, admirals and soldiers. The numbers
_Seimas_
confirmed by the for 2001 and 2002 are presented in the Table.

**Rotation**

In order to ensure efficient implementation of tasks assigned to the National Defence
System as well as a high professional profile of soldiers, soldiers may be rotated by transferring them to another unit or location in accordance with an order of the Minister of
National Defence or his authorised commander. Term of office of the commanders of
the regular forces can not exceed 5 years. Other commanders, senior staff officers, heads


-----

of departments, services and sections are usually rotated every 3[rd] year. The Minister of
National Defence establishes the order of rotation.

**Assessment**

Selection of officers to a higher rank, a new position or studies is based on assessment
results. The assessment of professional military service personnel is conducted once a year
or when they are transferred to another position or upon the change of their commander.
A serviceman’s direct commander fills in the assessment certificate. He makes an assessment of a serviceman’s behaviour, professional preparation, gives proposals as to further
service or granting a rank. A higher commander also signs the certificate and includes his
comments with regard to serviceman’s service and his direct commander’s assessment.
The direct commander advises the serviceman about the assessment results. If a serviceman is not satisfied with the assessment results, he may file a compliant with a commission
formed by the Minister. If a serviceman warned about his weaknesses does not follow
recommendations and does not improve his service, he may be assessed as unsuitable for
service and dismissed.

**Leaving for reserve**

The age at which professional military service personnel leave for the reserve depends on
their military rank:

  - Servicemen of lower than a master sergeant’s rank leave for reserve at the age of 35;

  - From a master sergeant to a senior non-commissioned officer – at the age of 50;

  - Second lieutenants – at 35;

  - First lieutenants – at 40;

  - Captains – at 43;

  - Majors – at 46;


-----

  - Lieutenant Colonels – at 50;

  - Colonels – at 53;

  - Generals – at 58.

If necessary the Minister of National Defence may prolong military service for military
personnel of not higher than the rank of colonel by signing a professional service contract
not exceeding 2 years. After the expiry of this term the service may be prolonged for
another 2-year term but only to officers of a rank not higher than major.

Military medics leave for the reserve at the age of 60, irrespectively of their rank.

Professional military service personnel who serve as specialists in accordance with the list
of military specialists approved by the Minister may leave for the reserve at the age of 55
irrespectively of their rank.

**Civil personnel**

Civil servants make up 15% of the National Defence System’s personnel.

The civilian personnel of the National Defence System are divided into statutory personnel
serving as civil servants of national defence, and other civil servants.

The civil service of national defence is carried out in divisions of the MND, the Armed
Forces, civil protection, operations, site protection and other services, if it is not necessary
to be a soldier of professional military service to perform official duties, but it is necessary
to have special knowledge or experience in the National Defence System, or if the carried
functions require statutory relations.

As professional military service personnel, civil servants of national defence may be sent to
Lithuanian and foreign military and non-military training institutions.

A rank qualification system has been introduced to assess the qualification and experience of civil servants of national defence. Qualification ranks do not signify subordination of civil servants. Qualification ranks are granted with regard to the level of a servant’s
special knowledge and experience as a defence specialist conducting special national defence functions. Civil servants are paid a bonus for their qualification rank in addition to
their duty wage. Civil personnel also receive additional payment for years served in the
National Defence System.

Planning of the personnel career as well as the demand for personnel is a matter of the
highest importance. This planning is based on the Baltic States and Sweden’s BALTPERS
project and on the Lithuanian-Norwegian project NORBALTPERS. In accordance with
BALTPERS the entire National Defence System personnel computer database is being
developed, which will enable access to information on the existing personnel in all profiles.
The NORBALTPERS project foresees implementation of the career planning system.


-----

**Personnel Training System**

Military personnel are trained for defence on the basis of the traditions of the Lithuanian
Armed Forces, the modern doctrine, present-day military science and experience of the
democratic states. Personnel of the Armed Forces are trained by developing a soldier’s
personality, his civil awareness, patriotism, and military ethics. The centralised training
and doctrine management system encompasses training of soldiers of compulsory and
professional military service in accordance with standardised programmes. The activity
of the Training and Doctrine Command of the Lithuanian Armed Forces encompasses
uniform basic training of soldiers in the Training regiment and volunteer forces. The
activity of the Command also involves training of sergeants and non-commissioned officers at the School of Non-Commissioned Officers in Kaunas, professional upgrading of
commanders and specialists at the Military advanced professional training centre, training of reservists in units.

In training soldiers and civil servants priorities are given to:

  - Preparation of a qualified soldier;

  - Teaching the English language;

  - Improvement of training of platoon, company and battalion commanders;

  - Training a necessary number of non-commissioned officers;

  - Introductory education of civil servants;

  - Preparation of the active reserve platoon commanders. They are trained at commanders’ courses for students and graduates of higher educational institutions.

Attention is being devoted to the professional development of soldiers and civilians abroad.
About 200 soldiers and civil servants go to study courses of one month’s duration or
longer at different levels in foreign countries every year.

The largest numbers of individuals go to study in Denmark, the United Kingdom, the
US, Canada, Poland, Netherlands, France, Sweden, Germany - a total of 24 countries.

**Military advanced professional training centre organises training and professional de-**
velopment courses, seminars, conferences for soldiers of the professional military service,
reservists, civil servants of the national defence system, heads of state and municipal institutions, enterprises, offices and organisations, their authorised persons, officials and employees, as well as other citizens of Lithuania.

**Training areas ensure a highly qualified supply of shooting and tactical exercises for the**
Lithuanian Armed Forces and military units of other countries planned to be carried out
on the territory of training areas. Training areas provide combat units with field barracks, sites for field camps, shooting galleries, tactical fields and facilities necessary to
carry out exercises. In 2001 the largest part of individual training programmes was being
implemented in training areas. Units and sub-units are trained in training areas to carry
out operation under conditions similar to combat conditions. Shooting galleries of rifle

-----

_System of training_
_of Lithuanian_
_Armed Forces_


men arms light trench mortars and manual anti-tank arms are installed in all training
areas. Arm safety instructions issued allow the use of heavy machine-guns and 120 mm
trench mortars in four training areas. Furthermore, it is permitted to shoot with 105-mm
light guns in the central training area. Safety requirements correspond to the standards
of NATO member states.

**English Language Training Centres organise intensive English language courses aimed**
at developing all four language skills of soldiers and employees of the National Defence
System (listening, speaking, reading and writing), paying special attention to the development of listening and speaking skills. Courses are organised at I – III levels of proficiency according to NATO standard STANAG 6001 requirements. The Lithuanian
Armed Forces have ten language training centres. Three-month English language courses
of levels I and II (STANAG 6001) are organised in eight centres. Two centres organise
four and half-month English language courses of Level III. High requirements for knowledge of the language are also set for the cadets of the Lithuanian Military Academy.
Upon graduation from the Academy their knowledge of the English language must correspond to Level II.

It is intended to increase the number of students in all English language training centres
in the future. The establishment of ten English language training centres in military units
of the Lithuanian Armed Forces speeded up the process of improving the language skills
of soldiers. 462 soldiers and civil servants completed the English language course at the


-----

_Training_
_areas_


-----

English Language Training Centres of the National Defence System in 1999. In 2000
the number of soldiers who completed the English language course totalled 560, with
335 of them having completed Level I, 198 – Level II and 27 – Level III.

A group of English language instructors was formed at the Training and Doctrine Command of the Lithuanian Armed Forces, which is responsible for the activity of the English Language Training Centres in the National Defence System, planning and co-ordination of courses, testing of students of the courses, preparation of instructional material,
summing up of the performance results and notifying the sub-units.

The teaching system allows preparation of up to 680 soldiers per year. Currently over
1,800 soldiers and civil servants have been tested and were issued certificates testifying to
the level of their knowledge.

**Military Engineering School trains military engineering specialists for the Lithuanian**
Armed Forces; co-ordinates and controls combat training of military engineering units
of the Lithuanian Armed Forces; organises and co-ordinates interaction of military engineering units of the Lithuanian Armed Forces with the military engineering structures of
foreign countries in the area of combat training and implements progressive military
engineering technologies and methods in the Lithuanian Armed Forces.

**Non-Commissioned Officers School trains sergeants and non-commissioned officers**
in accordance with the three-stage commander training programmes; trains sergeant
and non-commissioned officer specialists in accordance with the instructor training programmes; trains officers, non-commissioned officers and sergeants of the active reserve;
develops their professional qualifications in the general education courses; according to
NATO standards prepares curricula and methodology; provides proposals for improvement of the service and training of sergeants and non-commissioned officer commanders, as well that of specialists, prepares requirements for candidates to the courses at the
Non-Commissioned Officers School. In the future it is planned to train sergeants and
non-commissioned officer commanders at the Non-Commissioned Officers School in
accordance with complex four-stage training programme for commanders.

**The Training Regiment has been given the task of providing basic military training to**
soldiers of the initial compulsory military service, candidates to professional military
service and soldiers of the professional military service; military training of graduates
from higher schools; preparing basic training instructors; training of drivers and commanders of armoured vehicles; co-ordination of parachute training in the Lithuanian
Armed Forces, preparing instructors of parachute training and parachute training of
soldiers.

Equipping training areas and military training sites of the Lithuanian Armed Forces was
quickly improving in recent years. According to the plan of co-operation between the Lithuanian Armed Forces and the Royal Armed Forces of Denmark, in 2000 a tactic trainer was


-----

_System of_
_English_
_language_
_training_


installed at General Ramanauskas’ Military advanced professional training centre. In the
same year a laser riflemen trainer was installed in the training regiment. Shooting-ranges for
riflemen were installed in Central, Gaiþiûnai, Kairiai training areas in 1999-2000.

**General Jonas •emaitis Lithuanian Military Academy is the state higher military school**
of training and professional development of officers of the Republic of Lithuania and it is
a constituent part of the National Defence System, subordinated to the Minister of National Defence.

Academic and military training studies are organised at the Academy. The first stage of
the studies is the basic consecutive academic studies, completion of which result in obtaining a bachelor degree. The cadets obtain the bachelor degree in political science or
management. The first stage of military training – basic studies of military preparation,
completion of which result in obtaining the qualification of the commander of motorised
infantry platoon and the rank of lieutenant. In the course of their studies the cadets
complete the programme of the commander of the infantry platoon, undergo practical
training in military units, and participate in exercises in Lithuania or abroad. Military
training studies and academic studies are simultaneous. They last 4 years.

After 3-4 years of service in the Armed Forces as a platoon commander, deputy commander of a company or officer of the headquarters of the battalion, officers have the
possibility to upgrade their qualification in the Captain courses and Master studies (from
the year 2002). These studies constitute the Stage II of the studies at the Lithuanian Military Academy. The Captain courses programme encompasses the training of tactics of the
company and battalion as well as the work at the headquarters of battalion. It will be possible to relate these courses to the second stage consecutive academic Master studies, completion of which result in obtaining a Master degree. Those officers who have achieved the
best service results shall be selected to study at the Stage II. The duration of the Captain
courses is 6 months without Master studies and 12 month with Master studies.

Following studies at Stage II and 3-4 years of service in the Armed Forces as a company
commander, officer of the headquarters of a battalion, officers who are to be appointed


-----

to the post of the battalion commander or officer of the headquarters of a brigade, on the
basis of selection may be sent to study at the Baltic Defence College (BALTDEFCOL) or
other military academies of NATO states.

**Conscription**

The Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania establishes that the defence of the State of
Lithuania against a foreign armed attack is the right and duty of every citizen of the Republic of Lithuania. Every male citizen of the Republic of Lithuania between the age 19 and 27
is obliged to serve in the initial compulsory military or alternative national defence service in
the order established by law. Upon submitting an application, military service may be started
upon reaching 18 years of age and no later than 27 years of age.

The initial compulsory military service lasts 12 months. It is completed in units of the
National Defence System and upon the decision of the Parliament in other state institutions as well. Conscripts shall be appointed to the places of service taking into consideration their health, physical condition, education and personal requests.

The clergy of traditional religious communities and communes in Lithuania recognised by
the State shall be exempt from initial compulsory military service, as well as individuals that
have been imprisoned and persons who are not eligible for military service for health reasons.

The Law on Conscription also provides for the postponement of initial compulsory military service for a period of up to one year. Usually this is due to the studies of young
people at higher or high educational institutions or for family reasons.

The State’s intention and readiness to ensure the possibility for its citizens to do the duty
that corresponds to the conviction of man is the sign of its democratic nature and respect
for the human rights, therefore the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania enshrines
the right to serve in the alternative national defence service. This is the alternative service
to the initial compulsory military service for the individuals who cannot serve with arms
in their hands on account of their religious and pacifistic convictions. It lasts 18 months
and is served at the municipal health care or social care institutions.

In 2000 a gradual restructuring of the conscription administration system was commenced in the Republic of Lithuania. The Law on the Amendment of and Supplement
to the Law on Conscription establishes that the Conscription Administration Service
under the Ministry of National Defence and local government institutions shall be directly in charge of conscription administration.

In applying the new conscription administration system, local government institutions
are assigned a more important role – this is the essential feature of the new system. One of
the basic conscription administration issues is the quality of conscript selection. According to the new system local government institutions make the initial selection of con

-----

scripts, therefore the role and contribution of these institutions are significant in seeking
to implement the conscription administration policy efficiently.

The new conscription administration system consists of two stages:

1) Local government institutions initially select conscripts and are responsible for that
selection. The employee of the municipal administration in charge of conscription
administration keeps account of the young people including those of conscription
age, residing in the municipal territory, organises their health examination, sends
the selected conscripts to regional mandatory military service centres, identifies the
individuals who avoid being enlisted in the military record or avoid compulsory
military service, and brings prosecution against them. Also, on the proposal of the
mayor of the local government, the municipal council approves a municipal selection commission, which carries out the initial selection of conscripts – adopts decisions about postponing of the service or exemption from it.
2) Regional conscription centres of Conscription Administration Service under the
Ministry of National Defence call up conscripts to the compulsory military service,
carry out health examination of the conscripts (this is done by the physicians of the
Military medicine service appointed in the order established by the Ministry of
National Defence), determining their suitability for military service, the service of
Armed Forces and distribute conscripts to the units, as well as organise their transportation to the place of service. The centres also create and keep computer database of military records of conscripts, active reserve and mobilisation reserve in the
region. In 2000 Kaunas Conscription Centre and in 2001 – Klaipëda Conscription Centre were established. Two more conscription centres are planned to be
established in Panevëþys and Vilnius by the end of 2003.

Close co-operation between municipal and National Defence System institutions ensures the fulfilment of constitutional duties.

#### BUDGETBUDGETBUDGETBUDGETBUDGET

Planning, Programming and Budget System (PPBS)Planning, Programming and Budget System (PPBS)Planning, Programming and Budget System (PPBS)Planning, Programming and Budget System (PPBS)Planning, Programming and Budget System (PPBS)

The Planning, Programming and Budget System (PPBS), essentially complying with the
strategic planning methodology approved by the Government, is implemented in the
National Defence System (NDS) in order to secure rational, effective and purposeful
planning and utilisation of defence expenditures. The main objectives of the system are
as follows:

  - to clearly and properly define the objectives, tasks and results to be attained by all
NDS subdivisions;


-----

  - to administer expenditures exclusively for executing set tasks and for attaining a
concrete result;

  - to identify available alternatives and to measure and report effectiveness of planned
expenditures;

  - to ensure transparency of the National Defence System policy, plans and expenditures;

  - to control the results attained and the resources utilised;

  - to seek compatibility with the NATO planning process.

The following are the main documents establishing long-term and short-term strategic
goals of the system, its peacetime and wartime tasks, the army structure and the tasks for
the planning period:

  - ••• National Security Strategy **of the Republic of Lithuania defines the state inter-**
ests, the main national security policy goals and measures for their implementation.

  - ••• Lithuanian Military Defence Strategy outlines the options for use of military force
in response to threats and challenges to state security, for protecting public values
and national interests, and for contributing to ensuring international peace.

  - ••• Forces Planning Assumptions define the requirements for the total combat readiness and sustainability, for the intended force structure, the deployment location
and duration of military operations, which is the basis for preparing Long-term
state security enhancement programmes.

  - ••• Long-term Programmes for Enhancement of State Security define 10-year national defence system development trends, long-term anticipated results of each
programme, principal system development measures and financial assessment.

  - ••• The Guidelines for Development of the National Defence System is an annual
planning document initiating the planning cycle and setting the guidelines for the
development of the National Defence, the planned structure and priority tasks for
three years.

  - ••• National Defence System (NDS) Development Plan is a short-term planning
document prepared in line with the Guidelines for Development of the NDS,
specifying the concrete tasks, goals, structure and maximum allocated sums for
each programme. The NDS Development Plan provides the most important information and guidelines for personnel training, joint operation standards, sustainability
and redeployment requirements, as well as the main directives of NATO planning
documents and the financial resources for the period of three years, upon which
the co-ordinator of each programme and planners of units may prepare their programmes. Programmes and budget applications are prepared on the basis of the
NDS Development Plan.

The Programmes of the National Defence System are prepared in compliance with the
structural principle, i.e. separate programmes are prepared for separate types of armed
forces, and institutions and departments under the Ministry are included into a common


-----

programme in line with their objectives and tasks. A programme co-ordinator is assigned
to each programme, and the regulations of co-ordinator activities are approved.

The NDS Development Plan is submitted to the programme co-ordinators responsible
for the implementation of the tasks and objectives defined in said plan in the areas within
their remits. Units of the lower level plan their activities in compliance with the NDS
Development Plan and the established maximum assignation limits and, if needed, the
more detailed instructions received from the programme co-ordinators.

In March and April the units and institutions prepare action plans and investment
plans for the execution of the tasks as defined in the NDS Development Plan, assess the
needs for resources and submit them to the programme co-ordinators who, on the
basis of all the proposals, prepare strategic action plans, programme and budget summaries, and then submit said documents to the Defence Resource Group (DRG) for
consideration. Programme co-ordinators are responsible for ensuring that the prepared
programme is realistic, that all projects and measures have been reviewed and all alternatives have been taken into consideration, and the need for resources has been substantiated.

The programmes and strategic action plans, considered and assessed by the DRG and
amended in co-operation with the programme coordinators, are submitted to the Defence Resource Council (DRC) for consideration. Upon approval of the Council, the
strategic action plans, programmes and budget applications are submitted to the Ministry of Finance and the Government.

The NDS Development Plan and the expenditure estimates are amended and approved
_Seimas_
after the has adopted the Law on the Budget. The NDS development plan and
the approved expenditure estimates are the main documents upon which units organise
their activities.

Programme coordinators prepare mid-year and annual reports evaluating programme
implementation and the achieved results.

National Defence ExpendituresNational Defence ExpendituresNational Defence ExpendituresNational Defence ExpendituresNational Defence Expenditures

In order to achieve strategic goals of the NDS, funding must be ensured. Therefore, in
_Seimas_
1999 the passed the Law on national defence system funding strategy, in which
the following relative indicators of programme funding have been approved:

  - 1.70 –1.75 percent of GDP for the year 2000

  - 1.95 – 2.00 percent of GDP for the year 2001

The validity period of said law terminated in 2001. Therefore, in order to ensure the
continuity of the Lithuanian national security and defence policy all parliamentary parties of Lithuania have signed an agreement in May 2001 concerning the defence policy


-----

of Lithuania for 2001 – 2004. In this agreement the parties have confirmed the provision that Lithuania’s defence expenditures in year 2002 will amount to 2 percent of
GDP, and this percentage shall not be reduced in 2003-2004.

National defence expenditures not only include the budget of the Ministry of National
Defence, i.e. expenditures allocated for execution of tasks of the Ministry of National
Defence, but also expenditures of national defence related activities of other institutions
(interior service troops, border police formations, the Riflemen Union, and others).

In compliance with the NATO definition of defence expenditures, the expenditures for
performing civil safety functions are not included in national defence expenditures.

The approved expenditures for state defence in 2001 accounted for 1.95 % of GDP.
The Ministry of National Defence budget constituted 1.56 % GDP, including 1.23 %
GDP state budget expenditures and 0.33 % GDP expenditures from other sources. The
expenditures of national defence through other institutions amounted to 0.39 % GDP.
The major part of these expenditures comprised expenditures for border police formations, interior service troops, and expenditures for construction of an ammunition manufacturing company.

In 2001 expenditures for national defence amounted to 860.5 million Lt, or 93.5 % of
planned allocations, i.e. 1.8% GDP instead of the planned 1.95 % GDP. The reduction
of the percentage of expenditures was influenced by greater than planned GDP growth.

In compliance with the Act on Approval of State and Municipal Budget Financial Indicators for the Year 2002, passed by the Parliament of the Republic of Lithuania, at the
end of 2002, 1003.9 million Litas, or 2.0 % of GDP has been allocated to state defence


_Defence_
_Expenditures_
_1993-2004 m_


-----

(including expenditures from all funding sources) in compliance with the Agreement of
Parliamentary Parties. The budget of the Ministry of National Defence comprises 808.3
million Lt, or 1.61 % GDP, excluding expenditure for performing civil protection functions. The expenditures on state defence allocated to other institutions, i.e. the expenditures of aforementioned institutions and expenditures for “Fight against terrorism”, amount
to 195.6 million Litas, or 0.39 % GDP. Expenditures of other institutions account for a
considerable part of allocations for state defence. Therefore, in future, it is planned that
this part of expenditures will diminish and will not exceed 0.3% of GDP.

The main principles underlying the preparation of programmes and budget for 2002:

  - using the already set and functioning Armed Forces infrastructure to the maximum extent;

  - finalising the projects already launched, postponing establishment of new units;

  - executing exclusively those projects of infrastructure development which are associated with international agreements and material support of partners;

  - maintaining proportional balance between regular and extraordinary expenditures
by evaluating the increase of the system’s expenditures due to the implementation
of investment programmes;

  - ensuring that expenditures on personnel do not exceed 50% of MND budget;

  - MND programmes and budget are prepared so as to ensure that Preparation for
NATO Membership Programme and execution of Partnership Goals is accomplished.

2002 Programmes

Twelve programmes for attaining strategic goals and set tasks have been approved in
2002. In terms of structure and objectives, the first six programmes, for which 85% of
total MND budget is allocated, bear a direct relation to delivery of defence capability.
The remaining programmes aimed at defence management accounts for 15% of MND
budget.

In the approved MND budget for the year 2002, 50.2 % of all expenditures have been
allocated for the personnel (as previously has been set in the assumptions), 16% for exploitation and 33.8% for investments and as much as 22.4 % of the latter being allocated for procurement of modern armaments, military technologies and equipment.

With reference to the tasks of the Armed Forces, Land Forces are the main priority. The
expenditures of said forces amount to 39% of MND budget, followed by NDVF, which
account for up to 10% of MND budget. Final integration of the NDVF into the Land
Forces is planned in 2003.

While preparing the army development plans and planning the budget, the MND aims
to ensure purposeful, effective and rational use of expenditures. Maximum results with
minimal expenditures have become the governing principle of the budget planning.


-----

_Defence_
_expenditures_
_according to the_
_programmes_
_2001-2003_


#### DEFENCE INDUSTRYDEFENCE INDUSTRYDEFENCE INDUSTRYDEFENCE INDUSTRYDEFENCE INDUSTRY

The defence industry is not organised as a separate branch of industry in Lithuania.
Certain companies which in Soviet times were military industry companies (“Magnalis”,
“Kauno Platanas”, “Pergalës koncernas”, “Helisota”) and many light industry companies
(“Lituanica”, “Ðatrija”, “Alytaus tekstilë”, the Lithuanian Textile Institute) as well as newly
established companies (“Elsis”, “Belamas”, “Stigma”, amunition factory, etc) are related
to manufacturing and maintenance of defence production.

The Government of Lithuania is not planning to organise manufacturing of new military
products, excluding ammunition manufacturing. It is anticipated that ammunition shall
be exported to Baltic and European countries.

MND policy is to support and encourage the employment of Lithuanian companies to
the largest possible extent in satisfying the needs of Lithuanian Armed Forces. All items
necessary to the Lithuanian Armed Forces and which can be manufactured by Lithuanian industry are ordered by organising tenders to select the most effective contractor.

In accordance with the needs of the NDS, Lithuanian companies manufacture:

1. Military uniforms – the Lithuanian Textile Institute, “Šatrija”, “Utenos trikotaþas”,
“Sparta”,”Silvos trikotaþas”, “Tuma”, “Ivega”, “Garlita”, “Telteksa”, “Alytaus
tekstilë”;
2. Bullet proof jackets, helmets - Lithuanian Textile Institute;


-----

3. Military equipment and attributes – “Vilga”, “Skalmantas”, “Suvenyras”, “Furnitûra
ir marketingas”, “Telðiø praktika”;
4. Military footwear –“Sabalin”, “Sidabrinë kurpaitë”, “Lituanika”;
5. Dry food rations –“Pakma”;
6. Tactical radio stations L-3501, repair of “Harris” stations –“Elsis”;
7. Radio-relay connection lines – “Belamas”;
8. Modernisation of M14 rifles - “Pergalës koncernas”;
9. Repair of helicopters - “Helisota”;
10.Supply items - “Technogama”;
11.Ammunition magazine chambers –“Stigma” (for export);
12.Computer cardiographs – Cardiology Institute, Medical University, Kaunas;
13.Laser riflemen simulators –Institute of Defence Technologies, University of
Technology, Kaunas.

The main contribution of MND at encouraging the Lithuanian industry is being realised through offset agreements, when upon receipt of technical equipment from foreign
companies, an agreement is signed pertaining to the company investment into Lithuania’s industry.

This way, the resources of “Bofors” Company, Sweden, were invested into Company
“Stigma” ( located in Panevëþys) towards the development of production capabilities
(19 million Lt), sixteen new job positions had been created, and, in the year 2000, sales
amounted to 1.5 million Lt. Financial resources of “Harris”, a US based company,
amounting to 22 million Lt, were invested into Company “Elsis” (located in Kaunas)
for the development of production capabilities. Assemblence and maintenance of
“Harris” radio stations used in the Lithuanian Armed Forces has been organised. The
procedures and methods for producing new military radio stations have been mastered.

In order to use the potential of Lithuanian companies, manufacturing goods and commodities for military purposes more effectively, MND initiates and organises:

  - exhibitions of goods and commodities for defence and military purposes (the Lithuanian Polish Defence and Security Exhibition – Seminar in 2000);

  - presentation of products for military purposes to the heads of procurement and
logistics services of Lithuania and other Baltic countries;

  - bilateral meetings of defence manufacturers with Lithuanian business representatives.

In 2001 the MND initiated preparation of a programme of support for Lithuanian
science. The government of the Republic of Lithuania had approved the Programme for
Development of Science and Technology in 2001-2003, previously approved by the
Ministers of National Defence and Education and Science. For implementation of this
programme, the MND is planning to allocate 17 million Lt for the duration of 3 years.
Renovation of the fundamental scientific and technical base of four Lithuanian scientific


-----

centres by purchasing modern equipment is planned. New laser biotechnologies, sensory
and mechatronic technologies shall be developed.

One of the active measures MND has undertaken as part of the strategic plan for 20012003 is to integrate Lithuanian scientific centres in NATO and other international defence programmes, which will be realised through the Military Science and Technology
Council under the MND, composed of representatives of various leading Lithuanian
scientific institutions. MND intends to support the participation of scientists in NATO
science programmes (conferences, symposiums, collaboration in joint groups, etc.) by
allocating a certain amount of resources for this purpose.

The participation of Lithuanian scientists in NATO science programmes and sub-programmes has been increasing since the year 2000. Currently, three NATO “Science for
Peace” projects are being carried out in Lithuania. They are being executed by the scientists of Vilnius University in the areas of laser, biotechnology and optical electronics.
NATO grants subsidies amounting to over 2 million Lt for the implementation of said
projects.

In addition, NATO experts have selected three more projects within the framework of
this programme and submitted for approval in 2000. The authors of the selected programmes are scientists of the Semiconductor Physics Institute (2 projects) and Biochemistry Institute (1 project).

In constant co-operation with the science institutions of Lithuania, the MND is collecting data relating to proposals from Lithuanian scientists for state defence. A significant
number of works were published in “Defence Technologies from Lithuania” in 2000.
Certain criteria shall be applied for assessment of projects. Implementation of projects
meeting these criteria shall be planned within the National Defence System in compliance with the established MND planning procedures. This is yet another area of mutually beneficial co-operation with Lithuanian scientific institutions.

#### SOCIETYSOCIETYSOCIETY ANDSOCIETYSOCIETY AND AND AND   THE ARMED AND THE ARMEDTHE ARMEDTHE ARMED FORCESTHE ARMED FORCES FORCES FORCES FORCES

MND Activities in strengthening links between the Armed ForcesMND Activities in strengthening links between the Armed ForcesMND Activities in strengthening links between the Armed ForcesMND Activities in strengthening links between the Armed ForcesMND Activities in strengthening links between the Armed Forces
and the Societyand the Societyand the Societyand the Societyand the Society

Co-operation between the Armed Forces and society generates effects beneficial to both
parties: democracy is strengthened, whereas the Armed Forces and defence system become more effective. The Armed Forces must be accountable and the defence policy
must be transparent in order to ensure democratic control of these forces. Separate defence capabilities may be reinforced only in cases when social support is achieved. Therefore, constant communication between the society and the army is vital for the overall


-----

development of defence forces. The Lithuanian Armed Forces are a part of the society.
The Armed Forces serve the interests of the state and its citizens. Lithuanian citizens
define the tasks for the Armed Forces, allocate resources and control their use via elected
democratic institutions, i.e. the Seimas, the President and the Government. Over 4,000
conscripts serve in the Lithuanian Armed Forces every year, guaranteeing constant and
intensive co-operation between the Armed Forces and the society.

Close co-operation between the Armed Forces and the society constitute the basis of the
national security of Lithuania. Only when there is constant public support can the Armed
Forces attain optimal military readiness and employ all its military potential and action
capabilities in wartime.

The MND is executing an intensive programme for enhancement of public relations.
The main elements of said programme are:

  - informing the society of the activities of the Lithuanian Armed Forces and the
benefits of integration into NATO by means of mass media, (i.e. television, radio,
the press, publications and the Internet);

  - presenting the Armed Forces and their activities to society in a direct manner by
organising “open doors” in military units, military and public festivals, providing
support to municipalities,  educational institutions and other organisations;

  - supporting and promoting activities of non-governmental organisations in compliance with the objectives of the National Defence System.

Over 1 million Lt has been allocated to the implementation of programmes on providing
information to the public, co-operation with educational institutions and support for
public organisations in 2001. In addition, the Ministry of National Defence acquired
and transferred to Lithuanian schools computers and equipment valued at 4.5 million
Lt. The computer network created in this way shall allow the Ministry of National Defence to cooperate with Lithuanian schools more actively. 1 million Lt. is allocated for this
purpose in 2002.

Civil ProtectionCivil ProtectionCivil ProtectionCivil ProtectionCivil Protection

The Lithuanian Armed Forces provide prompt assistance for society and public institutions in terms of organising public events, maintaining public order, performing search
and rescue operations and disposal of unexploded ordnance, organising children’s leisure activities in summer and other activities.

The basic goal of the civil protection and rescue system of Lithuania is to protect the
society in the events of emergency situations. This system ensures that rescue services are
adequately prepared for operation in the event of natural disasters, industrial accidents
and other emergency situations. It also informs the society about dangers occurring to


-----

public health and property, and guarantees evacuation from regions under danger or
emergency sites. The Civil Protection Department under the MND coordinates the
activities of civil protection institutions and rescue services and organise prevention measures against extreme emergency situations throughout Lithuania.

Riflemen UnionRiflemen UnionRiflemen UnionRiflemen UnionRiflemen Union

An important role of a mediator between the army and the society is performed by the
Lithuanian Riflemen Union (LRU). The Union is a volunteer civil self-defence public
organisation aimed at strengthening the defensive powers of the country, promoting civil
and national awareness of Lithuanian citizens. The main goals of the LRU are:

  - strengthening Lithuanian independence, fostering national ethnic culture;

  - preparing Lithuanian citizens for self-defence and armed defence of the country;

  - educating the youth in the spirit of citizenship and patriotism and preparing for
military service;

  - providing assistance to the police forces in maintaining public order;

  - providing assistance to civil protection and rescue institutions eliminating consequences of disasters and performing rescue works.

At present LRU is composed of 10 regiments, 71 companies, and 16 separate units.
Overall 6,000 riflemen belong to the Lithuanian Riflemen Union. The Union is managed by a commander appointed for a period of three years by the General Congress of
Regiment Representatives, subsequent to submission of proposal by the Minister of National Defence and with the consent of the National Security and Defence Committee of
Parliament.

Civil Resistance CentreCivil Resistance CentreCivil Resistance CentreCivil Resistance CentreCivil Resistance Centre

In 1999 The Civil Resistance Centre was established within the framework of the Military Advanced Professional Training Centre in Nemenèinë. The objectives of the Centre
are as follows:

  - to prepare citizens for individual and organised resistance;

  - to prepare resistance programmes and coordinate their implementation;

  - to promote total defence and resistance ideas in the society.

The main activities of the Civil Resistance Centre include preparation of training programmes and their implementation by organising seminars for specialists from various
fields on relevant subjects of their interest.


-----

# AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE PARLIAMENTARY PARTIES
OF LITHUANIA ON THE DEFENCE POLICY,
2001–2004

Vilnius, 23 May 2001

The parliamentary parties of the Republic of Lithuania

  - Guided by the Law on the Basics of National Security of Lithuania, which stipulates that the national security and defence system of Lithuania is developed as a
part of the common European security and transatlantic defence systems, and that
decisions regarding the defence policy and Armed Forces of Lithuania are made by
the democratically elected civilian authorities;

  - Guided by the legal norms of the United Nations and other universally recognised
norms of international law that establish the inalienable rights of every State to
individual or collective self-defence in the event of armed aggression;

  - Striving to enhance peace and stability and referring to the provision of the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania which states that the population as a whole and
each individual citizen has the right to oppose any encroachment upon the independence, territorial integrity, or constitutional order of the State of Lithuania.;

  - Seeking to strengthen the defence capability of the State, increase interoperability
with NATO forces, actively support the EU Common Security and Foreign Policy
and ensure stable financing of the national defence system;

  - Emphasising the importance of fostering citizen’s values, education, science and
technologies, and the economic and social policies for the development of the national defence system,

enter this Agreement On the Defence Policy. The Parties agree on the essential directions and priorities for the development of the national defence system and on the prerequisites, including financial ones, necessary for the implementation of development
plans for the Armed Forces and of the NATO Membership Action Plan, and commit
themselves to the provisions of this Agreement.

THE DEFENCE POLICY OF LITHUANIA

Lithuania is seeking membership of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO)
and also strives to actively support the European Union’s Common Foreign and Security
Policy. Lithuania can secure long-term and stable security only by being a part of the
NATO collective defence system.


-----

Implementation of the Membership Action Plan proposed at the NATO Summit in
Washington in 1999 and approved by the Government of the Republic of Lithuania is
one of the key factors in the preparations for membership.

While it is preparing for integration into NATO, Lithuania will continue to participate
actively in the NATO Partnership for Peace and its Planning and Review Process, and
implement the partnership commitments it has adopted.

Fulfilment of these tasks requires that political parties agree on long-term plans for the
development of the national defence system and the need for stable financing.

PRIORITIES AND DIRECTIONS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF
THE NATIONAL DEFENCE SYSTEM

Lithuania will create an effective legal basis which is compatible with the provisions of the
international treaties of the NATO Allies and which regulates the participation of Lithuanian military units in NATO-led international operations, including operations under
Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty (collective defence).

Since 1994 Lithuania has participated in UN and NATO-led international operations:
UNPROFOR II in Croatia in 1994-95, IFOR and SFOR in Bosnia-Herzegovina since
1996, KFOR in Kosovo since 1999, and AFOR in Albania in 1999. The participation
in NATO led and EU international operations, and in crisis and conflict prevention, will
remain a priority for Lithuania in future.

The system of national defence is strengthened by developing the Lithuanian Armed
Forces and the structures under the Ministry of National Defence and by making them
more efficient.

The Lithuanian Armed Forces must be professionally prepared for collective actions,
armed with weapons and combat equipment that are modern, reliable and compatible
with NATO requirements, and able to act together with NATO forces in peace support
and Article 5 operations.

In order to use the funds allocated for the Armed Forces effectively, development is
focused on established priority areas.

In 2002-2004 the main priorities of the development for Armed Forces are as follows:
improvement of the training of servicemen and of the education system, improvement to
the conditions of service of servicemen, improvement of the command, control and communications system (C3), creation and development of air defence, development of the
logistics system, procurement and modernisation of weapons and equipment, and development of the defence infrastructure.


-----

By 2006 the Iron Wolf Brigade will be reorganised into a High Readiness Brigade “Iron
Wolf” capable of acting together with NATO forces under Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty in Lithuania.

By the end of 2002 a battalion will be created for operations outside Lithuania together
with NATO forces under Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty.

For UN and NATO international peace support operations in peace time Lithuania is
planning to deploy units up to company size.

In order to ensure the country’s security, Lithuania will create an effective air space monitoring and control system, improve the training of the mobilisation reserve and prepare
an infrastructure for the reception of NATO reinforcements.

**THE PLANNED FINANCING OF THE NATIONAL DEFENCE SYSTEM**

A stable share of the GDP must be allocated for the defence budget in 2002-2004 in
order to provide a sound basis upon which to base the planned force structure and
ensure effective defence.

In order to prepare effective defence plans and projects, decisions regarding any adjustments in financing have to be adopted three years in advance.

In order to ensure accountability for the use of the defence budget, a periodic audit of
the national defence system has to be carried out and regular reports submitted to the
Seimas (Parliament) on the development of the national defence system.

In 2002 the defence budget of Lithuania shall be 2 per cent of the GDP, and in 20032004 this percentage will not be decreased.

The parliamentary parties of Lithuania agree that long-term plans for the development of the
national defence system and stable financing, as well as consistent implementation of the Law
on the Basics of National Security of Lithuania are possible only by agreement between the
parliamentary parties and with broad public support and approval of these goals.

The parliamentary parties are convinced that the current security and defence policy
and integration into NATO and the EU will ensure independence, security and social
stability of the State of Lithuania and create favourable conditions for economic growth
and development, and the well-being of all our citizens.

The Centre Union K. Glaveckas

The Union of the “Young Lithuania”,
New Nationalists and Political Prisoners S. Buškevièius


-----

The Election Action of Lithuanian Poles V. Tomaševski

The Lithuanian Liberal Union R. Paksas

The Lithuanian Christian Democrats K. Bobelis

The Lithuanian Social Democratic Party V. P. Andriukaitis

The Modern Christian Democratic Party V. Boguðis

The New Democracy Party K. Prunskienë

The New Union (Social Liberal) Party A. Paulauskas

The Moderate Conservative Union G. Vagnorius

The Homeland Union (Lithuanian Conservatives) A. Kubilius

The Lithuanian Union of Political Prisoners
and Deportees P. Jakuèionis

Done in Vilnius on 23 May 2001


-----

-----

