HPM153 / 2011
Unique internal ID: 340510
[Версия on русском](http://lex.justice.md/viewdoc.php?action=view&view=doc&id=340510&lang=2)


[File of the legal act](http://lex.justice.md/md/340510/)


**Republic of Moldova**

**PARLIAMENT**

**DECISION No. 153**

of 15.07.2011

**for the approval of the**

**National Security Strategy of the Republic of Moldova**

Published: 14.10.2011 in the Official Gazette no. 170-175 art Nr: 499

_MODIFIED_
_[HP269 of 07.12.17, MO441-450 / 22.12.17 art.755](http://lex.justice.md/md/340510/md/373356%20/)_

Parliament shall adopt this decision.
**Art. 1. - The National Security Strategy of the Republic of Moldova, set out in the annex, is**
approved.
**Art. 2. - The Government will adjust the national programs and action plans to the objectives,**
priorities and policies set out in the Strategy.
**Art. 3. - The Supreme Security Council will monitor the implementation of the Strategy and will**
present an annual report to the Parliament in this regard.

**THE PRESIDENT OF THE PARLIAMENT Marian LUPU**

**Nr. 153. Chisinau, July 15, 2011.**

annex

**NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF**

**THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA**

**1. Introduction**

The National Security Strategy of the Republic of Moldova (hereinafter referred to as the Strategy )
starts from the national interests, responds to threats and risks with an impact on national security,
establishes the objectives of the national security system, identifies the means and ways to ensure
national security. The strategy is also a medium-term political-legal act that allows the adaptation to
internal and external developments of the policy in the field of national security, identifying specific
segments of the national security system that need reform, developing a realistic plan for implementing
reforms.
Based on the Concept of National Security, the whole set of actions aimed at ensuring the security of
the country starts from the understanding that, at present, the national security of a European state can
no longer be seen as an isolated phenomenon. The instabilities and dangers in Europe, including from
its peripheries affect the security of all European states requiring intense international cooperation


-----

for information and communication with the public in the field of national defense and security, as well
as other sectoral strategies in the field of national security.
The strategy takes into account the multilateral approach to national security, its multidimensional
and interdependent character, determined both by the state of affairs in the political, military and public
order in the country, as well as by the economic, social, ecological, energy and of another nature. Thus,
the Strategy establishes the criteria to which the national security system must comply, these being:
respect for the principles of the rule of law and the norms of human rights protection, strengthening of
institutions and democratic principles in the country, economic growth, ensuring civil control over the
armed forces and force structures, the implementation of the principle of demilitarization of the
institutions in the state that do not have defense attributions, the promotion of good relations with the
neighboring states, proper protection of classified information. The strategy also includes actions
needed in other sectors of major importance for national security, such as health, ecology, education,
the fight against corruption.

**2. National interests and security policy**

The vital national interests of the Republic of Moldova lie in ensuring and defending the
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, inalienable borders of the state, the security of citizens,
in respecting and protecting human rights and freedoms, in consolidating democracy, allowing the
development of a state. law and a market economy. The pursuit of these interests is an absolute priority
in the security policy of the Republic of Moldova.
From a strategic point of view, the Republic of Moldova directs its efforts to guarantee the
development of the state and society in terms of civilization and economy, to transform it into a
functional and stable democracy, to create and promote favorable conditions for increasing welfare and
prosperity. the country, for the modernization of the state through the development of science,
technologies, education, health and social security system and infrastructure, for the proper protection
of the environment and the national treasury. The promotion of national interests also involves efforts
to ensure an adequate positioning and action of the state on the international arena that would allow the
promotion and guarantee of national interests abroad.
A central element of the necessary instruments for the defense and promotion of the national
interests of the state is provided by the process of European integration of the Republic of Moldova.
The security policy of the Republic of Moldova is a set of concepts, legal norms and actions aimed
at promoting and protecting national interests by identifying, preventing and counteracting threats and
risks with an impact on state security.
Following an analysis of the strategic context and the situation in the country, the main threats to
national security were identified: poverty, economic underdevelopment and energy dependence,
Transnistrian conflict, tensions in the area and foreign military presence, external coercion,
criminogenic factor, corruption, the demographic problem and the exacerbation of the migration
phenomenon, the health of the population, the natural calamities, the environmental pollution, the
technogenic accidents, the informational insecurity, the instability of the financial-banking system.
The security of the Republic of Moldova is also affected by a number of risks and vulnerabilities that
can degenerate into threats if ignored and / or mismanaged. This chapter includes: social insecurity
(polarization of society, alcoholism, drug addiction, smoking, etc.), political instability and reduced
capacity to secure the state border (in particular, lack of control over its Transnistrian segment),
terrorism, food insecurity, influence economic and financial crises, including external ones.
Ensuring a sustainable and stable character of the national security of the Republic of Moldova
depends on the ability / capacity of the state to face complex challenges, which are the result of several
cross-border processes, interspersed and intertwined, political, economic, social, demographic and
ecological. The ability / capacity of the Republic of Moldova to face these challenges will increase or
decrease depending on the speed of elimination of discrepancies, in terms of democratic, economic and
technological development, between our country and developed European countries.
Thus, in order to protect national interests, public authorities will take the necessary measures and
use the appropriate means to reduce the vulnerabilities of the national security system and increase the
national capacity to respond to threats and risks. It will also ensure the continuous assessment of threats
and risks with an impact on national security, a process that will also include the formulation of
proposals and recommendations aimed at updating the state security policy.
In the process of promoting national interests will be taken into account the status of permanent
neutrality of the Republic of Moldova which assumes that our country is not a party to military blocs


-----

Achieving strategic security objectives involves the participation of public administration at all
levels, civil society and non-governmental organizations, as well as citizens.

**3. Strengthening national security through**

**foreign and defense policy**

Starting from the international security environment and from the context in which the Republic of
Moldova is placed, the foreign policy of the state is an integral part of the national security policy,
being directed towards ensuring, externally, satisfactory conditions for national security. of an
environment conducive to the promotion of national interests abroad.
The main foreign policy landmarks of the Republic of Moldova related to ensuring the state of
national security and the efficient promotion of its national interests refer to:
- the country's integration into the European Union;
- promoting mutually beneficial relations and building strategic partnerships with the EU, Romania,
Ukraine, the United States of America and the Russian Federation;
- intensifying international cooperation in order to take over the practices used in EU countries to
build a functional sector of national security.
Externally, the activities of the Republic of Moldova will be oriented towards establishing and
consolidating international relations and cooperation formulas that exclude the risk of involvement in
conflicts that would threaten national interests and that, in case of such conflicts, would allow
overcoming them through efforts. jointly with external strategic partners and by appealing to the
mechanisms of international law. Thus, in order to strengthen national security, specific foreign policy
actions will be carried out based on the observance of the international treaties to which the Republic
of Moldova is a party, of the objectives and principles of the UN Charter.
A special place in the security context belongs to the participation of the Republic of Moldova in
global, regional and subregional efforts to promote international stability and security through
cooperation within the UN, OSCE, as well as with NATO, other relevant international organizations,
participation in missions within EU Common Security and Defense Policy (CSDP).
**_3.1. The process of integration into the European Union_**
The national security of the Republic of Moldova cannot be conceived outside the context of
European security. Considering the fact that the European Union is a stabilizing factor, important for
the national security system, the Republic of Moldova will make efforts to advance in the process of
European integration. Prospective accession to the European Union will strengthen the country's
security, with the Republic of Moldova becoming a beneficiary and a source of stability and security.
Negotiating a framework for cooperation that unequivocally reflects the prospect of accession remains
a strategic objective for the Republic of Moldova.
Particular attention will be paid in the integration efforts to intensifying cooperation with the EU on
the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) and the CSDP, aimed at strengthening national and
regional security. The Republic of Moldova will cooperate with the EU in the fields of conflict
prevention and resolution, crisis management, non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
**_3.2. Participate in international efforts aimed at managing contemporary threats and challenges_**
The Republic of Moldova will actively use the framework for cooperation with the European Union,
the framework for multilateral cooperation provided by the UN, the Council of Europe, the OSCE,
NATO, the Central European Initiative, the South East European Cooperation Process, other
organizations and international initiatives, as well as programs and initiatives aimed at preventing and
regulating regional and internal conflicts, addressing and resolving global and regional security issues
with an impact on national security, combating international terrorism, combating cross-border crime,
preventing environmental degradation and contagious diseases, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, towards the elimination of poverty and the promotion of development, etc.
Taking into account the persistence of conflicts that threaten regional security and affect the
territorial integrity and independence of sovereign states, the Republic of Moldova supports the
creation and efficiency, within relevant international organizations, in particular the UN, EU and
OSCE, of mediation, prevention and enforcement mechanisms. crisis and conflict management, as well
as mechanisms for monitoring compliance with Member States' commitments.
Participation in international operations under the auspices of the UN, EU and OSCE will be part of
the contribution of the Republic of Moldova to international security efforts. The development of the
capabilities necessary to participate in international humanitarian, peacekeeping and rescue operations,
as well as increasing the scope of this participation are an integral part of the development and reform


-----

and trafficking of weapons in areas beyond the control of the governments of countries affected by
internal conflicts, Moldova supports efforts to increase confidence-building measures, strengthen and
expand international control regimes. weapons, preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and certain categories of conventional weapons. The Republic of Moldova will actively
participate in efforts aimed at revitalizing the control regime over conventional armaments in Europe
and the fundamental principles on which this control regime is based, First of all, the internationally
recognized principle of the need for the freely expressed agreement of the host state for the stationing
of foreign military forces on its territory. The implementation of the commitments previously made in
this context will create the necessary conditions for the establishment of a new control regime on
conventional armaments in Europe.
Cooperation within the CIS in the fields of security is conditioned by the commitments assumed at
the time of accession to this organization, according to which the Republic of Moldova does not
participate in addressing politico-military issues. Thus, priority will be given to the economic, trade
dimension with an impact on the economic and energy security of the Republic of Moldova, as well as
bilateral cooperation with CIS member countries.
**_3.3. Cooperation with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)_**
Relations with NATO are within the limits of the Partnership for Peace (PfP), of the Euro-Atlantic
Partnership Council (EAPC) and are carried out in practice according to the Individual Action Plan of
the Partnership (IPAP) Republic of Moldova-NATO. The development of these relations is a
contribution of our country to the strengthening of European security and stability, which, in turn, has a
favorable impact on national security. Such a strategy will ensure the transition of Moldova from a
consumer to a source of regional security and stability, and further participation in PfP and EAPC will
allow it to use and implement international experience in security and defense sector reform. .
The cooperation of the Republic of Moldova with NATO is within the limits of the Euro-Atlantic
Partnership and the Partnership for Peace Council, which does not affect the constitutional status of
permanent neutrality of the country and does not exceed the respective constitutional framework.
Through the process of individualization and deepening of cooperation with NATO, which was
reached with the launch in 2006 of the Individual Action Plan of the Partnership, the Republic of
Moldova aims to confirm the vector of European action that it has assumed, to obtain the necessary
tools and practices. for building a functioning national security sector, able to cope with new and
conventional threats and risks, which the state continues to face and, implicitly, to move from the
category of consumer to that of security generator in the region .
The implementation of IPAP is related to the reform of the national security sector in accordance
with European standards and practices in the field of security. The main objectives of IPAP are:
- reforming the political-legal basis of the national security sector and subsequent adjustment of the
normative acts to the reformed political-legal basis;
- establishing national capacities for planning and strategic analysis in the field of national security
and defense, assigning a functional character to these capacities;
- qualitative implementation of the recommendations of the Strategic Defense Analysis;
- initiating the process of establishing modern budgetary planning mechanisms in the field of
national security and defense;
- establishing the mechanisms of an authentic democratic control over the national security sector.
Achieving the respective objectives and the measures they imply determines the need to obtain in the
structures of the national security sector a qualified personnel in the following fields:
- strategic planning and analysis in the field of security and defense, elaboration of security policies;
- budget planning in the national security sector;
- elaboration of the force structure, deployment of the components of the national security sector and
development of peace missions;
- personnel management in the national security sector;
- acquisitions for the national security sector;
- information services;
- military justice.
The Republic of Moldova will also capitalize on cooperation with NATO in order to develop
national capacities to prepare, prevent and manage exceptional situations, as well as their
consequences. In this regard, the relevant authorities will intensify the exchange of experience and
consultations with NATO in order to take over and implement the best practices in this field


-----

well as improving the state s ability to react to threats to modern society.
**_3.4. Bilateral cooperation in the field of security_**
The Republic of Moldova promotes relations with all countries of the world according to the
principles of the UN Charter in order to ensure their support in achieving national priorities, including
those related to state security. Considering the essential role in ensuring the global and regional security
held by the states with major politico-military, economic and information resources, the security
cooperation relations will be developed as a priority and further with the member countries of the
European Union, with the USA, with the Russian Federation and with neighboring states both
bilaterally and multilaterally offered by international organizations.
The Republic of Moldova will promote strategic partnerships and special partnerships with Romania
and Ukraine in order to integrate Europe and strengthen national security and, implicitly, regional
security. Efforts will continue to strengthen the priority legal framework with both states. Ensuring
regional security, including on the economic, energy and environmental dimensions, remains a priority
of cooperation with neighboring states.
Close relations with the Member States of the European Union involve maintaining an active,
constructive and bottom-up dialogue, exchanging experience, carrying out joint projects, implementing
European standards and practices in the field of security.
The multidimensional cooperation with the USA implies the further intensification of the political
dialogue held at all levels, the consultations on security issues, as well as the attraction of the assistance
from the USA for the realization of the projects from the different development spheres of the Republic
of Moldova. An important place in the cooperation between the two countries is occupied by the
political support provided to the Republic of Moldova in the settlement of the Transnistrian conflict,
the assistance provided in the process of democratic reforms, as well as in the modernization of the
national security sector.
The development of bilateral cooperation with the Russian Federation will continue in accordance
with the provisions of the Basic Political Treaty, which corresponds to the interests of both states. The
Republic of Moldova will develop the constructive potential of bilateral relations in the political,
economic, social and energy spheres on the principles: sovereign equality, mutual respect and mutually
beneficial cooperation. Close cooperation with the Russian Federation will be developed both
bilaterally and within the established mechanisms of negotiations in the "5 + 2" format in order to
identify a comprehensive and viable solution to the Transnistrian conflict while respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova. .
**_3.5. Promoting defense policy_**
The defense policy of the Republic of Moldova is a set of visions, concepts, activities and relations
that reflect the complex nature of defense and define the state's ability to ensure continuous
modernization in order to develop its possibilities to use military means defensively. Defense policy
includes external and internal, military and non-military aspects of the national security system and is
based on the fundamental principle of ensuring democratic control over the armed forces by promoting
transparency and accountability of the national defense system to society.
Recognizing that the risk of armed aggression against the Republic of Moldova is currently low, the
state's defense policy will be aimed at developing sufficient military capabilities to ensure the
execution of the following missions:
- discouraging and, where appropriate, repelling an aggression. armed forces, by carrying out
defense operations (combat actions);
- ensuring the control and management of the airspace;
- providing support to civilian authorities in managing exceptional situations;
- participation in peacekeeping missions, including international ones, and in humanitarian missions.
Starting from the need to adjust the structure of the armed forces to the rigors and tasks deriving
from the mentioned missions, it is necessary to modify its current composition.
In this context, the National Army will be the only element of the armed forces of the Republic of
Moldova.
The Border Guard Service and the carabinieri troops, being still components of the national security
sector, will definitely become part of the justice and internal affairs system. The carabinieri troops will
take over entirely from the police bodies the functions of maintaining and restoring public order,
following the path of complete professionalization and gradual transition to service by contract.

Given the largely unpredictable and urgent nature of natural disasters as well as the frequent recent


-----

There is also a need to regulate the actions of the armed forces of the Republic of Moldova in the event
of a terrorist attack aimed at destabilizing its security status.
For the development of a robust, efficient national defense system and in accordance with the
available means, the Republic of Moldova will take the necessary actions in order to better
institutionalize the process of formulating the defense policy. Achieving this goal requires the
development of an appropriate legal framework, the delimitation of roles and responsibilities between
state structures, the existence of a coordination and strategic planning mechanism, as well as full
information and active involvement of society in the development of defense policy.
The detailed description of the state defense policy and the military aspects of the national security
of the Republic of Moldova is the object of the National Military Strategy.

**4. Ways to ensure national security**

**_4.1. Combating poverty, ensuring economic security and reducing energy dependence_**
Economic security is an indispensable part of national security. Thus, the actions of central public
administration authorities will be aimed at creating internal and external conditions to ensure the
independence of the national economy, sustainable economic growth, meeting the needs of the state
and citizens, combating poverty, competitiveness in foreign markets. In order to strengthen the national
financial-banking system, the relevant authorities will also take measures to increase the resilience of
the given system to external financial and economic crises.
Energy security, an integral part of economic security, is a set of measures aimed at consolidating the
energy complex by diversifying energy sources, by expanding energy transmission and distribution
networks and energy resources, by modernizing generation capacities located in the country.
In order to ensure the economic and energy security of the country, will be developed: an effective
mechanism for identifying internal and external danger factors, with the establishment of actions
necessary to ensure security, and an adequate decision-making system based on development programs
social and economic. In this regard, increased efforts will be made to:
- carrying out institutional transformations that contribute to the coordination of actions to ensure
economic security;
- development and implementation of competitive product manufacturing technologies;
- development of the infrastructure of the national economy, necessary for the achievement of
structural transformations;
- ensuring a more efficient use of resources;
- development of the technical-scientific, innovative and production potential;
- diversification of export potential;
- international collaboration in the field of energy and integration in the single European energy
system;
- improving the climate for investments in electricity generation;
- diversification of the types of fuels used on the territory of the country, as well as the ways of
importing energy resources;
- increasing, as far as possible, the competitive economic capacities for electricity production;
- promoting energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy resources, in line with relevant EU
policies;
- creation or lease, as far as possible, of natural gas storage depots;
- ringing the national gasification system;
- full gasification of the country.
**_4.2. Management of issues related to the Transnistrian conflict and the withdrawal of foreign_**
**_troops_**
The solution of the Transnistrian problem must be achieved exclusively by peaceful means in the
negotiation process in the "5 + 2" format.
The main objective of the process of political settlement of the Transnistrian conflict is to identify a
comprehensive, viable and final solution to the Transnistrian conflict, by developing and assigning a
special legal status to the Transnistrian region as an integral part of the Republic of Moldova.
The solution of the conflict must be based on the observance of the principles of sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova within its internationally recognized borders.
The final settlement of the conflict must ensure the viable, democratic, independent and sovereign
character of the reunified state, by reintegrating the constitutional, economic, social, security and
defense space


-----

fundamental human rights and freedoms, assisted by a free and consolidated civil society.
The political solution to the conflict will be consistent with the country's strategic vector of
European integration. Advancing on the path of European integration, the authorities of the Republic of
Moldova will continue to act in the direction of increasing the political, economic and social
attractiveness of the state and the goal of reintegration.
In promoting the settlement process, the Moldovan authorities will simultaneously focus their efforts
on managing confidence-building measures and on the process of negotiating the political settlement of
the conflict. The confidence-building measures are intended to help eliminate suspicions and resolve
the pressing problems facing the population on both banks of the Dniester.
The transformation of the current peacekeeping operation into a multinational civilian mission with
an international mandate will help achieve political regulation, creating the necessary mechanisms to
build trust and security.
The subject of Transnistrian conflict settlement will be consistently promoted in the context of
bilateral contacts with international actors involved in the settlement process - the OSCE, Russia,
Ukraine, the EU and its member states, as well as the United States. The authorities of the Republic of
Moldova will focus both on obtaining the support of external partners for the reintegration policies
promoted by the state, and on ensuring common approaches between international actors. The
authorities of the Republic of Moldova will also use multilateral forums of universal and regional
vocation, in particular the UN, the OSCE, the Council of Europe, etc., in order to raise awareness and
ensure the necessary support for reintegration efforts. Efforts will continue to secure the Transnistrian
segment of the Moldovan-Ukrainian border,
Withdrawal from the Republic of Moldova of the foreign military presence is imperative and is to be
carried out by virtue of the fact that it has no legal basis, contradicting the provisions of the
Constitution of the Republic of Moldova, international commitments and principles in the field of arms
control and politico-military relations. States, which provide for the need for the express agreement
expressed in this regard by the authorities of the host country. The immediate and unconditional
withdrawal from the territory of the Republic of Moldova of the ammunition belonging to the Russian
Federation and of the foreign military forces that ensure their guarding is likely to stimulate the process
of political settlement of the Transnistrian problem.
**_4.3. Decreasing the chances of foreign coercion The_**
Republic of Moldova remains exposed to the threat of political or other coercion, generated from
abroad in order to influence its foreign and domestic policy options. External coercion may be
exercised in the form of economic or other measures, as well as through the special services of other
states.
The current state of affairs indicates the need to acquire adequate information and communication
skills. These capabilities should include both tools for obtaining qualitative information and good
management of counterintelligence, as well as tools used in appropriate communication within the
national security sector and in the analysis of information used to make policy decisions. An
information system reset according to the standards and practices used in the EU will allow a better
orientation of the Republic of Moldova in the current security environment.
**_4.4. Combating the criminogenic factor and corruption_**
As shown by the analysis of threats and risks with an impact on security, in the Republic of Moldova
there is a worsening of the criminogenic situation against the background of diminished capacity to
combat them by the competent structures.
Thus, as priorities will be: increasing efforts to prevent and combat criminogenic factors, including
the liquidation of organized criminal groups operating both in the Republic of Moldova and in other
countries, destroying the technical and material base of these groups. Therefore, the implementation of
the reform of the national security sector follows, which will increase the capacity of the structures in
the national security sector empowered with the functions of combating criminogenic factors.
The competent structures will also continue their efforts to create conditions for the effective fight
against organized crime, illegal migration and trafficking in human beings, in particular in connection
with transnational organized crime activities.
The necessary actions will be taken to ensure, under the law, the protection of life, health, honor,
dignity, rights, freedoms, interests and property of citizens of criminal attacks, the prevention and
prosecution of crimes, the maintenance of public order and public security. state supervision in the field
of civil protection and fire protection throughout the country Efforts will be intensified to reduce the


-----

Greater attention should be paid to using the opportunities offered by Interpol, Europol, other law
enforcement cooperation organizations, as well as to stepping up cooperation with similar structures in
neighboring countries. The implementation of the community police system and the taking over of the
functions of ensuring and restoring public order on the entire territory of the country under the
responsibility of the carabinieri troops will be the basic measures in ensuring public order.
An imperative of the time is to develop the partnership between law enforcement and civil society, to
raise the role of the community in ensuring security and public peace, to prevent crime, especially
juvenile delinquency, and to raise the culture of detention. and the use of civilian weapons.
Starting from the fact that the phenomenon of corruption seriously affects the economic security of
the state, harms human rights, undermines state structures and social progress, which endangers the
national security of the Republic of Moldova, competent public institutions will continue to address the
fight against corruption at strategic level.
This phenomenon must be kept under a rigorous control and diminished both by applying measures
to prevent criminogenic factors and remove the conditions that generate corruption, as well as by
directly detecting acts of corruption, by prosecuting the guilty, under the law, by publicizing the cases
of corruption fought. The policy document containing the indicative direction of preventing and
combating corruption is the National Anti-Corruption Strategy. In order to achieve this policy, the
public institutions involved in the fight against corruption will execute the measures from the Action
Plan for the implementation of the National Anti-Corruption Strategy, from the National Development
Plan, etc.
An important role in this respect belongs to the civil society, which is to complete these measures
with monitoring and support actions.
**_4.5. Improving the demographic situation, the health of the population and ensuring_**
**_pharmaceutical safety_**
_[Point 4.5 of the name in the HP269 wording of 07.12.17, MO441-450 / 22.12.17 art.755]_
Starting from the negative tendencies of the natural increase in the Republic of Moldova, the
problems of demographic development will be further monitored, policies will be adopted to eliminate
existing and future threats and vulnerabilities, identifying actions to ensure demographic security
through cohesion, development and economic security. The central public authorities will develop and
implement the National Strategy in the field of demographic security.
Reducing the spread of disease will be achieved by developing and implementing national policies
and programs for primary and secondary prophylaxis, including health promotion, informing and
modifying risk behaviors, expanding prophylactic vaccination, increasing the potential for intervention
to detect, locate and eliminate epidemic outbreaks, through international cooperation in order to protect
the country's territory from the import and spread of communicable diseases, through the
implementation of the International Health Regulations.
Pharmaceutical security will be achieved by ensuring from the state a lasting protection for the
whole community and for each inhabitant in part from any threat / danger generated as a result of
unsatisfactory / non-compliant / illegal activity of the pharmaceutical system or its component parts.
The central public authorities will elaborate and implement the strategy and the strategic plan regarding
the strengthening of the pharmaceutical security in the Republic of Moldova, aiming at preventing the
introduction on the pharmaceutical market of the falsified medicines, of non-compliant quality;
ensuring the safety of medicines by strengthening clinical research and pharmacovigilance; ensuring
the proper storage of medicines in pharmaceutical companies; development of the national
pharmaceutical industry and others.

_[Point 4.5 paragraph introduced by HP269 of 07.12.17, MO441-450 / 22.12.17 art.755]_
Public health will be supported by the development of capacities to adapt and respond to a number
of environmental and social factors, such as pollution drinking water, climate change, the use of toxic
substances and chemical waste, the use of ionizing radiation sources and radioactive materials, and by
taking measures to prevent diseases conditioned by these factors. It is expected to develop and allocate
the necessary budget for the implementation of an action plan for health in relation to the environment,
with the involvement of all responsible authorities and civil society.

_[Point 4.5 paragraph amended by HP269 of 07.12.17, MO441-450 / 22.12.17 art.755]_
Given the global upward trend in HIV / AIDS infection, the competent institutions will keep the
situation under constant monitoring. Particular emphasis will be placed on stabilizing the epidemic of
tuberculosis


-----

**_environmental pollution and technical accidents_**
In order to ensure a prompt and effective response to possible risks and current needs, the civil
protection system is to be gradually transformed into a national system for managing exceptional
situations. This system will include as participants all state structures, as well as non-governmental
institutions, which interact based on clear, transparent and interdependent mechanisms, maximally
adapted to the needs and expectations of citizens. The cooperation mechanisms will be based on the
following principles: shared use of resources, integrated intervention, flexibility, organization on
modules, operational safety.
In order to adopt and implement European Union standards in the field of case management and
exceptional situations, a number of measures will be implemented in the Republic of Moldova, such as
the single European emergency telephone number “112”.
All elements of intervention in exceptional situations will be reformed to become compact, mobile
and fast, multifunctional and properly equipped, with autonomous operation for a certain period. In
addition to the interventions carried out within the borders of the Republic of Moldova, they are to
have the capacity to intervene and operate abroad, in accordance with the international treaties to which
the Republic of Moldova is a party. Efforts will also be intensified to create an effective mechanism for
communicating with external partners in order to signal and prevent exceptional situations.
Particular attention will be paid to the training process, which is one of the pillars of the multilateral
training of intervention services and the population in the field of prevention and liquidation of the
consequences of exceptional situations.
Cooperation will continue in the context of treaties and other policy documents to which the
Republic of Moldova is a party to ensure ecological security in a cross-border context, at regional and
international level.
Measures will be taken to:
- harmonize national legislation in the field of environmental protection with European Directives;
- monitoring and prevention of dangerous geological processes;
- monitoring and forecasting dangerous natural hazards;
- reduction of pollution of environmental components as a result of anthropogenic activity;
- ensuring operative information in case of accidental pollution of environmental components;
- reducing and eliminating the impact of toxic chemicals on the environment and the health of the
population;
- remediation of lands contaminated with persistent organic pollutants.
The collaboration with the civil society will be strengthened and the public involvement in the
decision-making in the field of environment will be extended, ensuring the access to the environmental
information, in accordance with the legislation in force.
**_4.7. Ensuring information security_**
Starting from increasing the role of information technologies in the field of state security, the
competent institutions will take actions to ensure the security and efficient administration of national
information systems, both legally and functionally, by reducing the main risk factors, such as: cybercrimes, computer viruses, software vulnerability, negligence or ill-will of users, unauthorized
connection of third parties.
In order to improve the security of information technologies, the competent institutions will develop
special technical solutions to increase the reliability of communication networks in critical cases, as
well as to create archives and stocks of electronic documents for secure storage of the database of
national importance, in accordance the regime of storage, preservation and evidence established by the
legislation regarding the electronic document and the digital signature, the registers and the protection
of personal data. The possibility of consolidating the mechanisms for the protection of personal data in
order to eliminate their use for illicit or political purposes will be analyzed.
The information security of the state is also related to the media challenges directed against the
Republic of Moldova. In this sense, a relevant normative framework will be adjusted, efficient
monitoring, control and implementation mechanisms will be established in order to reduce the existing
discrepancies and challenges, to protect the society from possible attempts of disinformation and / or
manipulative information from outside. Civil society will be consulted in this process.
**_4.8. Ensuring social security_**
The consolidation of a balanced and democratic society in the Republic of Moldova will be achieved
by implementing European criteria according to the obligations assumed by the Republic of Moldova


-----

will continue to be promoted in the Republic of Moldova. The authorities will continue to support
informing society about the country's history and culture, about political processes, about the
possibilities and rights of participation in these processes, thus stimulating civic spirit and civil
involvement.
In the process of integrating ethnic minorities into society, their cultural and linguistic identity will
be respected. The educational system will continue to promote the acquisition of the state language of
the Republic of Moldova, of the languages  of national minorities, thus facilitating social integration.
The observance of the right of the citizens of the Republic of Moldova to the freedom of conscience
and religion will be ensured, the necessary conditions for the functioning on the territory of the country
of the cults that respect the national legislation will be created.
In order to combat smoking, measures will be taken to comply with the prohibitions related to
smoking in public places, the sale of tobacco items to people up to 18 years, will examine the
possibilities of increasing excise duties on imports of tobacco items and value added tax. added,
programs for the prevention and treatment of smoking, etc. will be promoted.
Combating alcohol abuse will be achieved by banning the sale of alcohol to minors, by controlling
the quality of alcoholic beverages, by correctly and impartially informing the population about the
negative impact of alcohol abuse on health, etc. Budgetary sources will be provided for the treatment of
alcoholics and drug addicts and measures will be taken to prevent the proliferation of narcotics, leakage
from the legal circuit of health care of narcotics, psychotropic substances and precursors. The national
legislation in the field of tobacco, alcohol and drugs will be adjusted to the requirements of the
international treaties to which the Republic of Moldova is a party.
**_4.9. Ensuring political stability_**
The excessive frequency of repeated electoral cycles diminishes the stability of the political system
and the country as a whole. In this sense, the implementation of European norms of constructive
dialogue between political parties, especially between those involved in electoral processes, is
necessary to overcome some blockages that generate political instability. Thus, the need to examine the
way of improving the national legislation will be taken into account, taking into account the objectives
of political stability, of the development of the Republic of Moldova, of European integration. In this
process, external partners will be intensively consulted, including the EU, the Council of Europe and
the Venice Commission, other actors that promote the true values  of democracy.
**_4.10. Integrated management of the state border_**
Integrated management of the state border is one of the key tools in maintaining (protecting) the
state of national security, being directed against illegal migration and related crimes, other cross-border
crimes, including those interspersed with the phenomenon of international terrorism.
Ensuring the integrated management of the state border is also one of the important objectives of the
reform of the national security sector and of advancing on the path of European integration.
In this context, at national level, gradual measures will be adopted in order to ensure the integrated
management of the state border on all its sectors, which must bring together the following aspects:
- control and surveillance of the state border based on risk analysis, data and information processed
on crime;
- the detection and investigation of cross-border crimes by the Border Guard Service and the
Customs Service in coordination with other authorities in the justice and home affairs system at
national level;
- implementation of the measures involved in the access model in the Republic of Moldova
structured on four levels (measures in third countries, cooperation with neighboring countries, border
control, control measures within the country, including readmission);
- cooperation between the authorities involved in the integrated management of the state border,
including by facilitating the exchange of information necessary for the implementation of border
security measures;
- international cooperation in the field of ensuring the security of the state border;
- coordinating and ensuring the coherence of the activities of the authorities involved in ensuring
border security through the National Council for Integrated State Border Management.
**_4.11. Ensuring food security_**
State policy will ensure the full and efficient management of strategic food resources. The
credibility, safety and quality of foodstuffs are fundamental criteria that the Republic of Moldova will
comply with in order to ensure consumer health protection and the competitiveness of foodstuffs on


-----

policy for basic necessities, concrete measures to support domestic producers, quality of imported
products, including modified ones. genetically, will be priority tasks of institutions in the agroindustrial sector.
In order to develop an agricultural sector with a production in accordance with the requirements of
the European and global market and of a competitive quality, the competent institutions will undertake
measures to modernize production technologies, ensure quality throughout the entire production and
distribution process, promote and sales market development.
Internal food security will be one of the priorities for the development of the agro-industrial sector.
The principle "From safe food to a healthy diet" will underpin the development of policies and action
plans, the development and adoption of a regulatory framework in the field of quality, safety and food
safety, and the protection of consumer health. In order to protect the health of consumers, programs
will be developed and implemented to monitor threats in the food chain.
**_4.12. Fighting terrorism_**
Authorities empowered to prevent and combat terrorism or related activities will continue to make
the necessary efforts to implement programs and strategies for evaluation, monitoring, protection and
the like, adopted internationally and undertaken by the Republic of Moldova. These actions are
necessary for raising the functionality of the national security system and for streamlining the
institutional operation of preventing and combating terrorist threats and risks or related phenomena.
The activity of the competent public authorities is to focus on three basic segments: prevention and
non-admission of terrorist manifestations; stopping and combating terrorist financing; combating
terrorism through cooperation with competent institutions.
In this regard, the Republic of Moldova will focus its efforts on the integrated approach to any
terrorist manifestation or activities related to it, consolidating the national system for combating
terrorism. At the institutional level, actions will be taken to strengthen international cooperation,
including by finalizing efforts to: clearly and comprehensively define terrorism and establish standard
operating procedures, improve the counterterrorism operation system for the coherent action of
authorities and institutions with responsibilities in combating terrorism, for a better knowledge of
terrorist structures, methods and techniques.
**_4.13. Investigate threats, risks and vulnerabilities with an impact on defense capability and_**
**_national security_**
Science and innovation organizations will identify, through interdisciplinary strategic research in the
field of defense and security, the mechanisms for ensuring, in the short and medium term, national
security, including state military security in the conditions of reconfiguring the geostrategic
architecture.
In this sense, they:
- will perform expertise for the institutions empowered to ensure national security;
- will develop scenarios for ensuring national security by analyzing threats, risks and vulnerabilities
of both global and regional origin;
- will scientifically argue the place, role and functions of national security in strategic state policy
planning documents;
- will investigate the changes in the evolution of national security with an impact on the national
interests of the Republic of Moldova.

**5. The national security sector and its reform**

The national security system operates in accordance with the legislation in force. The main
objectives of the reform of this system will take into account the standards and advanced practices in
the field implemented in the countries of the European Union.
**_5.1. Institutional framework of the national security sector_**
The institutional framework underlying the system makes up the national security sector of the
Republic of Moldova. This sector includes state institutions with a mandate of force intended to
implement the tasks of protection of citizens and the state (operational level) and civilian state
institutions that exercise the functions of government, planning, control and supervision in the national
security system ( administrative level).
In accordance with the legislation in force, the formation and implementation of the national security
policy involves the supreme public authorities in the field of state security (Parliament, President of the
Republic of Moldova, Government and Supreme Security Council), state security and defense bodies
(Ministry Defense the Ministry of Internal Affairs the Intelligence and Security Service the State


-----

authorities.
_5.1.1. Supreme Security Council, mechanism for cooperation and coordination of the activity of the_
_national security sector_
The Supreme Security Council is an advisory body that analyzes the state of the national security
sector and presents to the President of the Republic of Moldova, other authorities recommendations in
making decisions related to national security.
The Supreme Security Council uses the capacities and expertise of the interdepartmental
commissions created to manage the processes in the field of national security, such as the National
Commission for the implementation of the Individual Action Plan of the partnership, the State
Commission for the strategic analysis of defense, etc.
_5.1.2. Armed forces_
The armed forces are intended to ensure military security and have the following missions:
defending the independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of Moldova,
participating in international peacekeeping operations, providing support to civilian authorities in crisis
situations.
The armed forces will be trained on the basis of modern combat doctrines, for a wide range of
missions, in accordance with modern ways of conducting military actions.
In order to achieve the objectives set out in the Strategy, the following specific tasks are established
in the medium term:
- modernization of the National Army in order to create a force structure, able to ensure military
security, as well as the efficient use of allocated resources, maintaining the mixed military service
system, with the subsequent increase of the share of military service by contract;
- fulfilling the missions corresponding to peacekeeping in the Security Zone, until the modification
of the current format of the joint peacekeeping forces;
- the continuous development of national capacities to participate in international peacekeeping
operations and the extension of the level of participation to an independent unit;
- surveillance and control of the country's airspace;
- reviewing the national mobilization system, necessary to ensure military security.
_5.1.3. The activity of the Intelligence and Security Service_
The Intelligence and Security Service (SIS) is a specialized state body, which has the direct
competence to ensure the state security of the Republic of Moldova. In this context, the SIS activity
will be subordinated to the need to ensure, first of all, a functional and multidimensional security, to
stop informative-subversive attempts abroad, to prevent the unconstitutional activity of some groups
and formations both in the country and from outside it, to fight organized crime, manifestations of
corruption, which undermine state security, and terrorism, to ensure the economic stability of the
country and to protect the national defense potential.
The purpose of the SIS activity is to ensure internal and external security, defend the constitutional
order, the national economic system and the defense capacity, fight terrorism and other threats to state
security with preventive and special means of a non-military nature.
In order to achieve this goal and achieve the general objective of the state policy in the field of
national security, SIS obtains, verifies, evaluates, maintains and capitalizes the information necessary
to know, prevent and counteract any actions that constitute or could constitute threats to sovereignty,
independence, security, the constitutional order and territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova, as
well as the data referring to the evolutions and events outside the country that are taken into account in
the formulation of the foreign policy, defense and economic policy of the Republic of Moldova. SIS
prevents and counteracts the subversive aspirations directed against the Republic of Moldova, the
actions of violent undermining of the democratic institutions of the state, other actions that pose threats
to state security; Undertakes measures to prevent and combat terrorist offenses, financing and securing
terrorist acts and other extremist activities; builds and ensures the secure functioning of government
communications systems, protection and prevention of disclosure of information that is a state secret;
ensures the creation, operation and development of cryptographic and technical information protection
systems; undertakes counter-intelligence measures under the law. builds and ensures the secure
functioning of government communications systems, protection and prevention of disclosure of
information that is a state secret; ensures the creation, operation and development of cryptographic and
technical information protection systems; undertakes counter-intelligence measures under the law.
builds and ensures the secure functioning of government communications systems protection and


-----

intelligence measures under the law.
_5.1.4. Border Guard_
Service The Border Guard Service is a central administrative authority that exercises its powers and
promotes state policy in the field of surveillance and control of the state border in order to combat
specific acts of cross-border crime, including illegal migration, ensuring the interests of Moldova at the
state border. laws. The Border Guard Service also promotes state policy in other areas provided by the
legislation in force.
In order to achieve the objectives set out in the Strategy, the following medium-term priorities are
established:
- elaboration and implementation of the National Strategy regarding the integrated management of
the state border;
- harmonization of legislation with the European Union acquis;
- optimizing the activity of the Border Guard Service in order to transform with the allocation of full
capacities to fight crimes at the state border, including in the context of launching the negotiations of
the Association Agreement with the European Union in the "State Border Management" section and
through visa liberalization;
- the gradual demilitarization and professionalization of the Border Guard Service;
- development of state border infrastructure and equipment;
- development of the Integrated Border Guard Information System, of advanced technologies, in
particular in the context of participation in the European Initiative on the Development of Border
Surveillance (EUROSUR).
**_5.2. Guidelines for the reform of the national security sector_**
The reform of the national security sector is a key objective in achieving a sustainable state of
security and stability of the Republic of Moldova. The reform of this sector is a complex process, with
an effect on the entire national security system, including on state and non-state institutions outside the
borders of the national security sector.
The process of reforming the national security sector, in which civil society, the media, relevant
international organizations will be involved, includes in the reference period of the Strategy the
following objectives: qualitative and quantitative resizing of the national security sector, so as to make
possible to plan the activity and allocate the necessary resources to this sector in accordance with the
principles, general values, objectives and guidelines of national security; strengthening the capacities
for analysis and response of the national security sector to changes in the security environment at
national and international level; ensuring civilian control over the national security sector;
strengthening the legitimacy of the national security sector; effective prevention of conflict, crisis and
emergency situations; peaceful reunification of the country.
The reform of the national security sector of the Republic of Moldova in accordance with EuroAtlantic standards and practices will be gradual and will include two levels: the political level of the
reform, which provides for efficient management of the national security sector, and the technical level,
aimed at raising operational competence, to strengthen the institutional and personnel capacities, as
well as the functionality of the structures of the national security sector.
In order to carry out the reform properly, the following tasks are defined:
_a) strengthening the strategic planning capacities_
The purpose of this task is to develop an effective planning system to ensure national security, to
invest strongly in it, depending on the threats and risks with an impact on national security, as well as
the available resources and policy instruments.
Methods of implementation:
- strengthening the role of the Supreme Security Council, investing it with deliberative functions,
coordination and policy development in the fields of security and defense, as well as developing the
following capacities:
- information and communication;
- permanent analysis of the national security system and its adjustment according to the evolution of
threats and risks;
- coordination, monitoring and strategic planning for crisis prevention and response;
- active involvement in the process of elaborating the security policies of the civil component of the
national security sector and of the civil society;

  - periodically performing the strategic analysis of the national security and defense system


-----

implementing the competencies of structures in the national security sector, respecting the
administrative hierarchy in the sector, specifying the functions and mandate of structures in the national
security sector, prioritizing the security system national.
Methods of implementation:
- adoption of normative acts or adjustment of existing ones to the needs of the reform of the national
security system in order to establish a functional and transparent normative and institutional
framework, clear delimitation of attributions and competencies, to avoid overlaps of competences
between armed forces and the other structures of the national security sector;
- determining the competences in the field of intelligence and civil and military counter-intelligence
and of the mechanisms of supervision and subordination of the respective services;
- demilitarization of all public institutions with a mandate of force, except the armed forces.
_c) reform of the armed forces_
The purpose of this task is the development and permanent maintenance of credible armed forces,
sufficient in quantity, flexible, mobile, multifunctional and interoperable, capable of ensuring the
fulfillment of missions.
To achieve this goal, the reform of the armed forces will continue, guided by the strategic analysis of
the defense, with priority focus on the following key aspects:
- fulfilling the recommendations given in the Strategic Defense Analysis;
- reviewing the structure of the components of the armed forces;
- moving to defense planning based on existing capabilities and capabilities and those needed to
participate in possible operations, in order to achieve national, regional and international security
objectives;
- harmonization of the defense planning process with the strategic and budgetary planning system of
the state in the national security sector;
- delimitation of the attributions between the command structures, realization of the modern
communication and informatics systems, adjustment of the national mobilization system;
- improving the conceptual basis on the ways of fulfilling missions, planning and organizing military
operations;
- modernization of the human resources management system, increasing the quality of personnel life
and profound improvement of military training and education;
- promoting the image of the armed forces in society through the intensification of the militarypatriotic education of the citizens;
- carrying out the endowment programs with the necessary equipment for the execution of the
missions in the security area, ensuring the surveillance and control of the airspace, fulfilling the
international commitments;
- elaboration of a national program for modernization of military equipment and armament, as well
as retraining of the armed forces in accordance with their missions and tasks.
In the process of reform, the armed forces will achieve their modified structure, composed of the
following forces: ground, air, special and support. Operationally, the forces will be grouped as follows:
operational forces, small forces and reserve forces; d) establishing a viable population information and
_communication system_

The purpose of this task is to encourage the participation of civil society in the process of reforming
the national security sector, to stimulate debates in society on security issues and the role of security
institutions, to raise the level of interaction between society and state institutions.
Adequate information of citizens on issues related to national security is a starting point in
promoting the relations between the force structures of the national security sector and the population,
in creating conditions for the vast majority of the population to accept the objectives of security sector
reform. in establishing a political climate conducive to supporting the reform process.
The accomplishment of these tasks will be based on the provisions of the Strategy of information
and communication with the public in the field of defense and national security, which is to be
approved by the Government.
Methods of implementation:
- supporting educational and information activities on national security issues in order to promote
among the population a good understanding of the problems in the national security sector;

  - creating favorable conditions for the development of the institutional capacities of the civil society


-----

_e) reforming the carabinieri troops_
The process of reforming the carabinieri troops provides for their restructuring into forces capable of
carrying out missions in peacetime and in crisis situations. In the reform process, the following
measures are expected to be taken:
- revision of the operational structures of the existing military units in peacetime for the efficient
allocation of financial resources, maintaining the mixed military service system, gradually increasing
the share of military service by contract;
- examination and adaptation, based on the results of the strategic analysis of the defense, of the
current system of mobilization of the carabinieri troops in order to correspond to the approved structure
and the available resources;
- adaptation to the current requirements of the system of initial training and professional
development of the corps of non-commissioned officers of the carabinieri troops;
- reviewing the composition of the forces destined to participate in actions in crisis situations and in
exceptional situations, in anti-extremist (anti-terrorist) actions;
- improvement of the combat and logistics insurance subunits (technical and logistic) of the
carabinieri troops;
- taking over the assurance and restoration of public order on the entire territory of the country.
The plans to reform the carabinieri troops will be adjusted, as appropriate, to the results of the
strategic defense analysis.

**6. Providing resources to the national security sector**

Awareness of the importance of the satisfactory state of national security for the Republic of
Moldova, which will allow the democratic development of the state and society until their
transformation into a viable and modern democracy, as well as taking responsibility for ensuring such a
state must lead to the full engagement of the policy and of the civil society in the realization of the
programmatic provisions of the Strategy.
Last but not least, the importance of national security must indicate the need to ensure the entire
national security system and the national security sector with quality human resources, with technicalmaterial, financial and scientific resources corresponding to the implementation of the measures
provided in the Strategy.
The following objectives are established for the economic-financial, technical-material and scientific
assurance of the implementation of the Strategy:
- programming and allocation of resources on strategic objectives in strict accordance with the
priorities established in the Strategy;
- application of resource management based on programs for all structures of the national security
sector;
- developing the cooperation of the institutions involved in ensuring the resources, as well as the
efficient exercise of the parliamentary control;
- promoting transparency in the allocation and use of public resources meant to increase the
responsibility towards the taxpayer.
The competent institutions will provide in the activity plans adequate measures for strengthening the
administration capacities and efficient use of resources for the implementation of the objectives
established in the Strategy.

**7. Implementation stages,**

**reporting and monitoring procedures**

In accordance with the provisions of Law no. 780-XV of December 27, 2001 on legislative acts,
taking into account the dynamic nature of the state of national security, the Strategy includes indicative
directions of activity in the field of national security for an average term of 4-7 years.
The role of monitoring the implementation process and inter-institutional coordination of activities is
assigned to the Supreme Security Council. The central public administration authorities will inform the
Supreme Security Council every six months about the implementation of the Strategy and will
formulate, as the case may be, proposals, recommendations, coordinated solutions. The Supreme
Security Council will annually inform the Parliament about the application of the Concept of National
Security and about the implementation of the Strategy.
The strategy will be reviewed and updated, including in consultation with civil society, at least once
every 4 years after its entry into force.


-----

