**NATIONAL SECURITY CONCEPT OF THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA**

**INTRODUCTION**

**1. THE AIM OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY, MAIN NATIONAL SECURITY**
**GUIDELINES, GENERAL VALUES, RISKS AND VULNERABILITES OF THE NATIONAL**
**SECURITY OF THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA**

1.1 **The aim of the national security and basic national security guidelines**

**1.2 The International Security Environment And the Republic of Moldova’s**
**positioning in this environment**

**1.3 Threats and Vulnerabilities of the National Security**

_1.3.0 The Transnistrian conflict and foreign military presence on the territory of the_
_Republic of Moldova_
_1.3.1 Threat of Foreign Coercion_
_1.3.2 External Negative Developments and International Crises_
_1.3.3 The Threat of Organized Crime_
_1.3.4 The Treat of International Terrorism_
_1.3.5 Threats that derive from human activity and Natural Disasters_
_1.3.6 Economic Threats_
_1.3.7 Social Threats_
_1.3.8 IT Threat_
_1.3.9 Internal vulnerabilities_

**2. NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEM OF THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA**

**2.1 The National Security Sector of The Republic of Moldova And Its Reformation**

_2.1.1 The institutions of the national security sector of the Republic of Moldova_
_2.1.2 The National Security Council and the civil dimension of the national security_

_sector_

_2.1.3 Consolidation of the military security and the Armed Forces of the Republic of_

_Moldova_

_2.1.4 Consolidation of the domestic security_

_2.1.4.1 The activity of the Security and Intelligence Service_
_2.1.4.2 The activity of the law enforcement agencies_
_2.1.4.3 Border Management and illegal migration_
_2.1.4.4 Crisis management services_

2.2 **The management of the problems related to the Transnistrian conflict and foreign**

**military forces withdrawal**

**2.3 Consolidating the supremacy of law and democratic institutions**


-----

**2.4 Prevention and Combating corruption and organized crime**

**2.5 The consolidation of the economic, energetic, intellectual property, social and**
**ecologic security of the Republic of Moldova. Regional development.**

2.5.1 Consolidating economic security
_2.5.2 Consolidating energetic security_
2.5.3 Consolidating social security

_2.5.3.1 Health care_
_2.5.3.2 Ensuring the unitary character of the society_

_2.5.4 Food security and consumer protection_
_2.5.5 Ensuring intellectual property security_
_2.5.6 Consolidating environment security and preserving biodiversity_
_2.5.7 The policy of regional development_

**2.6 The security of the informational technologies**

**3. FOREIGN POLICY – AN INSTRUMENT OF PROTECTING AND CONSOLIDATING**
**THE NATIONAL SECURITY OF THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA**

**3.1. Participation in international efforts to manage contemporary threats and**
**challenges**

**3.2 European Union integration process**

**3.3 Cooperation with NATO**

**3.4 Security Relationships in the Black Sea Area**

**3.5 Bilateral Security Cooperation**

**4. THE NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY. ITS ELEMENTS**

**FINAL AND TRANSITORY PROVISIONS**


-----

**Introduction**

The present National Security Concept of the Republic of Moldova drafted by a specialized
committee founded by presidential decree no. 374-IV of December 22, 2005 and consisting
of representatives of state administration, civil society and academic media, will be passed
by the Parliament of the Republic of Moldova and become the document that reflects the
general overview of the national and international security state of affair, and defines the
national security policy objective, main guidelines, general values and principles that shall
be protected by the Moldovan society, as well as reconfirms country’s irreversible course of
European integration.

The concept stems from the comprehensive understanding of the national security, the
multidimensional and interdependent character of it that is influenced not only by the
political, military and public order factors, but also by the social, environmental, energy
security and other factors. Thus, the concept clearly sets up the principles that the national
security system must observe: respect for democratic principles, development of market
economy, establishment of an efficient civil control over armed forces and force institutions,
maintain good relationships with the neighboring countries, increase interoperability of the
national and western security and defense systems, adequate level of information
classification. Concurrently, the concept paper supports reforms in sectors that are vital for
the national security, such as: healthcare, education and fight against corruption. The
provision of this document shall be implemented within the constitutional status of neutrality
of the Republic of Moldova and shall not infringe upon it.

The changes that occurred at national, regional and global levels and the continued
dynamics of these changes have lead to exhaustion of juridical effects of the National
Security Concept that was passed by Parliament on May 15, 1995. These changes have
lead to the adoption of the new document.

The National Security Concept of the Republic of Moldova is a document that outlines the
medium term national security priorities of the state. It will serve as a basis for conducting
the national security policy, improvement of the national security system, delineation of the
competencies and responsibilities of the state authorities in order to prepare and assure
proper means and forces to maintain the security of the nation and lasting development of
the state.

**1. THE AIM OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY, MAIN NATIONAL SECURITY**
**GUIDELINES, GENERAL VALUES, RISKS AND VULNERABILITES OF THE NATIONAL**
**SECURITY OF THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA**

1.2 **The aim of the national security and basic national security guidelines**

The Aim of the national security of the Republic of Moldova is to ensure and defend the
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, constitutional order, democratic

development and internal security, and to consolidate the statehood of the Republic of


-----

Moldova, which is equivalent to the edification of the national identity of the Moldovan
people.

The national security of the Republic of Moldova shall be provided for by observing the
legislation and by making use of foreign and domestic policy instruments of the state.

The EU integration path of the Republic of Moldova and deepening of the relations with
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, expressed through implementation of western security
standards while building the national security system, as well as maintenance of good
bilateral and regional relations, and participation to the multilateral cooperation will be the
factors that enable the Republic of Moldova to defend its national interests and achieve its
national security aims.

The policy of the Republic of Moldova in the field of national security derives from the
indivisibility, complexity and multidimensionality of the security, from the need to intensify
the international cooperation in the security field and to defend and cultivate the democratic
values. The Republic of Moldova strives for a quality transformation into a country that
actively supports the process of generating and spreading stability and security in the
region. Unconditional adherence to the democratic values and principles shared by the EU
member states shall represent the main guarantee for and serve as foundation of the
national security of the Republic of Moldova.

The Republic of Moldova supports the principle that every nation has the right and freedom
to chose its own ways to ensure its national security, and that no nation should jeopardize
the security of another nation. The national security policy of the Republic of Moldova is not
targeted against the national security of other states.

Given its national interests, as well as the commitments that derive from the European
integration policy, the Republic of Moldova shall guide itself by the following national
security guidelines:

   - restoration of the territorial integrity of the state, withdrawal of foreign military
presence on its territory, consolidation of its independence and statehood;

   - upkeep the dynamics of the European integration processes and deepen the
relations with NATO, develop cooperation with the EU and NATO member states;

   - ensure the democratic development of the society and consolidation of the domestic
security;

   - ensure the economic and social development by accelerating the political, economic
and institutional reforms, primarily of those conducive to EU integration criteria
fulfillment;

   - plenary development and exploration of the human potential, the main resource of
the country; efficient protection of human rights and interests of Moldovan citizen at
home and abroad;

   - consolidation of the economic, social, energy and environmental aspects of the
national security;

   - consolidation of the national military security;

   - participation of the Republic of Moldova to the efforts of the strengthening the
international security.


-----

To achieve the aim of its national security, the Republic of Moldova will implement its
foreign, security and defense policies, will consolidate the constitutional order in the
country, public safety and security of the sectors of vital importance to the state in a
coordinated and interdependent manner. Assessment and analysis of threats and risks that
impact the national security will make an essential part of the activity of public authorities
and state force institutions, which shape the state’s security policy. At the same time this
activity offers the necessary ground for short term planning by the Government of
coordinated actions of its agencies to be carried out in respective fields.

**1.2 The International Security Environment And the Republic of Moldova’s**
**positioning in this environment**

The national security of the Republic of Moldova directly depends on the developments in
international security environment. The process of the EU and NATO enlargement are
favorable to the development process of the Republic of Moldova and edification of the
national and regional security. Concurrently, the persisting effects of the bipolar world
system that existed in the past and during the cold war, alongside with the instability of the
post-Soviet space, are the circumstances that generate multiple threats and risks for the
national security of the state. The situation is placed in a global context of a continuous
change, being dominated by the globalization process that, in its turn, attaches the new
quality to the threats and risks the contemporary world is facing. Moreover, the
globalization process is conditioning the interrelation between the internal situation in the
country and external processes on the international arena and overseas.

The new risks and threats that are generated by the changes in the international security
are: international terrorism; proliferation of arms of mass destruction; cross-border
organized crime; illegal trafficking in persons, arms and narcotics; illegal migration triggered
by crises and poverty.

The process of international terrorism intermeddling with the cross-border organized crime
and proliferation of arms is ongoing. The states of conflict are in a continuous
transformation and, thus, create favorable grounds for such phenomena. Therefore, the
national security system of the Republic of Moldova must obtain an adequate functional
shape and build up the necessary capabilities to combat such phenomena and settle the
conflicts that feed or conduce to international terrorism. This may be achieved by
connecting the Republic of Moldova to the Euro-Atlantic security area expressed through
the implementation of respective security standards within the national security system.
This connection, as mentioned before, should not affect the neutrality of the Republic of
Moldova.

Provided the above, the need for closer international bi- and multilateral security
cooperation becomes more imperative. Abilities of international organizations to intervene
and solve concrete security problems, however, continue to fall short of full
accomplishment.

The rhythm of international contact development, including by those who are not subjects
of international law, increases the further internationalizing of various social and ecological


-----

issues. Therefore, the Republic of Moldova may more often be threatened by the problems
originated from outside its borders. Given the small size of the country and its openness,
the economy of the Republic of Moldova is strongly contingent upon the global economic
situation, particularly upon changes that occur on the traditional markets for Moldovan
products. Consolidation of the national security of the Republic of Moldova demands a
greater development and diversification of transparent and well balanced by the state
economic relations. In this context, creation of a stable and favorable climate for foreign
investment is important.

**1.3 Threats and Vulnerabilities of the National Security**

_1.3.0 The Transnistrian conflict and foreign military presence on the territory of the_
_Republic of Moldova_

The illegal presence of foreign military troops on the territory of the country and the
phenomenon of political separatism that generated the Transnistrian conflict and loss of
control over the Eastern regions are a continuous threat to independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and national security of the Republic of Moldova. The fundamental rights
and freedoms of the population from the left Nistru bank are systematically violated by the
separatist regime’s structures. Lack of control on behalf of constitutional Moldovan
authorities over the Transnistrian segment of the Moldovan-Ukrainian border favors
smuggling of goods, which seriously harm the economic security of the country and fuel
cross-border organized crime, illegal traffic of ammunition, drugs and human beings.

Military threats are linked to the illegal presence in the Eastern regions of the Republic of
Moldova of foreign military forces, ammunition and armaments, as well as to the activity of
the factories in the Transnistrian region, that produce armament without any monitoring or
tracking, which must be conducted by the competent Moldovan authorities.

The presence of the Russian troops and armament on the territory of the Republic of
Moldova contravenes the Constitution of the Republic of Moldova, international
commitments and the will of Moldovan citizens, thus becoming a political pressure tool and
major threat to the national security of the country. The foreign military presence on the
territory of Moldova favors the consolidation of the separatist regime.

_1.3.1 Threat of Foreign Coercion_

The threat of foreign coercion, political or other, to influence the foreign and domestic policy
of the Republic of Moldova is real. Such pressure may be exerted by means of economic or
other constraints against the Republic of Moldova or through the special services of other
states. The EU integration process that facilitates the political, economic and social
transformations in the country, cumulated with the civil society consolidation based on
democratic values, rule of law and legality shall foster the capacity of the Republic of
Moldova to cope with coercions and, whenever needed, to efficiently respond to such types
of threats.

_1.3.2 External Negative Developments and International Crises_


-----

Problems which the Republic of Moldova is confronted with may not be addressed in
isolation from the developments in certain areas of Europe, the latter being subject of
broader international concerns. The current threats to the national security of the Republic
of Moldova may become more imminent if combined with other new threats, including
negative external developments and unsolved international crises. Contradictory
developments in the pos-Soviet area might conduct to the generation of new threats to the
security of the Republic of Moldova. Given the indivisibility of the European security, the
Republic of Moldova’s national security is influenced by the security issues on the continent
and vice versa. Crisis situations and their consequences threaten the security on the
continent. Prolonged instability on the sub-regional level negatively impacts the process of
promoting lasting development strategies, discourages foreign investments, closes markets
for Moldovan products, favors illegal migration and trafficking in ammunition and narcotics.

_1.3.3 The Threat of Organized Crime_

Organized crime, including the cross-border organized crime, follows the tendency to
intermingle with the activity of terrorist organizations and with the proliferation of arms of
mass destruction. The persistence of criminal factors creates premises for terrorist activities
and proliferation of arms. Without control over the Eastern regions and the Transnistrian
segment of the Moldovan-Ukrainian border, the phenomenon of organized crime
represents an ascending threat to the national security of the Republic of Moldova. This risk
factor may also generate negative effects at the sub-regional and regional levels.

The danger of increasing influence of the cross-border organized crime over the Moldovan
society, combined with corruption and eventual penetration of the political, economic and
social spheres by the organized crime may undermine the supremacy of law and, implicitly,
the national security of the Republic of Moldova.

_1.3.4 The Treat of International Terrorism_

On the background of diminishing military threats to the national security, non-conventional
threats, in particular the globalization of international terrorism and proliferation of chemical,
biological, radioactive and nuclear arms, including their acquisition by non-state entities,
are growing.

Reduction of the international terrorism threat and prevention of proliferation of arms of
mass destruction are possible only by concerted and rapid actions on international level
that requires Moldova’s participation based on its international commitments. Additionally to
the actions undertaken in the context of international cooperation, the Republic of Moldova
is implementing domestic anti-terrorism measures.

_1.3.5 Threats that derive from human activity and Natural Disasters_

The threats that derive from human activity and that may impact the national security of the
Republic of Moldova are: explosions and conflagrations; accidents at power stations, at
plants that use radioactive and chemical agents, at transportation enterprises, as well as
cross-border effects of such accidents.


-----

In the South-eastern European region, where the Republic of Moldova is situated, the
potential danger may be caused by the obsolete equipment of several nuclear power
stations and large enterprises that use dangerous chemicals in their industrial process.

Natural disasters that may determine force major in the Republic of Moldova are
earthquakes, floods, landslides and other of a natural origin.

_1.3.6 Economic Threats_

Because of its small size and increasing economic interdependency between the Republic
of Moldova and the global economic system, a global or regional economic crisis or
instability on the traditional or priority foreign markets may considerably impact the
country’s economy. The major risk factors of economic origin that could pose threat to the
national security of the Republic of Moldova are generated by the excessive and unilateral
dependency of local electric and energy systems as well as of gas distribution networks on
foreign monopolies in the filed. This dependency, at the same time, constitutes the internal
vulnerability of the state.

_1.3.7 Social Threats_

Drug addiction, alcoholism, HIV/AIDS spread, and other contagious highly dangerous
diseases for the society represent a threat to the welfare, social and political stability of the
country.

_1.3.8 IT Threat_

Instable and dysfunctional information systems may pose threat to the national security.
Progressive expansion of electronic information systems in the Republic of Moldova and
the high degree of interconnection with the international information systems facilitate the
criminogenic factor in the field of IT and increase the vulnerability of such systems,
including in the spheres of primordial importance for the national security.

_1.3.9 Internal vulnerabilities_

The above-mentioned threats interconnect with the domestic vulnerabilities. The effects of
these vulnerabilities may determine accentuation and manifestation of existing threats as
well as generate new ones to the national security. Overlapping and combination of such
effects may negatively impact the national security. Neglect, cease of monitoring and loss
of control over the vulnerabilities may transform them into threats to national security and
may trigger domestic instability. The negative effects on the national security caused by
domestic vulnerabilities may be multiple, interdependent, dynamic and many-sided.

The main domestic vulnerabilities of the Republic of Moldova are:

   - Existence of a range of factors that intercalate and favor the persistence of the
aggressive separatism in the context of yet unsolved Transnistrian conflict. These
vulnerability constitutes the impossibility to administrate the Eastern territory of the
country, lack of control over the Transnistrian segment of the Moldovan-Ukrainian


-----

state border, continued illegal and uncontrolled production of military equipment and
armament, inability to control and manage the entire air space of the country.

   - The excessive and unilateral dependency of the Republic of Moldova on foreign
monopolistic energy systems represents a major internal vulnerability. This
vulnerability may easily grow into a threat to the national security. Such also include
the broad possibilities of accumulation of the foreign capital coming from economic
systems where market economy rules are not secured or underdeveloped in the
national economic sectors of major importance.

   - Continuing problems within the energy system of the country that may cause
disruptions in this system. Insufficient protection of energy sector objects.

   - Lasting character of the transition period that continues to cause negative economic,
financial, social effects and delays in structural reforms.

   - Economic migration, unemployment, population aging and low birthrate phenomena.
Lasting and complex character of the reduction of poverty process, existing
tendencies of social polarization, as well as upholding of gray economy that may
generate tensions and general discontent among people.

   - The existing discrepancy between the actual needs and efforts spent by the law
enforcement and special agencies to combat criminality, particularly, cross-border
criminality.

   - Corruption and management deficits within the state administration.

   - Slow development of the informational infrastructure and low competitiveness in the
IT sector, low quality of information processing and unsatisfactory use of information
of national interest, lack of quick react capabilities on information that is bias and
distorts the realities of the Republic of Moldova. Internal vulnerabilities also include
maintaining the connectivity between national and former Soviet Union informational
systems, and perpetuation of inconstancies in protecting classified information.

   - Continued use of obsolete technologies that may be hazardous for people and lead
to ecological disasters.

   - Reduced capacity of preventing ecological disasters and natural calamities (land
slides, floods, earthquakes, etc.), as well as addressing the consequences thereof.

   - Emigration of highly qualified specialists and wakening of the country’s development
potential.

**2. NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEM OF THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA**

The system of national security is the aggregate of concepts, strategies, policies, means,
regulations and administrative structures of a state, as well as of public/social institutions of


-----

the Republic of Moldova whose role is to implement, protect and promote the national
interests of the Republic of Moldova. At the same time, the national security system of the
Republic of Moldova is a mechanism in which its components interact, a mechanism that is
based on the national interests and values of the Moldovan society, used for the
implementation of the strategic objectives of the country, in compliance with the national
security policy guidelines.

The state will implement functional and efficient standards in building a national security
system.

**2.1 The National Security Sector of The Republic of Moldova And Its Reformation**

The Republic of Moldova understands the need for a national security system based on a
clearly defined by a relevant normative documents institutional frame and highly qualified
personnel that will operate in compliance with the law. This institutional frame constitutes
the national security sector of the Republic of Moldova.

The national security sector of the Republic of Moldova includes state force institutions
(operational level) with a duty to protect the citizens and the state and state civil institutions
(administrative level) with a duty to govern, plan, control and supervise the national security
system. The national security sector is responsible for the implementation of the national
security aim.

Given the multidimensional character of the security, the functioning of the national security
sector is influenced by factors that determine the security environment and by the activity of
authorities from the sectors of vital importance to the state.

Reformation of the national security sector of the Republic of Moldova is a complex process
with spillover effects on state and non-state institutions from outside the definition of the
national security sector of the Republic of Moldova, as stipulated by the present Concept.
This process includes the following components: political, military and defense, foreign
policy, intelligence and counterintelligence, constitutional order, justice, economic, financial,
energetic, industrial, communications and infrastructure, social protection and environment

- all of which are interdependent.

The process of national security sector reformation is based on the need of the Republic of
Moldova to achieve an adequate security and stability level that would allow it to develop as
a state and reach steady economic development, which will bring along sustainable
security and stability. The national security sector reform is implemented with the
participation of the civil society, mass-media, human rights organizations and relevant
international institutions.

The process of reforming the national security sector particularly includes, but not limit itself
to: improvement of the national security sector efficiency in line with the needs, guidelines
and aim of the national security; consolidation of the national security sector’s react
capabilities to changes in the domestic and international security environment; assurance
of functional civil control over the national security sector; strengthening the civil
governance of the national security sector; consolidation of the national security sector’s


-----

legitimacy; quality and quantity rescaling of the national security sector in a way that will
allow conducting of the necessary planning activities and resource allocation in conformity
with the priorities of the Moldovan society; effective prevention of conflicts, crises and
emergency situations; reintegration of the country.

_2.1.1 The institutions of the national security sector of the Republic of Moldova_

State force institutions and state civil institutions which form the national security sector are:
the National Army of the Republic of Moldova; Border Guard Service; Carabineer Troops,
Security and Intelligence Service; Police bodies and Emergency Department of the Ministry
of Interior; Custom Service; Penitentiary Department of the Ministry of Justice; State
Protection and Guard Service; the Center for Combating the Economic Crimes and
Corruption; the permanent Parliamentary Committees on Defense, Security and Public
Order as well as the parliamentary Committee on Foreign Policy and European Integration;
the Ministry of Defense; Ministry of Interior; Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European
Integration; Ministry of Reintegration; Ministry of Finance; Ministry of Justice; the
Prosecutor General Office.

The good functioning of the national security sector is indispensable with the activities of
the institutions with the competences on multiple dimensions of security. This refers to the
activity of the Ministry of Economy and Trade; Ministry of Industry and Infrastructure;
Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources; Ministry of Informational Development; Ministry
of Health Care; Ministry of Social Protection; Ministry of Transportation and Roads; Ministry
of Education and Youth; Ministry of Local Public Administration; Ministry of Agriculture and
Food Processing; Academy of Science of Moldova; Standardization and Metrology Service;
Bureau for Interethnic Relations and Judicial System.

The administrative competences in the national security system defined by the Constitution
of the Republic of Moldova and the country’s legislation in force are exercised by the
President of the Republic of Moldova, the Parliament and the Government.

The general coordination and adoption during peace time of the recommendations for
decision making regarding the national security and the national security sector are carried
out by the National Security Council.

_2.1.2 The National Security Council and the civil dimension of the national security_

_sector_

The National Security Council is the structure meant to carry out the general coordination of
the national security sector’s institutions and activities of the other institutions exercised on
different dimensions of the national security as well to adopt the recommendations for
decision making on national security. During peace time the National Security Council
exercises its attributions of the consultative body. In case of an emergency, siege or war
the Council will serve as a body with deliberative functions.

On a basis of the provisions of the article 77 of the Moldovan Constitution, the President of
the Republic of Moldova chairs the National Security Council.


-----

The proper functioning of the Council is ensured by its Secretary, who is a civil person of
the administration of the Republic of Moldova’s President.

The permanent members of the National Security Council are: the President of the
Republic of Moldova, the Speaker of the Parliament, the Prime Minister of the Republic of
Moldova, the chairmen of the permanent Parliamentary Committees on National Security,
Defense and Public Order, as well as for Foreign Policy and European Integration, the
Minister of Foreign Affairs and European Integration, the Minister of Defense, the Minister
of Interior, the Minister of Reintegration, the Minister of Finance, the SIS Director, the
President’s advisors on Domestic as well as on Foreign policy, the Secretary of the
National Security Council.

While drafting its Rule and Regulations, the National Security Council will decide on
establishing the positions of the permanent advisors and non-permanent members of the
Council. The positions of the permanent advisors will be covered by the senior level
officials from the state force institutions (operational level). The decision to invite the
permanent advisors of the Council or its non-permanent members will be taken in
accordance with the issue examine in the Council’s session.

The functions of the National Security Council:

  - Integrated analysis of the security situation. Caring out this function allows the
comprehensive evaluation of the security situation which serves as a basis for
elaboration/adjusting of the national security policy and adoption of adequate
decisions. The main element of this task is the assessment of the multiple treats to
the national security of the Republic of Moldova. The method for the threat
assessment is the exchange of information and unification of efforts in the process of
gathering information concerning threats. To fulfill this duty decisions are needed to
create sufficient capabilities for the National Security Council.

  - Adopting the recommendations on allocation of necessary resources in order to
cope with the threats to the national security. Fulfilling this task allows balancing
security allocations with other allotments of major importance for the country, as well
as tackling thoroughly the national security concerns.

  - Monitoring, controlling and supervising in the national security system. Caring out
this task guarantees the efficient use of the allocated resources with the aim at
consolidating security; analyzing the efficiency of the security plans or relevant
structures; maintaining the ability of the different institutions to activate in crisis or
emergency situations; supervising the process of expenditures, administration and
implementation of the policies by the state force institutions; promoting political
control and trust building between the institutions within the national security sector.

  - Identifying the national security priorities. Caring out this duty allows structuring the
national security priorities and planning the stages for accomplishing these priorities.

  - Coordinating the activities in case of urgency or crisis.  In case of crisis the Council
will act as a body with deliberative tasks.


-----

  - Administering and monitoring the reformation process of the national security
sector.

The National Security Council uses the capacities and expertise of the Interdepartmental
Committees to manage the developments in the national security sector, like the National
Committee on Implementing the Individual Partnership Action Plan, the State Committee on
Strategic Defense Review etc. The Council may decide to set up new inter-institutional
structures.

The National Security Strategy of the Republic of Moldova and the Rules and Regulations
of the National Security Council approved by a Decree of the President of the Republic of
Moldova will refer in details on sub-divisions in the Council’s structure, other structures
associated with it and its functioning mechanism.

_2.1.3 Consolidation of the military security and the Armed Forces of the Republic of_

_Moldova_

Armed Forces of the Republic of Moldova are responsible for ensuring the national security
state of affair by military methods. The Armed Forces’ main task is to ensure the Republic
of Moldova’s defense in any circumstances. The Armed Forces offer necessary support to
the relevant public institutions in case of civil emergency, natural calamities, technological
accidents or disasters. The Armed Forces participate in the international peace operations,
humanitarian and combating international terrorism missions.

The cooperation with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the objective of reaching
by the Republic of Moldova’s Armed Forces the maximum level of inter-operability will offer
a basis for building and developing a viable, credible, efficient, operational and modern
defense system for the country. This process envisages setting up and institutionalizing the
system of defense planning through adopting necessary regulations. The reformation tasks
of the armed forces of the Republic of Moldova are:

a) Achieving sufficient defensive capabilities, through the setting up and permanently

maintaining forces that are credible, quantitatively sufficient and trained according to
the modern standards, able to adequately react to the existent and potential risks and
threats;

b) Restructuring and modernizing the military force, through:

     - Re-dimensioning the armed forces and establishing their new structure,
professionalizing military personnel, modernizing and standardizing the
training for performing military missions;

     - Maintaining functional capacity of the armament and existent equipment and
increasing its quality both through modernizing it and through acquiring new
modern equipment.

In the same context, it will be taken into consideration the need for adequate staff social
protection, efficient management of the equipment, armament and excess infrastructure
etc. With the aim at building and developing its defense system, the Republic of Moldova
will develop a comprehensive Strategic Defense Review (SDR).


-----

National Military Strategy will reflect the priorities and objectives of the Republic of
Moldova’s defense system development. The respective documents will take into
consideration the Republic of Moldova’s international commitments.

_2.1.4 Consolidation of the domestic security_

The domestic security and public order is an important component of the national security
along with military security and other dimensions of the security of the Republic of Moldova.
The main tasks of the institutions meant to ensure domestic security refer to guaranteeing
stability in the Republic of Moldova, combating criminal phenomenon, protecting people
and property rights.

_2.1.4.1 The activity of the Security and Intelligence Service_

The goal of the Security and Intelligence Service (SIS) of the Republic of Moldova is to
ensure the domestic security and maintain constitutional order through preventive and
special means of non-military nature. In order to achieve this goal and the general aim of
the national security, the SIS collects and process the information on the ground of what
the fundamental thesis of the national security policy are formulated.

The Security and Intelligence Service collects, verifies, assesses, keeps and develops the
necessary information for acknowledging, prevention and counter any actions that bring or
might bring threats to sovereignty, independence, safety, constitutional order and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Moldova. The SIS gathers information about evolution and
events occurring outside the country, which allow formulating defense, economic and
foreign policies of the Republic of Moldova. The SIS functions are: recognition, prevention
and countering espionage and subversive activities against the Republic of Moldova,
actions with impact on the democratic institutions of state and other actions that are
threatening the state’s security; providing counterintelligence information for the Armed
Forces of the Republic of Moldova; assuring the security of the Moldovan institutions
overseas and of the forces participating to a peace missions; prevention and countering of
the terrorism, of the financing and supporting terrorism and extremists movements
activities; setting up and maintaining the secure functioning of the of the government
communications; protection of the classified information; conducting of other activities
envisaged by legislation.

Obtaining pertinent information in reasonable time limits on developments that may
threaten the national security is crucial for maintaining the constitutional order and domestic
security of the Republic of Moldova. In order to efficiently counter the security threats, the
ISS also develops an international cooperation and an inter-agency cooperation within the
country.

The international cooperation the SIS participates is important for obtaining the information
on regional crisis, combating terrorism, preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, illegal arms, drugs and human being traffic.

The SIS in cooperation with the law enforcement bodies acts to prevent the infiltration of
the organized crime in politics and public administration.


-----

_2.1.4.2 The activity of the law enforcement agencies_

The activity of the law enforcement agencies aims at maintaining public order. The
phenomenon of organized cross-border crime is the biggest threat to the public order and
security of the Republic of Moldova. The fight against organized cross-border crime is
conducted in cooperation with the subdivisions of the Ministry of Interior, Border Guard
Service, Center for Combating Economic Crimes and Corruption and Prosecutor General
Office and the Penitentiary Department of the Ministry of Justice.

The fight against organized crime is aimed at curbing and preventing criminal activities on
accumulation of illegal profits on a big scale.

An increased attention shall be drawn to benefiting from the opportunities offered by the
Interpol and Europol as well as by the cooperation with the law enforcement agencies in
the neighboring states.

There is a need for setting up a witness protecting system in order to participate to the
relevant international programs.

_2.1.4.3 Border Management and illegal migration_

The efficient management of the state border that includes supervision and qualified control
is essential for ensuring the national security of the Republic of Moldova. The border
security system is shall be adjusted to the relevant requirements applied in the European
Union.

Modernization of the state border management of the Republic of Moldova should be
conducted in a way that offers opportunities for open cooperation with neighbors and does
not imply new barriers. The process of adjusting of the national legislation to the acquis
communitaire in that field will be regarded as a priority.

The Border Guard Service in cooperation with other competent authorities acts to prevent
illegal border crossing and to ensure the efficient procedures to the state border crossing
points, being responsible for maintaining high standards of the border control. Setting up
border integrated management system is essential for guaranteeing the border security,
increasing the efficiency of the fight against illegal migration, organized crime, terrorism and
other forms of criminal cross-border activity.

The cooperation between the Border Guard Service, the Ministry of Interior, the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and European Integration, SIS and other competent agencies dealing with
illegal migration issues will follow the objective to build an integrated control system of the
migration flow and to ensure the efficiency of the measures already adopted to counter the
existing risks.

_2.1.4.4 Crisis management services_


-----

The goal of ensuring domestic security entails adequate capability and proper training in
order to promptly react to the emergency civil situation, natural disasters and ecologic
catastrophes. In an emergency situation it is necessary to guarantee the functioning of the
sectors of vital importance to the state, to protect the infrastructure and secure the public
information. In order to ensure the functionality of the institutions of vital importance to the
state in emergency situations it is necessary to reorganize the system of strategic reserves
and to adapt it to the nation’s needs. The sufficient equipment and proper training of the
staff of the MoI’s Department on Emergency Situations, law-enforcement bodies,
institutions of the energetic, transportation, communication, and ecologic, health care and
social protection systems are crucial.

2.3 **The management of the problems related to the Transnistrian conflict and foreign**

**military forces withdrawal**

As it was mentioned in the present Concept, the Transnistrian conflict, the lack of an
efficient control on the Transnistrian section on the Moldovan - Ukrainian border, the
presence of Russian troops and armament on the territory of the Republic of Moldova
constitutes a major obstacle in the state and society’s development and generates multiple
interconnected threats of conventional and non-conventional nature to the national,
regional and international security. Therefore, the Transnistrian conflict settlement and
reintegration of the country is no longer an internal problem of the Republic of Moldova,
instead it evolved into a regional security problem and its settlement requires full
involvement of external influential factors such as the EU and the USA.

The Republic of Moldova spends efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement of the conflict,
secured Moldovan - Ukrainian border and unconditional implementing by the Russian
Federation of its commitments made at the OSCE summit in Istanbul in 1999. These are
the priority objectives of the foreign and security policy of the country.

Fomented separatism and increased instability are generated by the illegal presence on the
country’s territory of the foreign military forces and armaments. The Republic of Moldova
will use all legal methods to reach the unconditional and complete withdrawal of the
Russian military forces, according to the Istanbul (1999) OSCE Summit’s decisions. The full
implementation of the Istanbul’s decisions will set the conditions for the Republic of
Moldova to ratify the Adapted CFE Treaty.

On July 22, 2005 the Parliament of the Republic of Moldova adopted the Law on basic
provisions of the special legal status of Transnistria, (nr. 173-XVI) which determines the
future autonomy framework of the region within the structure of the reintegrated state.

The Republic of Moldova’s authority’s vision regarding the ways for Transnistrian conflict
settlement actively supported by the Moldovan civil society includes, in particular, the goal
of democratization and demilitarization of the Transnistrian region as well as implementing
a confidence building measures.

The democratization process requires the establishment of an international mechanism for
political reforms that would allow for free and fair elections leading to the legitimate local
authorities. The future autonomy status of the region with the reunified country will be


-----

negotiated only with such legitimate authorities and in accordance with the principles
stipulated in the above-mentioned law of 22 July 2005. In order not to allow for external
pressure on the voters, Moldovan authorities believe that the electoral process must be
preceded by withdrawal of foreign troupes from the territory of the country.

The demilitarization means the withdrawal of the Russian troops from the territory of the
country, dismantlement of the paramilitary forces and the security structures of the
unconstitutional regime, the replacement of the current peacekeeping operation with an
international mission of civilian and military observers established in line with the UN/OSCE
standards. An international inspection should take place at the armaments stockpiles of the
Russian Federation and an OSCE-led monitoring mission should be organized at the
military industrial complex in the Transnistrian region.

The objectives on securing the state border include: drafting and implementing the National
Strategy on integrated stet border management in order to adapt the existing border
management to the EU standards; further cooperation with Ukraine and the EU border
assistance mission (EUBAM); consolidating the cooperation between the national
institutions with related competences at the border and international cooperation on
combating terrorism, proliferation of mass destruction arms and illegal migration as well as
in combating all types of border crimes.

**2.3 Consolidating the supremacy of law and democratic institutions**

From the perspective of the national security of the Republic of Moldova, guaranteeing the
good functioning of the democratic institutions and the rule of law, as well as protecting
human rights and fundamental liberties of the people are primary objectives. The
administrative, public order protection and judicial systems are consolidated and developed
to ensure the governance functionality based on rule of law.

The continuing development of the civil society is essential for the functioning of the
democratic institutions and the rule of law. The preconditions for the development of the
civil society are ensured by the constitutional democratic and stable framework, level of
openness of the society, promoting civil initiatives and accessibility to the high quality
education.

**2.4 Prevention and Combating corruption and organized crime**

The policy on prevention and combating corruption and its successful implementation
requires the compliance of the public authorities’ activities with the democratic and rule of
law standards. The Republic of Moldova worked out a long-term state policy on combating
economic crimes and corruption.

These areas are developed through balanced cooperation between the public sector,
private sector and the society ensuring, at the same time, the implementation of the
international commitments made by the Republic of Moldova in the respective filed. The
main tasks of the strategy on combating corruption are improving the legislation and
consolidating the institutional system as well as increasing and supporting public
information on legal issues.


-----

The main state institutions assigned to fight economic crimes and corruptions are:

  - _The Centre for Combating Economic Crimes and Corruption the main body tasked_
with preventing and combating corruption, with main functions including: a)
preventing, identifying, investigating and curbing economic-financial and fiscal
infringements and crimes; b) fighting corruption and protectionism; c) combating
legalization of goods acquired illegally and money-laundering; d) anti-corruption
expertise for the draft bills and the Executive’s regulations with the aim at bringing
them in line with the state policy on preventing and combating corruption.

  - _Anti-corruption and criminal investigation Prosecutor Office a specialized subdivision_
within the PGO of the Republic of Moldova. The Prosecutor Office leads and
conducts criminal investigations, represents the prosecution in courts, as well as
checks the legality of the procedural-criminal activities carried out by the criminal
investigation body.

  - _Other public authorities, as envisaged by legislation_

The amendments operated within the national legislation regarding the legalization of the
capital and fiscal amnesty are directed to improve the situation in the fields of registration of
the private property and taxation and to facilitate the prevention of a legalization of an
illegally gained property as well as the gathering of a necessary proofs for the identification
of the penal cases.

**2.5 The consolidation of the economic, energetic, intellectual property, social and**
**ecologic security of the Republic of Moldova. Regional development.**

2.5.2 Consolidating economic security

The rapid, balanced and durable economic growth is vital for achieving the goals of the
security policy of the Republic of Moldova. It is in the national interest of the Republic of
Moldova to promote the diversification of the foreign economic relations. In that respect it is
important to maintain a stable economic environment, which, along with other factors, will
ensure the attractiveness of the Republic of Moldova for foreign investments.

The Republic of Moldova ensures the credibility of its financial system. In order to settle the
international crisis and their economic consequences, it is necessary to ensure a long
lasting stability and a fund reserve in the financial system of the country.

The goal of the economic policy is to achieve a durable economic and social development.
Taking into consideration that a stable macroeconomic environment is an important
precondition for growth, its preservation becomes an essential task of the economic policy
of the Government.

In this respect, the long-term priorities of the Republic of Moldova are the following:
creating favorable conditions for economy functioning, stimulating setting up the efficient
and competitive industrial structures, as well as reducing disproportions and economic


-----

risks. Apart from these tasks, it is important to improve the national taxation policy, paying
considerable attention to tax collection.

To ensure economic security, it is necessary to diversify the economy with the orientation
to the goods and services with the high added value. During the process of diversification
of the national economy it is necessary to increase the significance of the promising
industries that were underdeveloped up to date, meanwhile maximally using the
advantages offered by the current industries. The Republic of Moldova will promote a
development policy oriented to innovation, setting up and functioning of the innovational
system. Enhancing competitiveness and reaching out to new foreign markets will be
encouraged.

Creating necessary conditions for the economic development, it is important to create a
favorable environment for business promotion, to develop a state policy on goal-oriented
assistance, to improve the fiscal system and its management, as well as to set up a system
for training and business consultancy.

A competitive industry considerably influences the economic development and the security
of the country. The volume increase of the competitive products with the high added value
and their export may diminish the deficit of the foreign trade. Thus, the attraction of
investments in the industrial sector will enhance.

According to the international standards, the Republic of Moldova increases its security
measures in the field of transport.

The country’s economic development is also related to the ability to maintain and enhance
the transit loads flow. The main tasks in developing the transportation services are ensuring
the services’ competitiveness, building oil and oil products pipelines, modernizing the road
network, the East-West rail road corridor and the connected infrastructure.

The Republic of Moldova pays increased attention to developing transportation
infrastructure and to the integration process in the European and global transportation
network. The Republic of Moldova is firmly decisive to continue its active participation in
expending the trans-european transportation network, benefiting at large from its
geographic position as a bridge between the EU and countries from the CIS zone.

_2.5.2 Consolidating energetic security_

Regulation of the energy market and the development of an adequate infrastructure have to
ensure sufficient electric power supply for consumers, as well as an appropriate exercise of
the essential state functions. On the gas market, the activities of gas suppliers must be
carefully monitored. It is essential to identify opportunities for a diversification of gas supply
sources for the country. On the thermal agents market, proper conditions will be created in
order to provide heating to the population even in cases when the supply with the basic fuel
is interrupted. On the bunker oil market, a minimum quantity of fuel will be stored to match
at least the EU quantitative standards and to ensure its efficient use in cases when a
regular supply with bunker oil is interrupted. There is a need to foresee a possibility for
storing a certain quantity of bunker oil outside of the country.


-----

The situation in the energy sector could have a serious impact over the economic security
and over the country’s further development. It is necessary to create oil reserves in the
country. With the liberalization of the energy industry market, which implies joining a
common European energy and oil market, ensuring security of the supplies system should
be one of the major requirements. The use of local energy resources and an increase of
their efficiency, creation of new energy capacities built on advanced technologies are
regarded as priority goals aimed at reducing the country’s dependency on the imported
resources.

A successful implementation of the Energy Strategy should contribute to the settlement of
some conceptual problems as it is an important component in a multidimensional approach
towards the energy sector. Gradual integration of the Republic of Moldova’s energy system
in the South-east European Energy Community will increase, primarily, integration in the
Pan-European energy system while contributing simultaneously to reducing the country’s
unilateral energy dependency as energy issue is being examined on the regional level. In
the context of the National Gasification Program, it is viewed as of primary importance to
develop the main gas pipelines, branches and local network infrastructure. With the launch
of the Giurgiulesti Terminal it is expected that the country’s energy dependency will
decrease.

2.5.4 Consolidating social security

To strengthen the citizens’ social security, it is essential to solve the problems related to the
employment market, to establish a durable system of social security that will cover the
vulnerable groups and to educate and train a highly qualified work force able to ensure the
continuity of the economic growth.

In public health-related emergency situations an increased number of people might need
medical assistance due to the outbreak of contagious disease, mass intoxication or
exposure to radiation. The Republic of Moldova develops its national system to cope with
public health emergencies according to the European standards. It is important in that
respect to build on the accumulated experience in the PfP.

Combating contagious diseases, including spreading the HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis, is the
state’s responsibility. In the Republic of Moldova the measures on preventing the
expansion of the very dangerous contagious diseases are implemented according to the
international medical regulations. National programs are put into practice to reduce drug
addiction, to limit the spread of HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis.

The capacity and durable development of the social security system, which protects the
citizens in case of social risk and offers handicapped people means to support their lives,
play an important role in preventing social tensions and ensure the welfare of the society.
The main tasks of the social security system are to provide the social insurance and
assistance.

The system of state social insurance precedes the state pension insurance, maternity and
sickness, unemployment insurance, as well as the cases of industrial accidents or


-----

professional diseases. The category of ensured people will be extended, the pension age
will be gradually increased, a support system of those unemployed will be developed
(including payment of allowances) which will facilitate the return of unemployed citizens on
the work market.

The state social insurance services cover three main fields: medical assistance
(allowances), social care and social rehabilitation. The provision of these services as well
as the number of categories of people who will benefit from alternative social services will
grow. The management of the social assistance and financial system will be improved. The
education of the society regarding the social care and rehabilitation issues, citizen’s rights
and obligations will be further promoted. The functioning of social assistance is assigned to
the state and local public administration.

_2.5.3.1 Health care_

The public health is an important indicator of the social unity and equality, welfare and
poverty as well as of the environment factors and cultural standards. In order to rapidly
improve the people’s health in the Republic of Moldova, it is necessary to increase the
efficiency of the medical practice of the society on the ground of certain scientific measures
meant to improve the health, to prevent diseases and to increase life duration.

To fulfill this task it is necessary to consider the public health’s risk factors as well as the
environment protection, consumer security, health insurance and labor security.

The aim of the health care is to ensure the medical service quality available for the
population while improving the structure of the assigned services, to strengthen and
increase the quality of the routine health services, to guarantee the cost efficiency and
rational approach to the patients, as well as to create the ground for a system of integrated
departmental medical services to act in the emergency situation both on the local and
national level.

In other terms, the goal is to reach high quality, easily accessible health care for the
population and a system of first medical assistance on low costs, equitable, qualitative and
rapid for all citizens of the Republic of Moldova.

_2.5.3.2 Ensuring the unitary character of the society_

The consolidation of a balanced and democratic society in the Republic of Moldova occurs
through implementing its policies on social integrity. The whole society plays an important
role in the development of the country and in ensuring the social security. Thus, the civil
society is built with the aim at involving all population groups in the country’s development.
The integration process entails political integration, social and regional integration of the
society, as well as the language and culture integration. In order to ensure an efficient
functionality of the Republic of Moldova as a unitary state, which protects the multiethnic
and multi-linguistic essence of its people, it is vital to implement a demographic policy
targeting to stop the demographic decline and the overall ageing of the Moldovan society,
as well as reaching in future of a positive rate of population growth.


-----

The Republic of Moldova guarantees the rights of the persons belonging to the ethnic
minorities or different social groups and helps them to integrate in the society. The Republic
of Moldova will continue to support the public information on political processes, on the
country’s history and culture, opportunities and rights to participate in these processes, thus
stimulating civic spirit and involvement. Along with naturalization of foreign citizens, their
involvement in the social and political life will be promoted.

Improving the organization of work force, reducing (preventing) the unemployment,
consolidating the links between the education and employment market as well as
preventing unfavorable regional differences are able to diminish to the minimum the risk of
social rejection.

In the process of integrating the society in the education area, the most significant target
groups are youth and children. The state’s education and cultural policy system will
guarantee acquiring and inheriting both the general human values specifically promoted by
the Republic of Moldova and the opportunities for preserving the intercultural education and
cultural identity of the ethnic minorities. The educational system will continue to promote
learning the state language of the Republic of Moldova, thus facilitating the integration of
the society.

The national cultural policy anticipates the state and municipal responsibilities in further
preserving and developing all nationalities that live in the Republic of Moldova, their cultural
inheritance and involvement in the contemporary life.

_2.5.4 Food security and consumer protection_

The food policy’s goal is to develop an agricultural sector with products that comply with the
European and global market’s requirements as well as competitive quality and production
costs. To achieve this goal, the following activities will be undertaken: modernizing
production technologies, ensuring the quality during the whole process of production and
distribution, promoting and developing markets.

The credibility, security and quality of the food products are fundamental criteria to be met
in order to protect the consumer’s health and ensure the food products’ competitiveness on
the internal and external markets. Considering the influence of this policy on the social and
economic spheres as well as on political and international relations, drafting and
implementing such a policy is an actual and important task. Organizing and developing the
food industry, as well as the consumer’ supply with healthy and qualitative food products
will involve two intertwined policies – the food industry economic policy and the policy of
credibility, security and quality of the food products.

Aspiring to harmonious development of the rural areas and amelioration of the
environment, the concept of rural development will be worked out and along with its
implementation another long term development program on rural areas will be worked out.
Other non-related to agriculture business will be promoted, thus facilitating the settlement
of the social and economic problems of the rural areas.


-----

The epizootic situation in the country is systematically under control. The prevention and
action plans are drafted and periodically updated to address epidemiological threats. In
case of mass animal infection, a set of compensation measures to eliminate the animals’
diseases will be drafted and implemented.

_2.5.5 Ensuring intellectual property security_

To ensure the intellectual property security, the efforts will be oriented to the harmonization
of the intellectual property system of the Republic of Moldova with the existing mechanisms
in the European Union. An important aspect and an indispensable condition in this field
consists in the improvement of application of the national legislation regarding the
intellectual property. In the context of internal and external risks in this field, the Moldovan
civil society will be informed on the importance of the intellectual property rights. Taking into
consideration the European aspirations of the country, an important element is the
stimulation of participation of the research institutions to the projects on the intellectual
property protection conducted within the European Union. A better application of the
legislation on author right and connected rights will contribute to a better organization and
management of the national system of intellectual property protection.

_2.5.6 Consolidating environment security and preserving biodiversity_

The Republic of Moldova fulfills its commitments which derive from different International
Conventions on environment with the aim at improving and modernizing the national
system of monitoring the environment quality.

In that respect the Republic of Moldova undertakes necessary measures with the view at
harmonizing the national legislation and regulations in the filed of environment protection
and using natural resources with the EU Directives, according to the European
Commission’s General Directorate for Environment.

The Republic of Moldova also actively participates in the relevant working groups
established by the international organizations. To cope with the consequences of the
emergency situations which generated the pollution with chemical and radioactive agents,
there is a need for continuous improvement and modernization of the national system for
monitoring the environment’s quality according to the international standards.

To prevent the uncontrolled proliferation in the environment of the genetically modified
bodies (GMO), the Republic of Moldova will have strict regulations on import, risk
assessment, labeling, monitoring and control of the GMO.

Further efforts will be undertaken to combat the anthropogenic factors that have a negative
influence on the biodiversity and on the ecosystem in general. The state will protect the
rare species and will take new measures to regenerate the traditional species on the
territory of the Republic of Moldova. Pollution control, risk management and biodiversity
preserving will contribute to the creation of a better environment for life.

_2.5.7 The policy of regional development_


-----

Implementing the policy of regional development of the Republic of Moldova in accordance
with the existing legislation will ensure the rapid development of the underdeveloped
regions and reduction of life standards’ differences inside the country, as well as will
facilitate the balanced development of the entire country.

At the government level, promoting a regional policy and coordinating with structural
instruments according to the EU standards will be ensured. The concentration of the
resources and institutional system will be consolidated, and their capacity will be
strengthened both at the national, regional and local.

One of the preconditions for a more rapid development of the country as well as for
ensuring domestic security and stability is a successful administrative reform along with
implementation of the projects that promote the local administration development.

With the development of the regional development policy’s objectives, the favorable
conditions for investment flow and the development of the entrepreneurial activities will be
ensured. This will offer support to the less developed and rarely populated regions. The
development of the local infrastructure is important. The development of the route network
(including alternative roads for main routes) and the communication systems, as well as
ensuring education and cultural infrastructure, also, have a considerable importance.

**2.6 The security of the informational technologies**

With the increase of the informational technologies’ role in the public and private sector,
their place in the state’ security and defense enhances as well, especially if we take into
account that there are no borders in the informational technologies field. At the same time,
there is increased need to ensure the security and efficient administration of the national
informational systems, as well as to protect the fundamental rights of the Republic of
Moldova’s citizens.

Taking into account the growing level of computerization of the country, the informational
security will be ensured on a legal and organizational level through diminishing main risk
factors like informational viruses, flawed functioning of the computers and soft programs,
negligence or bad-intentions of the users and unauthorized connection of the third persons.

Aiming at improving the informational technologies security it is necessary to work out a
project on developing the reserved communicational networks in order to be used in the
crisis situation. For secured stocking of the data base of national importance it is necessary
to set up archives and stocks of electronic documents.

In order to prevent the information-related crimes and threats to the domestic security,
which may be caused by the vulnerability of the informational technologies systems, as well
as to ensure the security of the data base and registers, it is necessary to undertake
organizational and physical security measures. Otherwise, the information related crimes
may reach a dangerous scale of organized crime along with illegal traffic of arms and
drugs.


-----

In order to ensure an adequate functioning of the state defense system in case of crisis or
times of war as well as to ensure the state’s ability to timely and efficiently send the flow of
information, including those classified, between the Republic of Moldova and the rest of the
world, it is imperative to build sufficient national capacities to carry out secured exchange of
information and stocking the information. In this respect it is also of a major importance to
develop the capacities for a secured exchange of information on the domestic level, as well
as between the Executive/MFA and diplomatic missions of the Republic of Moldova.

**3. FOREIGN POLICY – AN INSTRUMENT OF PROTECTING AND CONSOLIDATING**
**THE NATIONAL SECURITY OF THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA**

The foreign policy is part of the national security policy of the Republic of Moldova, with the
objective to influence the international security environment in a way as to meet the
national interests of the country. Foreign activities undertaken in order to implement the
national security policy are directed toward establishing and consolidating a network of
international relations and cooperation formulas that would diminish the risk of getting
involved in conflicts, as this would jeopardize the national interests, and in case such
conflicts exist/occur, would allow for their settlement in cooperation with our foreign
strategic partners.

Stability, predictability and consistency of the Moldovan foreign policy serve as
preconditions for Moldova’s becoming a democratic European state, with an advanced
economy and a high level of security.

In this context, the economic dimension of the foreign policy is regarded as an important
factor. Diversification of markets for Moldovan exports, ensuring energy security, attraction
of foreign investments, promotion of WTO and other western trade standards, as well as
multiplication of free trade zones will always be among the priorities of the foreign policy of
the Republic of Moldova.

Special foreign policy actions aim at establishing a sustainable cooperation with the
countries that share with the Republic of Moldova the same values – democracy, state of
law, market economy and human rights. The national security aims will be achieved by
carrying out specific diplomatic activities on multilateral and bilateral level and by
implementing creative, dynamic and pragmatic foreign policy, in compliance with the
international treaties and agreements the Republic of Moldova is party to, and with the UN
Charter objectives and principles.

The Republic of Moldova wants to become a model for other countries, demonstrating the
viability of the multiethnic state in which the rights and dignity of all its citizens are
respected, regardless of the ethnicity, language or religion.

Continuous consolidation of cooperation with the EU and its member states, active
participation in the global, regional and sub-regional efforts targeted toward promotion of
international stability and security, development of relations with NATO within the
constitutional provisions of neutrality, maintaining constructive relations with the
neighboring countries and traditional economic partners, efficient management of the


-----

common social, economic, financial, environmental and other issues are foreign and
national security policy priorities of the Republic of Moldova.

**3.1. Participation in international efforts to manage contemporary threats and**
**challenges**

The existing framework of multilateral cooperation offered by the international organizations
allows for addressing and solving global and regional security issues, and contributes to the
consolidation of the national security. The Republic of Moldova is interested in actively
supporting, together with the EU member states, the initiatives within the UN, OSCE and
other international organizations to prevent and resolve regional and internal conflicts, to
fight international terrorism, to combat cross-border crime, to prevent the deterioration of
the environment, spread of contagious diseases, proliferation of arms of mass destruction,
as well as the initiatives to reduce poverty, to promote development, etc.

Taking into consideration the ongoing internal conflicts, many of which are associated with
the existence of separatist entities inspired and supported from abroad, that threat the
regional security and impinge on the territorial integrity and independence of sovereign
states, the Republic of Moldova supports the establishment or efficient functioning inside of
relevant international organizations, in particular the UN and OSCE, of mediation and
consultation mechanisms for prevention and administration of crises and conflicts.
Similarly, we will support initiatives of international organizations aiming at creation or
improvement of the mechanisms of control over fulfillment of commitments by the member
states. Participation of the Republic of Moldova in the UN peace operations and in the
OSCE missions on the European continent is another instrument of the same objective.
Building up the necessary capacities for participation in international peace operations,
including the extension of this participation, is an integral part of the Republic of Moldova’s
Armed Forces and law enforcement agencies development and reform plan.

The Republic of Moldova participates in the anti-terrorist activities undertaken at the
international level and supports within international organizations the initiatives of
prevention and fighting terrorism.

As a responsible member of the international community and being aware of the illegal
production and trafficking in arms in areas outside governments’ control of the states
affected by the internal conflicts, the Republic of Moldova supports the efforts targeting
consolidation of confidence building measures, strengthening and extension of international
regimes of arms control and prevention of proliferation of arms of mass destruction and
some categories of conventional arms. Acknowledging the importance of the Treaty on
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) as an instrument of European security that
aims at providing transparency in the military activities by instating control over
conventional arms and by exchanging information and implementation of a comprehensive
monitoring system, the Republic of Moldova, as a state party, will initiate the ratification of
the Adapted CFE Treaty only if this step meets the security needs of the country, provided
that all parties to the treaty commit to fully implement their respective international
commitments.

**3.2 European Union integration process**


-----

Enlargement of the EU is a factor that stabilizes the European security system and
broadens the geographic area in which political, economic and social developments on the
basis of a democratic principles are guaranteed. The national security of the Republic of
Moldova may not be conceived separately from the European security.

The process of European integration and acquiring of EU membership will positively
influence and consolidate the security of the Republic of Moldova and will bring stability and
prosperity to the country.

The Republic of Moldova supports the efforts of the European countries in building a
sustainable security system in Europe. Regional cooperation through sub-regional
organizations whose final objective is to facilitate the EU integration is an additional
element of the continental security consolidation process. The Republic of Moldova actively
participates in the activities of the regional institutions and initiatives, all of which pursue
higher regional stability and therefore consolidation of the European security.

Deepening the political dialog and cooperation within the Common Foreign and Security
Policy (CFSP), as well as collaboration of parties in resolving the Transnistrian conflict will
contribute to the consolidation of the national and regional security. In the context of the
Transnistrian conflict, participation of the EU and the USA in the negotiation process is
essential. The success of the EUBAM in the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine will facilitate
the process of solving general regional security issues related to illegal production of and
trafficking in arms.

**3.3 Cooperation with NATO**

The relationship of the Republic of Moldova with NATO is conducted in conformity with the
constitutional status of neutrality of the state, fall within the Euro-Atlantic Partnership and
Partnership for Peace and meets the national interests of the country. The process of
multidimensional and complex deepening the relationship with NATO, supported by both
sides, aims at building a functional national security system for the Republic of Moldova
and country’s transformation from consumer of regional security to a generator of such.
Concurrently, by cooperating with NATO, the Republic of Moldova wishes to improve its
national capabilities of coping with new types of threats, including the old conventional
ones.

Launching of the Individual Partnership Action Plan (IPAP) with NATO confirms the
European orientation of the Republic of Moldova. Implementation of IPAP implies the
transformation of the entire national security system in line with the western security
standards. The reforms carried out as part of the IPAP are complementary to the process
of transformation run in conformity with EU integration objective.

The objective of such reforms is to establish efficient mechanisms of civil control over
armed forces and the entire national security sector of the country, broaden the
interoperability of armed forces and other force institutions of Moldova with the those of
European states, and creation of adequate budgeting mechanisms for the national security
sector.


-----

**3.4 Security Relationships in the Black Sea Area**

The most important insecurity and instability factors from the Black Sea area are the frozen
conflicts and regions where the international norms are not applied. Transformation of the
Black Sea area into a secure, stable, democratic and prosperous space through a
multilateral process supported by the European partners will enhance the region’s security
and, implicitly, the national security of the Republic of Moldova.

The security relations in the Black Sea area are developing both on bilateral level and
inside various multilateral institutions and cooperation formulas. Due to the enlargement of
the EU and NATO the role of these two organizations in security cooperation at Black Sea
is growing.

Given the diversity that the Black Sea area presents, the Republic of Moldova maintains
partnership relations and develops extensive cooperation with the countries from the
region.

Participation of the USA in the process of including the Black Sea area in the Euro-Atlantic
security area represents a guarantee in that respect.

Economic development of the Russian Federation is important to the security, stability and
prosperity of the entire Black Sea area. In this context, the Republic of Moldova uses the
opportunities and potential of the Moldovan-Russian relations to promote cooperation in
fighting terrorism, organized crime, proliferation of arms, etc.

The Republic of Moldova attributes great importance to the Organization for Black Sea
Economic Cooperation (BSEC) looking for for the consolidation of cooperation inside BSEC
in the fields of energy, trade, transportation, communications, tourism and infrastructure
development.

**3.5 Bilateral Security Cooperation**

International security is directly linked to the quality of the bilateral relations between
members of the international community, despite their different views and contributions to
the process. States with considerable political, military, economic and informational
resources play an essential role in providing international security, having the ability to
influence the situation at regional and global level.

The Republic of Moldova wishes to build up friendly relations with all democratic states.
This will be done by supporting the UN Charter principles and with the purpose of receiving
the support of other states in implementing the national priorities of the Republic of
Moldova, including improvement of living standards of the population, reaching a
sustainable solution to the Transnistrian conflict, and integration of Moldova into a united
and free Europe.

As the Republic of Moldova requests assistance from stronger and more prosperous states
to help it develop the national security and advance economically and politically, so will the


-----

Republic of Moldova, within existing possibilities, provide humanitarian, political, economic
and security assistance to countries in need.

The Republic of Moldova attributes strategic importance to its relations with the USA,
including in the field of security, both at bi- and multilateral frameworks. This cooperation
implies a continuous and intense political dialogue at all levels, security consultations,
reciprocal foreign policy support, exchange of information and US assistance in
implementation of projects in different fields of development of the Republic of Moldova.

The European vocation of the Republic of Moldova and the EU integration process require
establishment of strong relationships with UE member states, maintenance of an active
dialog, exchange of experience, implementation of common projects. The Republic of
Moldova stands for the principles of open, constructive and ascending cooperation with the
EU member state, implementing the European security standards and practices.

The Republic of Moldova would like to attach a sustainable and constructive quality to its
dialogue with Ukraine and Romania. The Republic of Moldova maintains its position that
the common European values, respect for independency, sovereignty and territorial
integrity shall govern the future relationship with Ukraine and Romania. In this context, the
Republic of Moldova believes important to sign basic border and political treaties with
Romania. One of the priorities of the relationship between the Republic of Moldova and its
neighbors is regional security, including economic, energy and environmental security.

The Republic of Moldova regards an active cooperation of with the Baltic States and the
Central and South-East European states as very important. This cooperation will include,
among others, learning about the European integration experience of these states.

The Republic of Moldova will continue to develop bilateral relationship with the Russian
Federation based on a spirit of friendship and collaboration in conformity with the provisions
of the basic political Treaty that matches the interests of the people of the both states. The
Republic of Moldova will shape its policy in such a way as to explore the constructive
potential of the bilateral relations with Russian Federation in the political, economic, social
and energy spheres, and in finding a solution to the Transnistrian conflict, based on the
principles of independence and territorial integrity.

**4. THE NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY. ITS ELEMENTS**

After the adoption of this document, the Republic of Moldova will draft and approve the
National Security Strategy that will describe the ways of guaranteeing the national security,
the mechanisms of cooperation between the components of the national security system
which include the NGOs and media, the coordinating tools of the national security system’s
activities and institutions with the responsibilities on different security dimensions, the
funding procedures of the national security sector and the reformations stages of the
national security system of the Republic of Moldova. The National Security Strategy will be
approved by the Government of the Republic of Moldova. This document will serve as a
foundation for drafting the National Military Strategy, the Strategy on Public Information on
Security Issues and other sectors’ strategies in the national security field.


-----

**FINAL AND TRANSITORY PROVISIONS**

With the adoption of this new Concept, the Parliament decision no. 445-XIII from 15 May
1995 regarding the adoption of the National Security Concept of the Republic of Moldova
ceases its effect.

The National Security Concept of the Republic of Moldova will be updated and modified
with attaining the country’s priority objectives in the national security field.


-----

