**NATIONAL SECURITY CONCEPT OF MONGOLIA**

**CHAPTER ONE GENERAL PROVISIONS**

**1.1 National Security**

I.1.1. Mongolia’s national security shall mean ensuring favorable external and internal
conditions for securing and protecting the genuine national interests of Mongolia.

I.1.2. Mongolia’s genuine national interests shall incorporate the very existence of the
Mongolian people and its civilization, independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and
inviolability of its borders, national unity, constitutional establishment, security, economic
independence and sustainable ecological development.

I.1.3. The prime purpose of ensuring national security shall be safeguarding and guaranteeing
national independence, sovereignty and unity.

I.1.4. Parliamentary governance built on respect for human rights and freedoms, the rule of law
as well as a democratic state structure built on social stability shall be the preeminent guarantee
for the assurance of national security.

I.1.5. Mongolia’s national security shall be attained when the interrelationship between state,
society and civilian security is assured.

I.1.6. Protection and preservation of national history, language, culture, heritage, customs and
traditions shall serve as fundamental and vital requisites for the existence and vitality of the
Mongolian identity and nationality.


-----

**I.2. Principles of Ensuring National Security**

I.2.1. Respect for a National Sense of Patriotism

Mongolia’s national security shall depend upon active actions of each Mongolian citizen as
creator, defender and holder of national values.

1.2.2 Interaction between State and Citizen

The prime responsibility of the state shall be to ensure national security. The state shall provide
its citizens with wide-ranging information and knowledge on security issues as well as
possibilities for cooperation and contribution towards the protection and enhancement of
national security.

1.2.3. Integrated Security Strategy

National security shall be assured through the interrelationship among the “security of the
existence of Mongolia”, “economic security”, “internal security”, “human security”, “environment
security” and “information security”.

1.2.4. Knowledge Based Approach

The approach to security and action-making shall be based on knowledge, information and
analysis.

1.2.5. Realistic Approach


-----

Potential threats and challenges shall be realistically identified and remedies and resources
shall be efficiently found.

1.2.6. Globalization Impact

While world globalization increases the vulnerability and dependency of a state upon others; it
offers opportunities for safeguarding national interests through use of external ways and means.

**CHAPTER TWO MONGOLIA’S SECURITY ENVIRONMENT:**

**CHALLENGES AND RISKS**

**CHAPTER THREE NATIONAL SECURITY COMPONENTS**

**AND COMPLIANCE**

**3.1. Security of Existence**

Assurance of Mongolia’s independence, sovereignty, inviolability of borders, territorial integrity,
security of Mongolian civilization, population and genetic uniqueness shall constitute a


-----

foundation for the security of its existence.

**3.1.1 Independence and Sovereignty**

3.1.1.1. Commitment to a unified foreign policy and supremacy of national interests in foreign
affairs shall be consistently maintained.

3.1.1.2. The basic methods for ensuring Mongolia’s independence and sovereignty shall be
political and diplomatic actions. Accordingly a multi-pillared foreign policy directed towards
building active relationships and cooperation with foreign states and international institutions
shall be implemented.

3.1.1.3 A consistent peacemaking foreign policy coupled with active support for international
community efforts aimed at strengthening peace and security shall be implemented.

3.1.1.4 Good neighbor friendly relations and wide-ranging cooperation with the Russian
Federation and the People’s Republic of China shall be developed. More specifically, national
interests and the history of bilateral relationships shall be taken into account while regional
peace and stability as well as a general balance of relations with neighbors shall be sought.

3.1.1.5. Pursuant to a “third neighbor” strategy, bilateral and multilateral cooperation with highly
developed democracies in political, economic, cultural and humanitarian affairs shall be
undertaken.

3.1.1.6 Bilateral relations and multilateral cooperation shall be continuously pursued in security
and defense areas with Mongolia's two neighboring states, the USA, member states of NATO,
the European Union and the Asia-Pacific region along with active participation in international
peacemaking missions.

3.1.1.7 Active cooperation with UN Security Council member-states and international


-----

organizations shall be made on implementation of UN General Assembly resolutions on
strengthening Mongolia’s international security.

3.1.1.8 Active support shall be given to regional countries’ policies and efforts towards
strengthening strategic stability and establishing security cooperation mechanisms in the
Asia-Pacific region and East Asia, including North-East Asia.

3.1.2 Inviolability of Borders and Territorial Integrity

3.1.2.1. With a view to ensuring territorial security, Mongolia’s land administration policy and
land management system shall be improved.

3.1.2.2. An Integrated defense and armed forces system based upon local defense shall be put
in place while strengthening armed forces’ professionalism and capacity-building. Increased
citizen participation in the border protection strategy shall be encouraged.

3.1.2.3. An early-warning and rapid-deployment system shall be put into operation to prevent
mass refugee border-crossings or related emergency situations while a set of legal, political and
diplomatic actions shall be undertaken.

3.1.2.4. Structural, technical and technological renovation shall be made on border protection,
surveillance and a rapid deployment information network established.

3.1.2.5. Border area regional economies shall be developed in accordance with unified national
interests, Mongolia’s sovereignty, inviolability of borders and territorial integrity.

3.1.2.6. The supreme state authority shall make decisions on opening or closing border
checkpoints or making modifications to the border checkpoint regime.


-----

3.1.2.7. Border area development strategy and its foreign connections shall be defined and
regulated by unified state policy.

**3.1.3. Security of Population and Genetic Identity**

3.1.3.1. Mongolia’s population growth, human development and quality of life shall be
supported.

3.1.3.2. Favorable conditions shall be provided to citizens studying or working abroad for
returning and working and living in the homeland.

3.1.3.3 Favorable conditions shall be provided to Mongolians and their children born abroad and
having foreign citizenship for traveling, living, studying, working or having access to insurance in
Mongolia. The state shall honor and protect citizens’ interests arising from dual citizenship.

3.1.3.4. Accelerated efforts to reduce the negative effects upon the nation's genetic heritage of
inbreeding, chronic alcoholism and drug addiction shall be taken.

3.1.3.5. A current record of foreign citizens, aliens and migrants shall be maintained while
registration, monitoring, information data processing, legal environment, management and
organization shall be improved.

**3.1.4. Security of Civilization**

3.1.4.1. The State shall have primary responsibility for protecting, developing and promoting the
study of Mongolian history, language, culture, religion, customs and traditions, encouraging
academic literature, films and works of art, protecting Mongolia's physical and non-physical
cultural heritage. It shall take actions to establish a World Mongolist Study Center in
Ulaanbaatar and involve foreign Mongolist Study scholars in research, study and publication
and set up Study Center branches in other countries.


-----

3.1.4.2. Protect and develop the Mongolian language and script as well as increase the
instruction and usage of traditional Mongolian script.

3.1.4.3. Undertake measures to promote in-depth education in history, culture, customs and
traditions and foster a sense of patriotism in children and youth through social, family and
educational institutions.

3.1.4.4. Undertake efforts to assess and recognize the works, talents and achievements of
outstanding personalities and their contributions to culture, art, national customs and traditions.

3.1.4.5. Develop wide-ranging cultural relations with other countries, including third neighbor
countries, and popularize Mongolian culture and history through diplomatic missions and
individual citizens all over the world.

3.1.4.6. Support proposals and initiatives by citizens on the prevention of Mongolian historical
and cultural artifacts from being smuggled abroad. Through appropriate measures seek,
research, recover and restore items of Mongolian cultural heritage existing abroad in active
cooperation with foreign nations.

3.1.4.7. Revive and develop Buddhist religion and culture. Encourage activities of monasteries
and temples towards enlightenment of societal wisdom, strengthening national unity, alleviating
poverty, disaster relief and protection of the natural environment.

3.1.3.8. Maximize support for research and studies on Buddhism which protected and
preserved for many centuries the Mongolian people’s intellectual civilization.

**3.2. Economic Security**


-----

The basic precondition for achieving and maintaining economic security shall be the adoption of
a sustainable development model that ensures independent economic development and a
natural environment conducive to human security and peaceful living.

A constructive strategy shall be put forward to design a multi-pillared economic structure,
balanced investment policy and financial security as well as an efficient policy on such issues as
energy, mineral resources, foreign trade and regional economic integration.

**3.2.1. Multi-Pillared Economic Structure**

3.2.1.1. Self-sustained economic capacity shall be built and a multi-pillared economic structure
competitive in certain areas on the world market shall be put in place.

3.2.1.2. With a view to ensuring the basic needs of the population, economic sustainability and
efficiency, generating national revenues and assuring national security, strategically significant
sectors such as mineral resources, food, agriculture, energy, road, transportation, information,
communications industries and finances shall be developed in accordance with international
and EU standards.

3.2.1.3. A transparent and responsible mining and mineral resource industry shall be developed
while derived revenues shall be redirected to ensuring short-term and medium-term sustainable
economic development, establishing a multi-pillared economic structure, supporting human
development and developing education, health and public sports.

3.2.1.4. Infrastructure industry development shall be linked to national security requirements
while economic efficiency shall be a criterion for making investments. Primacy of Mongolia’s
national interests shall be the guiding principle when developing the nation’s railway network.

3.2.1.5. Support and encourage on a priority basis the production of goods and services that
take into account Mongolia’s clean natural environment; intellectual strengths and geographic
advantages, competitiveness in international markets, products exportable by air transportation
and information technology with high added value.


-----

3.2.1.6. Set international standards in the education sector. Coordinate activities between
universities, institutes and research institutions and improve human development.

3.2.1.7. Direct scientific research, studies and innovations in strategically important industries
while increasing economic efficiency and competitiveness.

3.2.1.8. Support high technology development while developing competitive capability on the
international market in such sectors as nanotechnology, biotechnology, communications and
information technology.

3.2.1.9. Protect the domestic labor market while undertaking a consistent strategy on
eradication of poverty by creating secure jobs.

**3.2.2. Balanced Investment Strategy**

3.2.2.1. Devise a strategy to increase and protect a proportion of and participation by domestic
investors in the economy while creating opportunities for national investors to expand their
businesses, increase their competitive capacity in international markets and play a decisive role
in the advancement of economic security, development and progress.

3.2.2.2. Design a strategy whereby the investment of any foreign country does not exceed one
third of overall foreign investment in Mongolia. Undertake a policy to restrict investments by
foreign state-owned companies and balance the volume of investments by neighboring and
highly developed countries within strategically important sectors.

3.2.2.3. Create a legal environment and conditions to attract foreign investments with no harm
to shares of Mongolia’s vital economic entities sold on international stock exchange markets.


-----

3.2.2.4. Make foreign investments instrumental in increasing competitiveness, financial and
managerial efficiency, introducing new technologies and defining long-term development goals.

3.2.2.5. Decrease excessive dependency on foreign trade transit transportation and as a
land-locked country negotiate mutually beneficial long-term bilateral or trilateral agreements with
the two neighboring countries. Create conditions to have access to sea ports for export of goods
onto world markets, organize transportation routes to sea-ports and increase the flow of transit
transportation across the territory of Mongolia.

**3.2.3. Budget and Finances Sector Security**

3.2.3.1 Ensure economic security and develop a healthy sustainable and well-disciplined
financial sector supporting long-term national growth and development.

3.2.3.2 Government borrowing shall be directed to real economic sectors and shall be sufficient
and proportionate as to ensure financial security.

3.2.3.3 Maintain national foreign exchange and gold reserves at a level not less than the
amount of annual import requirement. Undertake long-run measures to increase foreign
reserves and improve their management.

3.2.3.4 Increase monetary policy efficiency to improve purchasing power and convertibility of
the national currency and maintain its stability. Use the national currency only for all domestic
payment and settlement transactions and maintain a percentage and volume of the national
currency on the domestic currency markets at a proportionate level.

3.2.3.5. Establish an inter-bank risk fund to reinstate the principle that the state rejects any
reimbursement of losses caused by financial institution wrongdoing.

3.2.3.6. Put in place a system of monitoring major foreign and domestic payments and


-----

settlements, loans and letters of credit transaction flows along with a system on the prevention,
detection, investigation and punishment of economic and financial crimes.

**3.2.4. Energy and Mineral Resource Sector Policy**

3.2.4.1. While developing the mineral resource sector give importance to ensuring national
security so as to avoid becoming merely a commodity supplier or an arena of confrontation of
conflicting interests among national and foreign political interests or businesses, as well as
giving importance to preventing environmental degradation. Improve mining sector transparency
and responsibility as well as overseeing mining industry incomes.

3.4.2.2. Create conditions for extensive use of coal, a main domestic source of energy, for
decreasing imports and increasing exports, supporting local output and increasing jobs.
Develop less expensive energy production with less negative environmental impacts so as to
fully supply energy and fuel demands by domestic production through the use of coal and other
energy sources (such as solar, wind, hydro-electric and bio-fuel) by the year 2020.

3.2.4.3. Reduce direct petroleum dependency on one country so that domestic output fully
supplies energy demands by the year 2020. Prevent the risk of price fluctuations and maintain a
national petroleum reserve at a level of not less than six months supply.

3.2.4.4. Develop a nuclear energy sector in accordance with national interests and the principle
of use for peaceful purposes. Develop nuclear production facilities for use, processing,
conversion and enrichment of radioactive materials.

**3.2.5. Foreign Trade and Integration Policy**

3.2.5.1. Reduce the nation’s economic vulnerability as a small market with an excessive
dependency on imports and a small number of export goods.


-----

3.2.5.2. Reduce the foreign trade deficit by applying tariff and non-tariff means to support
domestic production. Supply national industries with strategic goods and commodities by
creating favorable conditions for the import of industrial equipment.

3.2.5.3. Undertake a policy of avoiding excessive dependency on one country’s goods in the
overall import spectrum. Put in place a monitoring and management system for commodity
procurement with particular attention to wholesale and retail sales artificial pricing, monopoly
and unfair competition. Make legal arrangements to protect domestic production and markets.

3.2.5.4. Make decisions on joining regional or international integration arrangements and
concluding free trade agreements based upon Mongolia’s economic security and economic
development objectives as determined by research and studies.

**3.3. Internal Security**

The foundation of internal security shall rest on ensuring human rights and freedoms,
adherence to the Constitution, respect for the rule of law, continuity of the Mongolian state
governance and national unity, support for political parties, civil society, free press and media,
individual liberties as well as safeguarding public order and social stability.

**3.3.1. Strengthening Constitutional Establishment**

3.3.1.1. Consistently undertake a principle of administering state management and governance,
state power distribution, democracy, rule of law and national unity set out in the Constitution of
Mongolia.

3.3.1.2. Match administrative territorial division and the electoral system with commonly held
national interests and national integrated development goals.

3.3.1.3. Take resolute actions against any attempt to seize unconstitutionally state power.


-----

Create conditions to guarantee citizens the right to elect or to be elected and to participate in
free and independent elections.

3.3.1.4. Improve legal, organizational and monitoring capacities to detect, disrupt and prevent
attempts by any foreign elements to influence the outcome of Mongolia’s elections.

3.3.1.5. Strengthen the national system of ensuring human rights and freedoms and improve
connectivity of inter-institutional actions to assure free elections.

3.3.1.6. Ensure oversight and balance of power among legislative, executive and judicial
branches.

3.3.1.7. Continue to develop a judiciary system that is independent and responsible and
assures justice and equality for every citizen before the law. Enact laws, undertake training and
establish policies to strengthen the competence and independence of the judiciary.

**3.3.2. Mongolian State Continuity and Strengthening State Governance**

3.3.2.1. Strengthen transparent and responsible public service providing equal services to
citizens and undertake a policy to recruit for public service professional and qualified personnel.
By developing electronic governance direct public services to citizens efficiently, promptly and
economically.

3.3.2.2. Promote government transparency and accountability and expand anti-corruption
efforts at the national and local levels and ensure participation of political parties and civil
society in these efforts. Intensify corruption prevention and advocacy efforts and nurture a
sense of intolerance towards corruption.

3.3.2.3. Establish a legal and organizational basis to ensure continuity of state policy.


-----

3.3.2.4. Improve the state's governing capacity to make economic adjustments through efficient
policy ways and means.

3.3.2.5. Undertake a policy to restrict state participation in businesses except for activities in
strategically important economic sectors and delegate economic functions to civil or private
entities.

3.3.2.6. Refine in line with international standards public servants’ ethical, knowledge and skill
requirements, increase their salary and create conditions for efficient job performance.

3.3.2.7. Provide public servants with knowledge on security, create conditions for capacity
building, professionalism perfection and fair competition as well as restricting by law conflicts of
interest.

**3.3.3. Strengthening National Unity**

3.3.3.1. The foundation for ensuring national security, unity and consensus shall rest on good
social morality, sound social psychology and shared social values.

3.3.3.2. The State, citizens and mass media shall jointly implement a policy to shape a social
psychology in accordance with which citizens will be proud of their country, nationality, national
accomplishments and progress and respect national interests, ethics, law and statehood.

3.3.3.3. Strengthen national unity and social consensus which guarantee national security,
development and progress and prevent any actions leading to disintegration of the country or
society and outbreaks of internal conflicts or clashes.

3.3.3.4. Take resolute actions against any development which discriminates against citizens on


-----

the basis of nationality, religion, faith, gender or belief, instigating favoritism to persons based
on place of birth or violating human rights and freedoms and consequently disrupting national
unity and social stability.

3.3.3.5. Respect integrity of national interests and unity of state policy and actions at central and
local levels. Conduct all state official affairs in the Mongolian language.

**3.3.4. Social Stability**

3.3.4.1. Support further evolution of political parties and internal democracy and increase their
obligations and responsibilities before the nation and society.

3.3.4.2. Further develop civil society through equal participation and consensus with
non-governmental organizations, develop state policies to encourage the exercise of oversight
over the state. Establish a legal basis to support non-governmental organizations offering
services to society and develop state and civil society partnerships.

3.3.4.3. Enhance the autonomous and independent status of the media, improve responsibility,
professional competence and ethical conduct norms of media personnel and maintain social
stability.

3.3.4.4. Prevent possible public disorder or chaos due to decline in law and order, discipline and
responsibility.

**3.4. Human Security**

The basis of ensuring human security for a Mongolian shall be creating healthy and safe living
conditions and environment, ensuring food security, guaranteeing secure residence and
protecting them from becoming a victim of crime or assault.


-----

**3.4.1. Creating Conditions for Healthy Life**

3.4.1.1. Support development of public health sector and carry out activities directed to
encourage and inculcate a sense of leading a healthy life and increasing health education to
citizens at all levels of educational establishments through mass media.

3.4.1.2. Develop and increase opportunities for children, youth and adults to engage in public
physical events and sports and exercise and take fitness classes.

3.4.1.3. Improve the population’s consumption of healthy and nutritious foods, prevent the
spread of contagious diseases and decrease nutritional deficiencies.

3.4.1.4. Take actions to increase research and studies on current and emerging contagious
diseases, detect diseases at an earlier stage and take preventive measures to limit their spread.

3.4.1.5. Ensure availability of contingency plans of action during the breakout and spread of
contagious diseases and establish a national reserve of preventive medical supplies, vaccines
and bio-medications.

3.4.1.6. Take measures for early detection, diagnosis and treatment of cancer and other
prevalent non-contagious diseases and for decreasing ailments caused by accidents or
occupation and to increase the longevity of the population.

3.4.1.7. Decrease maternal and infant mortality rate and take measures for early detection of
congenital defects.

3.4.1.8. Strengthen the system to provide the population primary medical package treatment
and services as well as medical emergency treatment assistance and ensure equal access by


-----

the population.

3.4.1.9. Improve a health insurance system and protect citizens from risks arising from medical
treatment or services.

3.4.1.10. Observe international standard practice in the training system of medical care, service
and health sector human resources and introduce internationally recognized medical treatment
and diagnosis equipment and technology.

3.4.1.11. Constantly enhance the capability of prompt delivery of necessary medical assistance
response during disaster or emergency situations.

3.4.1.12. Improve the standard requirements for oversight over and coordination of production,
sale, export and import of hospital instruments, tools, medications, vaccines and
bio-medicaments; develop domestic production and ensure quality and security through
establishment of a biotechnology complex.

**3.4.2. Food Security**

3.4.2.1. Ensure that food supply needs are met and create conditions for steady, stable and
sufficient supply of foodstuffs for the population that meet proper nutrition standards.

3.4.2.2. Undertake technical and economic measures to provide a stable supply of 70 percent of
life-essential foodstuffs for Mongolians through domestic production.

3.4.2.3. Ensure a guaranteed food supply through conclusion of long-term agreements on
procurement of strategically important foodstuffs, forming a national reserve of strategically
important foodstuffs for use during disasters and creating a seasonal reserve for a steady
supply demands of Mongolia's cities, towns and other communities.


-----

3.4.2.4. Supply the population with sufficient drinking water and increase monitoring and
management of the quality and security of water supplies.

3.4.2.5. Establish a fused system at all stages to exercise quality control, monitoring and
verification of preparation, production, sale, service and storage of food raw materials.

3.4.2.6. Reform veterinary practice, increase a rapid-response capability to address the
outbreak or spread of infectious animal diseases and improve the system for disease protection
and for ensuring bio-security. Protect the genetic fund of Mongolian domestic farm animals and
acclimated varieties of grains. Improve the monitoring of the use of natural and human-friendly
food bags, packaging materials, fertilizers and pesticides.

3.4.2.7 Take measures to improve food quality and food safety requirements in accordance with
international standards, enhance the management arrangements and attain international
accreditation.

3.4.2.8. Establish a system to import foodstuffs only via economic entities and ensure quality
control and security through establishing an integrated preliminary quality control,
documentation and verification system for imported foodstuffs and conducting assessments on
quality guarantees during the import stage.

3.4.2.9. Monitor and conduct risk assessments of nanotechnology and biotechnology and take
measures to protect the public from potential harm.

**3.4.3 Living environment security**

3.4.3.1. Ensure the safety of citizens’ living and working environments and decrease disaster
risks as important means for assuring human safety.


-----

3.4.3.2. For the purpose of dispersing the capital city’s rising population density make plans for
satellite cities and link suburban areas by highways, mass transit systems, energy supply and
engineering constructions.

3.4.3.3. Integrate city and town general development plans with a view to creating a safe living
and working environment for citizens and refine law and public policy to assure the strict
observance of publicly adopted plans for city or town development.

3.4.3.4. Reduce air, water and soil pollution in metropolitan areas, increase efficiency of
sanitation and hygiene systems and physical plants and improve waste and garbage
management.

3.4.3.5. Assess the structural tolerance of “earthquake-proof” and “earthquake-resistant”
apartments, other dwellings, production and service business buildings and engineering
structures. Make arrangements to reinforce or tear down buildings and structures not resisting
earthquakes of magnitude 8 on the Richter scale and construct new buildings in accordance
with official standards.

3.4.3.6. Improve structure and construction material quality and hygiene requirements
compatible with international standards and introduce a quality control system governed by
professional associations and independent organizations.

3.4.3.7. Optimize obligation and responsibility of citizens to create and maintain a healthy living
environment.

**3.4.4. Protection of citizens from transnational crime**

3.4.4.1. Improve the protection of citizens from terrorism and transnational crime or violence.

3.4.4.2. Prevent citizens in particular, children and women from becoming victims of human


-----

trafficking, improve the legal environment and maximize efforts to investigate, disrupt and
suppress such criminal activities and punish wrongdoers.

3.4.4.3. Enhance a national capacity to control and monitor the flow of narcotics and substances
affecting human psyches and vigorously combat the illegal sale, possession or consumption of
all substances as defined by law.

3.4.4.4. Intensify a training and information campaign to prevent the public from crimes and
increase international cooperation in this area.

**3.5. Security of the natural environment**

Maintaining a balance of nature, protecting water resources, mitigating impact of climate change
and land degradation, preventing harm from a variety of biological deficiencies, reducing risks of
environment pollution, natural disasters and adversities shall be

prerequisites for assuring healthy human life and security as well as preserving the natural
environment.

**3.5.1. Prevention from deficiency in water resources**

3.5.1.1. Improve the structure and organization of the water management sector, its control and
monitoring mechanism, establish the practice that users bear a responsibility for water
resources protection and create conditions for sustained drinking water production and supply in
an amount sufficient for the population.

3.5.1.2. Undertake legal coordination specifying the mechanism for financing assessment,
protection and increase of water resources as well as collecting reimbursements for the cost of
water exploration expeditions funded by the state budget.


-----

3.5.1.3. The state shall fund budget efforts for water exploration to evaluate and determine
underground water reservoir, hydro-geology mapping and recording of the resource and
develop a database, monitoring and assessment network and strengthen the capacity-building
of research organizations.

3.5.1.4. Protect water resources by developing large underground fresh water reservoirs and
river water sources under special national protection and restricting economic activities in the
large lakes’ basins constituting fresh water resources.

3.5.1.5. Introduce use-and-manage system for water basins, determine usable surface and
underground water reserves without destabilizing the ecosystem in the basins and strictly follow
water use limits. Develop a legal framework allowing no user to exceed use or consumption
rights.

3.5.1.6. Establish or enlarge national parks in order to place water sources at Hangai and Hentii
mountain ranges and the vicinity of Lake Huvsgul into the national reserve, and prohibit mining
activities in the parks.

3.5.1.7. Improve the surface water usage and make adjustments in the water flows of large
rivers, construct artificial water reservoirs for collecting waters of rain, snow and ice runoff in
humid climate areas rich with energy resources, establish covered water storage and
transmission systems in desert and steppe dry areas with severe surface evaporation.

3.5.1.8. Introduce water economy technology and rational water use practices, increase the
beneficial effects of prudent water and energy use, restrict the use of underground water for
agricultural irrigation and drinking water use for non-food production and support a strategy of
advanced technology purification of waste water and re-using purified water.

**3.5.2. Mitigation of impacts of climate change and land degradation**


-----

3.5.2.1. Develop a policy and capacity-building to mitigate the negative impacts of climate
change and desertification, establish a national structure for policy coordination,

mobilize international financial funds to undertake on-site inspection and study missions and
ensure comprehensive participation in the efforts.

3.5.2.2. Establish a legal environment to make payments for pasture use and transfer a
responsibility to possess, protect and restore the pasture, make a region-to-region assessment
on existing and potential capacity of pastures, set a proper proportion on number, type and
structure of livestock.

3.5.2.3. Place pasture resources, Menen steppe, desert oasis and saxaul bushes under special
national protection and establish methods for soil restoration and plant revival on grasslands
and develop resources to protect soil fertility and moisture.

3.5.2.4. Reduce land surface layer degradation through soil protection and introduction of
efficient irrigation equipment and technology.

3.5.2.5. Introduce science-and-technology know-how into animal husbandry business practices
and lifestyle of herdsmen, restore and preserve the traditional way of thinking and practical
herding abilities, enable herdsmen to sense and adapt their way of life into the rapidly changing
ecosystem. To this end, educate and implement pilot projects and programs on management
skills, increase and expand public training and information campaigns.

3.5.2.6. Make effective the legal arrangement motivating pasture users to restore and protect
degraded or destroyed lands due to mining activities.

3.5.2.7. Educate the public on protection of the natural environment, carry out countrywide
information dissemination through involvement of temples and civil society organizations
advocating historical and religious tradition and culture on protecting and preserving nature.


-----

**3.5.3. Preservation of biological diversity and prevention of resource deficiency**

3.5.3.1. Carry out a complex of scientifically-supported actions to research, protect and properly
use natural habitat resources, such as forests, rivers, lakes, wild animals and plants.

3.5.3.2. Provide sustainable natural development by evaluating ecological effects on the
management of natural resources. Make accurate eco-economic assessment of the natural
resources and establish a payment system for damages caused to the natural environment.

3.5.3.3. Prohibit export of wild plants, forest-derived resources and logging and increase the
forest reserve by two percent.

3.5.3.4. Introduce technology for substitution of wood, resolve the issue of fuel through
increasing production of wood-substituting materials, increase the import of wood and
wood-substituting materials.

3.5.3.5. Enrich the habitat with rare endangered wild animals and plants, as well as those
beneficial to natural ecosystems under special national protection and apply more

bio-technical methods to support and sustain those habitats. Establish a fund for preserving and
growing species and establishing a protected genetic fund for rare endangered wild animals,
plants and micro organisms.

3.5.3.6. While adapting non-native wild animals, plants or micro-organisms, prevent changes
from occurring in the biodiversity gene pool and establish a monitoring system.

3.5.3.7. Improve the legislative environment for regulating issues relating to gene modification
and ensure bio security, assess the risks and increase the capability to control and monitor
gene manipulation.


-----

3.5.3.8. Develop a road-map to protect nature, increase public participation in planning and
implementing relevant activities and encourage increased engagement of civil society, private
organizations and local population in forestation and reforestation, protection, planting,
restoring, researching and monitoring rare endangered species, targeted wild animals and
plants.

**3.5.4. Reduction of environmental pollution**

3.5.4.1. Implement a mechanism requiring polluters to pay for the harm and damage caused to
nature, restrict the amount of waste at the pollution sites, prohibit equipment and technology
adversely affecting nature and encourage the introduction of advanced technologies that
decrease waste.

3.5.4.2. Participate in international community efforts on combating trans-boundary air and
water pollution and increase environment evaluation and monitoring capacity.

3.5.4.3. Support a policy of developing facilities to recycle waste for energy production and
other raw materials. Improve the identification, management and monitoring of dangerous
wastes and prevent the emergence of harmful or dangerous waste concentration sites.

3.5.4.4. Produce energy, heat and clean fuel for public utilities through processing raw coal by
heating, gasification and fluidization, evaluate environment impacts so as to introduce advanced
effective production technology. Increase the use of solar, wind and renewable sources of
energy as well as nuclear energy.

3.5.4.5. Improve legislation and increase control capacity on chemical warfare or toxic agents,
biological materials and radioactive minerals.

**3.5.5. Reduce risks of natural calamities and disasters**


-----

3.5.5.1. Undertake a risk assessment of each disaster caused by natural or human factors or
technological failures and take actions to minimize the risks.

3.5.5.2. Strengthen the disaster management system, take actions at the national level to
reduce vulnerabilities, create conditions to encourage participation in the efforts by central and
local governments, specialized organizations, private entities and citizens and increase their
capacities.

3.5.5.3. Systematically prepare the equipment, human resources, research means and forecast
technology and ensure continuity of a network for monitoring and evaluation of natural
calamities and potential disasters, improve ways and means for prompt delivery of information
to customers and establish a disaster early-warning system.

**3.6. Information security**

Assurance of national interests on information and guaranteeing information integrity,
confidentiality and availability for the state, citizen and private organizations shall be a basis for
ensuring information security.

**3.6.1. Assurance of national interests in the field of information**

3.6.1.1. Information and information security are of vital importance to ensure national security,
support national development, generate national values and develop the social intellect.

3.6.1.2. Restrict outside entities’ attempts to influence the social psychology, social stability and
individual consciousness and ethics of Mongolians. Develop a capacity to disrupt or counter any
information that promotes or supports animosity, discrimination or hatred and develop a social
mentality of non-acceptance of such efforts.


-----

3.6.1.3. Establish and develop a capacity to minimize the danger of intrusion into the national
information infrastructure and attempts to weaken economic and social capability.

3.6.1.4. Rights of foreign-investment mass media activities in Mongolia shall be restricted if they
harm national security. Ownership and association with media shall be transparent and their
activities - realistic, balanced and responsible. Support publication and promotion of national
values through mass media and contain at proper level information on foreign religion, culture or
state policy.

3.6.1.5. Develop a national policy on legal arrangement, standard, management, organization
and training on information security to enhance social awareness and information security
knowledge.

3.6.1.7. Develop information security policy, procedures, risk management, internal auditing and
assessment capacity in governmental and private organizations.

3.6.1.8. Apply advanced cost-effective solutions on information security once a risk assessment
and recommendations are made. Highly educated and professional national specialists shall be
employed to manage information security systems for governmental organizations and key
national infrastructure facilities.

3.6.1.9. Support and develop national manufacture of competitive information and
communications systems, equipment and software, develop solutions to national information
security and reduce technological dependency.

3.6.1.10. Specifically support national fundamental and applied sciences research, study and
training on information and communication technology as well as information security.

3.6.1.11. Develop national capacity-building on computational forensics analysis to combat
cyber crime or investigate, detect and collect evidence of crimes.


-----

3.6.1.12. Develop and expand international cooperation to ensure information security, prevent
the danger of confrontation in information space and combat cyber crime.

**3.6.2. Integrity of information**

3.6.2.1. Integrity of information shall be ensured through protection of information, information
space and infrastructure from illegal intrusion, manipulation or theft.

3.6.2.2. In order to ensure the integrity of government information centralize accurate, realistic,
time-effective and essential information in the government data base, create conditions for
sharing and exchanging information by competent authorities.

3.6.2.3. Prohibit the collection, storage, use or transfer of information on an individual except as
authorized by law or permitted by the individual.

3.6.2.4. Develop national capacity-building to reduce vulnerabilities of the national information
space and infrastructure.

3.6.2.5. For the purpose of ensuring the integrity of electronic information develop a digital
signature public key infrastructure, reduce network system and web-site vulnerabilities,
establish secure and safe infrastructure, communications, information transmission and access
control through introducing an encryption system, malicious code protection system and
modification management.

3.6.2.6. With a view to develop information security infrastructure use principles of state-private
organizations’ partnership and provide policy support to internal outsourcing for information
security.

**3.6.3. Confidentiality of information**


-----

3.6.3.1. Safety shall be ensured through protection against illegal access, intrusion, disclosure
of information or its components.

3.6.3.2. Refine government information categorization and security classifications, improve legal
environment for management and organization of classified information protection to a higher
level.

3.6.3.3. Improve the legal framework to categorize, fix the value, record, store, transmit, transfer
and monitor state data or information.

3.6.3.4. Prevent information loss or leaks from communication lines or channels, establish
protected infrastructure for government networks and data exchanges, ensure security of
wireless communications.

3.6.3.5 Put in operation function-based access control at governmental organizations and key
infrastructure facilities, establish monitoring and analysis, establish a capacity-building to detect
and block any intrusion.

3.6.3.6. Introduce a cipher, digital signature and secure connection to transmit and store
electronic data at governmental organizations and key infrastructure facilities.

3.6.3.7. Prohibit intrusion on individual or family privacy, correspondence, information
confidentiality, rights and freedoms except in cases of ensuring national security and following
all legal procedures.

**3.6.4. Availability of information**

3.6.4.1. The availability of information shall be made by providing rights and freedom to search,


-----

collect, generate, transmit and disseminate information not prohibited by law and free access to
information infrastructure, components and services.

3.6.4.2. Supplying state policy makers and the public with wide-ranging information and
integrated understanding of threats and risks facing the nation shall be a prerequisite for
ensuring national security.

3.6.4.3. Establish a national security data base and develop a mechanism to provide citizens
with wide-ranging information on national security through the State Great Hural, local
government organizations and media. Maximize efforts to set up governance open information
sources, methodologies and procedures to efficiently use these sources in the electronic
governance services.

3.6.4.4. Facilitate and support mass media and infrastructure management to deliver
information to the public in a speedy and expeditious manner and ensure reliable operation.

3.6.4.5. Create a favorable environment for mass media organizations to look for and publish
information not prohibited by law.

3.6.4.6. Ensure that national information infrastructure develops a readiness capacity to counter
and overcome intrusions, develops planning for ensuring the continuity and restoration of
activities, establishes a monitoring, analysis and warning center, develops a national system on
rapid response to computer emergency situations.

**CHAPTER FOUR. NATIONAL SECURITY STRUCTURAL SYSTEM**

Mongolia shall improve and develop the national security structural system with a view to
provide consistent protection of national interests and ensure national independence and


-----

sovereignty in a rapidly changing security environment.

**4.1. Goals to improve the national security structural system**

4.1.1. The primary responsibility of the state shall be considering the national interests at all
stages of state affairs and giving emphasis to ensuring national security.

4.1.2. Make necessary legislation, management and organizational reforms on the structural
system to ensure national security and make it integrated and effective.

4.1.3. Improve the connectivity between institutions designated to ensure national security,
eliminate the duplication of activities and enhance inter-agency coordination.

4.1.4. Increase ethical, professional, responsibility and law-abiding requirements for personnel
in the organizations designated to ensure national security and enhance their legal status and
welfare.

4.1.5. Insurance of national security shall be based on information and analysis as well as
individual and collaborative efforts of the state, civil society, private entities and individuals.

4.1.6. Prioritize information collection and analysis in national security activities, timely
information supply to relevant governmental organizations, decision-makers and citizens,
establishment of enhanced national security data base and reform information compilation,
protection and use regimes.

4.1.7. Enhance national capacity of security and foreign policy research institutions and
increase their participation in state policy making.


-----

4.1.8. Promote and encourage participation of citizens, private businesses and civil society in
the efforts to provide and protect national security interests, enhance methods and areas of
cooperation.

4.1.9. Strengthen national capacity-building to overcome disasters, unexpected dangers and
incursions and reduce risks. Enhance a readiness for cooperation among organizations
designated to ensure national security and other governmental entities during an emergency.

**4.2. Structural System and management for ensuring national security**

4.2.1. The State Great Hural, the President of Mongolia, the National Security Council, the
Government of Mongolia, law enforcement and special task-force organizations, ministries and
local governments shall govern national security functions.

4.2.2. Organizations with legislative, executive and judicial power and authority, local
self-governing organizations shall implement this concept expressed in the Constitution of
Mongolia, legislation and other legal resolutions within their respective jurisdiction.

4.2.3. Mongolia’s citizens and civil society institutions shall strictly observe legislation to ensure
national security and take active part in its implementation.

4.2.4. The National Security Council shall be responsible for coordinating nation-wide efforts for
ensuring the implementation of the National Security Concept and security related national
legislation and governmental policies.

4.2.5. The National Security Council shall coordinate the National Security Concept
implementation policies, strategies and actions and adopt rules and regulations.

4.2.6. Governors of the capital city, aimags, sums and districts shall be mandated to organize
the implementation of the National Security Concept, related legislation, policies and


-----

resolutions.

4.2.7. Information and reports delivered by relevant designated officials and other information
received by the National Security Council through its working channels shall comprise the
national security data base.

**4.3. Implementation and monitoring system of the National Security Concept**

4.3.1. The National Security Council shall develop criteria on monitoring and analyzing
implementation of the National Security Concept and evaluation of the security situation.

4.3.2. Sub-Council Members of the National Security Council, Governors of aimags and capital
city shall communicate their information and reports to the National Security Council.

4.3.3. The National Security Council shall administer constant monitoring on National Security
Concept implementation, related legislation, policies and resolutions and evaluate the status of
national security condition.

4.3.4. The Head of the National Security Council shall make annual report on progress of the
National Security Concept implementation and national security condition to the State Great
Hural in a closed session.

**CHAPTER FIVE. OTHER PROVISIONS**

The National Security Concept implementation policies and actions shall not be interrupted and
if necessary shall be modified or improved in accordance with the rapidly changing security


-----

environment.


-----

