## National Risk Assessment


-----

# National Risk Assessment 6

#### The Network of Analysts for National Security
 Dr M.G. Mennen (editor)


-----

The National Risk Assessment 6 has been produced by the Network of Analysts for National Security (ANV) for the
National Steering Committee for National Safety and Security (SNV).

National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM)
Research and Documentation Centre (WODC), Ministry of Security and Justice
General Intelligence and Security Service of the Netherlands (AIVD)
Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research (TNO)
Netherlands Institute of International Relations ‘Clingendael’
International Institute of Social Studies (ISS), Erasmus University Rotterdam

Contact: marcel.mennen@rivm.nl

Project number: E/609042/14.

© RIVM 2014
Extracts from this publication may be reproduced if cited as follows:
‘National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM) title of publication and year of publication’


-----

# Contents

**1 Introduction** **4**

**2 Scenarios for the NRA 6** **5**

**2.1 Far-right extremism scenario** **5**

Aim and rationale for inclusion 5

Scenario description 5

**2.2 Lek Dike breach/Flooding of Lopiker- and Krimpenerwaard scenario** **7**

Aim and rationale for inclusion 7

Scenario description 7

**2.3 Foreign enterprise unmasked as a criminal Trojan horse** **9**

Aim and rationale for inclusion 9

Scenario description 9

**3 Comparative analysis of the scenarios** **11**

The risk diagram 11

Positions of the new scenarios in the risk diagram 12

What are the main effects of the new scenarios? 14

Which are the most relevant impact criteria in view of all the scenarios? 15

**Appendix 1** **17**

The National Network of Safety and Security Analysts 17

**Appendix 2** **18**

Organisations involved in the NRA 18


-----

# Introduction


In support of the inter-departmental National Safety and
Security Strategy of the Netherlands, a National Risk
Assessment (known by the initials NRA) is carried out once
a year. The exercise involves exploring a number of safety
and security themes by analysing various scenarios in the
context of a standard reference framework. The approach
is referred to as the NRA methodology[1]. The findings are
intended to provide policy makers with insight into the
relative likelihood and impact of the various scenarios.
Such insight is important for specifying capability
implications, formulating policy, and defining priorities,
with the aim of preparing the Netherlands as well as
possible for various types of disaster and threat.

This report summarises the NRA 6. This NRA and the
constituent scenarios have been independently produced
by the Network of Analysts for National Security (known
by the Dutch initials ANV). The ANV is an authoritative
knowledge network, which since 2011 has been tasked by
the Ministry of Security and Justice with performing the
annual NRA on behalf of the National Steering Committee
for National Safety and Security (known by the Dutch
initials SNV).
The NRA 6 examined three scenarios: Far-right extremism,
Lek Dike breach/Flooding of Lopiker- and Krimpenerwaard

1 The NRA methodology is described in a manual entitled Working

with Scenarios, Risk Analysis, and Capabilities in the National Safety

and Security Strategy (2014), published by the Ministry of Security

and Justice


and Foreign enterprise unmasked as a criminal Trojan
horse. For each of the scenarios addressed in the NRA 6,
the impact and likelihood assessments have been used as
the basis for a capability analysis.

In this report a summary of each scenario is given,
preceded by an explanation on its aim and rationale for
inclusion. Subsequently the NRA risk diagram and the
main conclusions of the analysis of each scenario’s
likelihood and impact are provided. Consideration is also
given to the impact scores: which criteria often yield high
scores, and what can be concluded from such patterns.


-----

# Scenarios for the NRA 6

### 2.1 Far-right extremism   scenario


#### Aim and rationale for inclusion

On the advice of the Network of Analysts for National
Security (ANV), the National Steering Committee for
National Safety and Security (SNV) has selected the theme
of Extremism for the NRA 6. The main reason for this is
that the extremism-related scenarios produced for
previous NRAs are now several years old and develop­
ments regarding the issue of radicalisation have increased
the urgency of fresh analysis. In order to define the theme
of Extremism, a brainstorming session was organised with
experts from the ANV and a number of policy advisors
from the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations
and the Ministry of Security and Justice. The experts and
advisors indicated that updating the scenario for the issue
of right-wing extremism (referred to here as far-right
extremism) would be the most desirable option for the
National Risk Assessment. Other subjects relating to
polarisation and radicalisation – such as left-wing
extremism, Muslim extremism and animal-rights
extremism – were also considered important, albeit less
urgent. It was therefore advised that these issues are
addressed during the next National Risk Assessment.


#### Scenario description

At the beginning of 2015, there is a major economic crisis
and mass unemployment. As a result, anti-government,
anti-Europe and anti-immigration sentiments are
successfully exploited by 'populist' movements within the
Netherlands. By this point, the traditional far-right groups
in the Netherlands (neo-Nazis and ultranationalists)
haven't yet figured out how to capitalise on these
opportunities.

In 2016, this situation begins to change following a split in
the 'right-wing populist' party set up several years before.
The parliamentary group in the Dutch Lower House is
divided regarding whether or not to co-operate with
groups in other European countries that hold either
private or open anti-Jewish and anti-Semitic viewpoints.
The split in 2016 results in two 'right-wing populist'
parties, both with strongly anti-Islamic and Eurosceptic
viewpoints, with one of these parties also embracing a
northern European identity and occupying an anti-Zionis­
tic position.

In mid-2016, a number of medium-sized southern
European banks go bust despite years of financial support


-----

from the EU emergency fund. On the internet and on
social media, unconfirmed reports regularly appear of
large-scale mismanagement and corruption by an alleged
network of southern European bank directors of Jewish
descent. The web forum of the Schwarzwald Council – a
think-tank that focuses on opinion forming about the
'Northern European identity' – regularly displays messages
making such insinuations. Despite the think-tank's claims
that they have no connections to far-right extremist
groups, the forum also regularly features other racist,
anti-Semitic and anti-Islamic posts. A fire at a mosque in
Munich in May 2017, which kills 12 people, is applauded by
a number of forum contributors. In the Dutch think-tank,
like those in many other Western European countries,
participants have been involved in threats against
prominent figures in the Islamic and Jewish communities.

In the meantime, the old anti-capitalist attitude of the
traditional right-wing extremists is gaining new momen­
tum. This movement, which a few years earlier distanced
itself from the classic Nazi ideology of Adolf Hitler,
subscribes predominantly to the early, more anti-capitalist
ideology of the 1920s Nazi party. The movement conducts
active online propaganda that preaches the maintenance
of social achievements for natives at the expense of
non-natives, hatred of what it sees as the neoliberal
European Union, the supposed threat of 'capitalist'
Zionism and Judaism around the world (as 'they' purpor­
tedly seek to control the Dutch government and the
financial world) and anti-capitalist 'solutions' to the global
financial crisis. Their opinions regularly coincide with those
held in anarchist circles. Due to the weakness and limited
influence of far-left extremist groups in the Netherlands,
there is growing willingness amongst these groups to join
forces with the far-right extremists. This development is
also evident in other European countries.

Collaborations are set up between far-left and far-right
extremists, serving as a hotbed for further radicalisation.
In 2016, a previously unknown group known as the
Anti-Capitalist Alliance (ACA) carries out an arson attack on
the Ministry of Finance in The Hague and threatens the
CEO of the Bank of the Netherlands. Cyber attacks made
possible by collaborations between far-left hacktivists and
far-right extremists bring down government and bank
websites. The police and the General Intelligence and
Security Service of the Netherlands (AIVD) work together
with their German counterparts following clues about
possible links between the ACA and the New Red Army
Faction in Germany.

Another development is the rise of the far-right
'Neighbourly Assistance' movement. Originating in
Sweden, the group is soon replicated in other European
countries The movement focuses on providing aid to


senior citizens and other vulnerable people in deprived
areas, providing them with food and care. However, they
expressly exclude Jews and Muslims from the scope of
their activities. Eventually, a European collaboration is
created under the name European League for Neighbourly
Assistance (ELNA). From 2017, regular attacks against
banks, Muslims and Jews are carried out in the
Netherlands, in which individual members of the move­
ment are involved. The movement calls upon its members
to boycott democratic procedures and reject all contact
with the authorities.

In mid-2017, a number of young members of the ACA and
the ELNA comes together and forms what they refer to as
the Public Defence League (PDL). In collaboration with
Dutch-based members of the German New National
Socialist Underground (NNSU), they decide to carry out a
series of murders targeting entrepreneurs of Jewish and
Muslim descent. This results in major unrest amongst
Jewish and Muslim entrepreneurs, many of which decide
to hire personal security. Many radical websites call for
Muslims to set up armed protection groups.

By the end of 2017, the Netherlands appears to be in the
clutches of an escalating spiral of violence. Violent
confrontations between far-right extremists and radical
Muslims supported by anti-fascist groups become a
regular occurrence. They often result in fatal shootings,
many times with innocent bystanders as victims. The PDL
continues to carry out attacks, with targets now including
politicians of Jewish or Muslim descent. Furthermore,
arson attacks are frequently carried out on synagogues
and mosques.

In response to the escalating violence, a widespread public
protest movement develops. Demonstrations are
conducted in the major cities, organised by a national
alliance of Jewish, Christian, Islamic and Humanist groups
in addition to other social organisations. At the end of a
huge demonstration in a major city, in which MPs, cabinet
members and prominent figures from the business
community, trade unions and churches also participate,
anti-fascists and ELNA members come to blows. The
tussles between the two groups continue all night,
resulting in some serious injuries and substantial material
damage in the inner city.

The 'populist right-wing' parties strongly distance
themselves from the increasing violence. Prominent
members of the Schwarzwald Council publicly state that
terrorism achieves nothing. The government covertly
attempts to seek contact with members of the
Schwarzwald Council to ask them to establish contacts
with prominent figures amongst the young membership
of the ELNA In the foreign press the Netherlands is


-----

#### Scenario description

This scenario involves the same type of weather that
caused the 1995 flood threats. In the first weeks of January
of that year, a large volume of snow fell in the Rhine river
basin. Once the weather changed, the soil became
saturated due to the melting surface snow and the
still-frozen subsoil. Days of persistent rain in the Rhine
river basin resulted in the rainwater being quickly drained
from the river, causing high discharge-water levels.

The scenario plays out in the dike-ring region of Lopikerand Krimpenerwaard (dike ring 15). The southern bounda­
ry of this dike-ring area is the relatively weak Lek Dike.
This area borders the northern part of the Hollandse IJssel
River. The northern watercourse along the canalised
Hollandse IJssel separates dike ring 15 from the western
Central Holland dike ring (dike ring 14). This watercourse is
too low to hold back the floodwater, which will result in
the flooding of part of dike ring area 14 (cascade effect).

Elsewhere along the Rhine branches and in the lower river
district there are sections of the dike with comparable
chances of failure. The threat caused by the high dischar­
ge-water levels will ensure that the attention of the water
boards and the preparation conducted by safety regions,
local authorities and emergency services has to be focused
on practically all of the dike rings along the Rhine
branches, the Meuse and the lower river district. In all
regions, permanent dike monitoring and scaled-up crisis
management will be engaged and measures will be taken
(sandbags, dike heightening) to reinforce relative weak
spots in the dike.

One day before the dike breach, water bailiffs in the region
report that according to the experts, the dikes are
weakening so quickly that there is a 'real' risk of a breach
in the next few days. Experts from the safety regions
estimate that if this happens and the residents are unable
to get out of the area, that hundreds of thousands of
people could end up trapped without food, drinking water,
electricity or heating, and without assistance. The
authorities within the safety regions in dike rings 15 and 44
decide to jointly evacuate their residents. However, there
is too little capacity and too little time to engage people
from other regions or even to evacuate the eastern region
of dike ring 14, partly because of the critical situation along
other sections of the river. Furthermore, there is a threat of
flooding from the Lower Rhine region in Germany, which
will – should it occur – result in huge volumes of river
water pouring into the Netherlands.

The decision to evacuate is taken in the morning to enable
the residents to pack their things and leave by daylight. Via
the media residents are informed of the areas to be


increasingly described as an unstable country. Tourism
falls and investors from Muslim countries and even the
United States begin to question the wisdom of involve­
ment in the Netherlands. Public opinion in these countries
paints the picture that many Dutch people sympathise
with the far-right extremists and calls are made to boycott
Dutch products.

### 2.2 Lek Dike breach/Flooding   of Lopiker- and 
  Krimpenerwaard scenario

#### Aim and rationale for inclusion

The results of the long-term study 'Veiligheid Nederland in
Kaart' (National Safety Analysis for the Netherlands)
conducted by the Ministry of Infrastructure and the
Environment into the likelihood of flooding in Dutch
dike-ring areas, warrant the creation of a new scenario
concerning flooding in the river district. In contrast to flood
scenarios from previous NRAs, this is not a worst-credible
flood, but a flood that has a higher risk of occurrence than
the current norms, according to the recent insights into dike
strength in the Netherlands. The increased risk of flooding is
a consequence of the dike-failure mechanisms of microsta­
bility and piping, and the unpredictability and unmanagea­
bility of these mechanisms.

In consultation with the organisations concerned, a scenario
was chosen that involves the flooding of Lopiker- and
Krimpenerwaard originating from the River Lek, followed by
a cascade effect in the Central Holland dike ring.
Furthermore, it was decided to include a cross-border
flooding threat from Germany. In the scenario, this
eventuality will not manifest itself: it will remain 'just' a
threat. The added value this provides is that governments
and organisations will be forced to extend the focus of their
capabilities to include greater areas of the river district. This
is particularly relevant with regard to co-ordination
between various safety regions and evacuation
opportunities.

In this scenario, the predictability (particularly with regard
to timescale) and ability to evacuate the affected area will
play a major role. The selected scenario involves both an
area that floods relatively quickly and an area that takes
several days to flood. The scenario also involves a signifi­
cant element of surprise: the flood proves unpredictable
because the dike appears to be weak even at low water
levels. This makes horizontal evacuation almost or entirely
impossible. As a result, the various government bodies
must select alternative options such as vertical evacuation


-----

evacuated and the routes that must be taken to do so.
They are also asked to help to evacuate residents requiring
care or assistance. All municipalities in the evacuation area
set up hotlines for people who are unable to evacuate
either on their own or with the assistance of others. The
residents of the evacuation area react calmly; no panic
ensues. The evacuation slowly swings into action.

That same evening, there is a breach in the Lek Dike west
of Nieuwegein. Only a small proportion of the residents of
dike rings 15 and 44 have left the area, a proportion were
about to leave and others had packed their things and
were ready to go the following morning. Panic breaks out
in Nieuwegein and IJsselstein. There is also growing unrest
elsewhere in the region. There is a sudden surge of people
rushing to leave by car or public transport.

In the first few hours after the breach, the water level rises
rapidly. Major problems begin to occur as people are no
longer able to escape the region. Most of the residents
seek refuge in buildings or look for higher ground. For
some, it is already too late. Many drown, some in their
cars, others (particularly the elderly) at home or in the
street, unable to outrun the rapidly encroaching waters.
The water penetrates both dike ring 14 and dike ring 15. In
just a few hours the water flows through viaducts under
the A2 motorway. IJsselstein is immersed. The Lopik
transmitter mast is surrounded by water, but it remains in
operation. It is clearly evident that large regions of dike
rings 14 and 15 are going to flood. The images of people
drowning as they flee the floodwaters send shockwaves
through the nation. In dike ring 15, the eastern region of
dike ring 14, the city of Utrecht and the surrounding area,
the chaos is complete. There is little the police can do, and
the traffic grinds to a halt.

The authorities in the affected safety regions decide to
halt horizontal evacuation and initiate vertical evacuation.
People in the areas under threat are urgently advised to
seek a safe, high place and stay there. Evacuation by car is
strongly discouraged. Repeated warnings emphasise that
the threat applies to the entirety of the river district.
However, this warning is largely ineffective. In Utrecht,
Nieuwegein and IJsselstein, most of the citizens have
sought refuge in a high place, but in other areas, many
residents have nevertheless decided to evacuate by car:
most of them are already en route. In the flooded areas,
both mobile phone networks and land lines are inopera­
tive. In the hours and days that follow, other vital facilities
also fail.

Approximately a week after the breach, the flooding
reaches its peak. By this time, the area is practically
inaccessible. Major food shortages affect the disaster area
and attempts at food distribution are chaotic In the


western region of dike ring 15, the army has succeeded in
erecting an emergency dike around the high-voltage
substation. The dike is expected to be tall and strong
enough to repel the waters and ensure the operation of
the substation. The emergency power generators are
divided between hospitals, care homes and water boards
insofar as they are needed. However, the supply of diesel
for the generators is a major problem. In the disaster area,
looting of shops and houses is reported. People who have
left their houses call on the police to guard their property.
However, the police simply don't have the capacity to do
so and continue to focus their efforts on rescuing people.

The providers of vital products and services such as
electricity, gas, sanitation, drinking water and telecommu­
nication were able to disconnect the facilities in the
majority of the disaster area soon enough to prevent as
much damage (to areas outside the disaster area) as
possible.

It takes well over a week to get all of the people in the
flooded area to safety. Homes, office blocks and other
buildings are checked for any remaining survivors. Bodies
of the victims continually materialise. Soldiers and
emergency workers in the safety regions begin to clear up
the cadavers of drowned cattle. This involves a great deal
of urgency in order to prevent disease.

The hole in the dike in Lopik has now expanded to 100
metres wide and 15 metres deep. It cannot be sealed
immediately as the current is too strong for light materials
to plug the gap, and the dike is too weak to enable supply
of coarser materials. It takes two weeks following the
breach to stabilise the situation and for the Lek's water
levels to recede enough to enable repair. The threat of a
dike breach elsewhere on the major rivers dissipates.

The flooded area is too low-lying to drain naturally, so all
of the water has to be pumped away. Using all of the
pumps that the Netherlands possesses and is able to buy/
borrow from abroad, it takes 10 months to pump all of the
water out of the area. Throughout this period, vital
facilities and infrastructure such as roads, electricity,
sanitation, drinking water and telecommunications are
unavailable in the disaster area. The area remains deserted
for a long time. Saturation of the subsoil caused by the
flooding results in a great deal of water damage and cable
breaks, which take months to put right.

Two years after the breach, the area has been cleaned up,
the buildings repaired and the vital infrastructure restored.
The residents have returned and life begins to get back to
normal. An upgraded distribution network for both
electricity and gas is also in place following a project that
ran for over a year


-----

### 2.3 Foreign enterprise 
  unmasked as a criminal   Trojan horse scenario

#### Aim and rationale for inclusion

Large-scale fraud and crime can potentially pose a threat
to national security. Furthermore, global criminal subver­
sion of mainstream activities has been shown to be on the
rise. In a 2013 report by the Advisory Council on
International Affairs (AIV), it was advised that more
attention be focused on the topic of cross-border criminal
activity. International organised crime has therefore been
selected as an issue for a scenario in the NRA 6.

In order to determine a specific scenario within this broad
issue, consultations and brainstorming sessions were held
with experts and representatives from relevant govern­
ment bodies. Based on the information gathered, four
scenarios were proposed. These proposals were then
discussed and a single proposal was selected for further
elaboration into a comprehensive scenario.

The following considerations played a major part in the
selection of this particular scenario:
1. The scenario is inspired by recent political revolutions

and conflicts in the Middle East, and in particular the
resulting large volumes of flight capital that are too
substantial to be processed using traditional moneylaundering channels.

2. As a result, there is increasing subversion of main­

stream commercial activities by cross-border criminal
organisations.

3. The Netherlands is an attractive location for non-Euro­

pean organisations, particularly due to the country's
key position in Western European logistical networks.

4. The Trojan horse aspect is central to the scenario, i.e.

the fact that it is only discovered at a late stage that a
foreign enterprise established in the Netherlands is
partially a front for illegal activity. Furthermore, it is
found that the enterprise in question is not only
involved in money-laundering practices within the
Netherlands, but also seeks to profit from other
criminal activities.

5. The potential damage goes further than just economic

damage. Due to the close ties that the criminal
enterprise has with politicians and authorities, in
addition to the services it provides to wider society, the
unmasking and collapse of the organisation results in
political instability and social unrest.

In order to produce a complete scenario encompassing the
potential effects on national security an indicative scoring


system was established with the aim of compiling data
and aspects based on the selected issue and the impact
criteria designated as relevant. This ensured a comprehen­
sive scenario involving a meaningful and appropriate
capability analysis.

#### Scenario description

Coralart, a recently established enterprise from one of the
Gulf states, is making major investments in the
Netherlands with the aim of creating a base for strategic
expansion in Europe. The planned investments for the first
ten years amount to twelve billion euros and include
activities such as prestigious construction projects, joint
ventures in the transport sector and logistics, and an
aggressive expansion of various financial services. At first
glance, Coralart seems to be an ultramodern investment
and holding company. However, in reality, it is simply a
vehicle for processing the stolen riches of fallen Arab
regimes. The formal management structure has been
infiltrated by criminal elements, creating a parallel criminal
circuit of money-laundering processes, profit pursuit and
decision making. The CEO's special legal advisor and the
management of the HR and financial departments are
strategic posts that are covertly under orders from a
second (criminal) management level and largely operate
as a clan. This alternative management system within the
organisation works behind the scenes and most employ­
ees have no idea it exists.

Initially, the business is a great success. By conducting
intensive lobbying and media activities, making substan­
tial injections into the Dutch economy (particularly several
crisis-hit sectors), directly and indirectly creating 20,000
jobs and carrying out a series of social projects in deprived
areas, the business is able to establish an excellent
reputation with the general public and gain access to the
upper echelons of Dutch politics. The prospect of further
investment in the Dutch economy ensures broad public
and political support.

However, within three years, this excellent reputation is
tainted by judicial inquiries into a number of the conglo­
merate's business units. Despite the slow progress and
limited co-ordination of the inquiries in addition to strong
political resistance, it eventually becomes clear that the
illegal activities in question are not one-off incidents but
part of a systematic operation to launder money and
reinvest the proceeds of criminal activity.

The spectacular demise of the organisation following this
discovery eventually results in the loss of 20,000 jobs
(although some of these are saved by selling affected firms
to new owners) and the cessation of the enterprise's


-----

activities in the Netherlands, which achieved total annual
turnover of five billion euros per year. The same applies to
the annual flow of thirty billion euros via the currency,
credit and transfer services conducted by the enterprise's
financial division. Countless charitable activities are
cancelled and major construction projects are halted.

The collapse of the enterprise also results in a legitimacy
crisis at various political and administrative levels and the
resignation of a number of ministers and political leaders.
Furthermore, the continued popularity of the company in
certain underprivileged areas/communities and in its
home base of Rotterdam results in social unrest and


protests in the streets. A great deal of friction is created
between the established liberal media and local communi­
ties. Populist politicians who run campaigns promising to
clean up the government and defend the rights of ordinary
working people rapidly gain support. Their words are
given even more weight when criminal vendettas relating
the termination of Coralart's illegal activities claim the
lives of nine people, mostly foreigners. New laws and
control measures for foreign investment, established with
the intention of restoring international trust in Dutch ports
and trade facilities, initially result in a decline in foreign
investment.


-----

# Comparative analysis of the scenarios

#### The risk diagram


The findings of the likelihood and impact analysis of each
scenario according to the NRA methodology are depicted


in the risk diagram (Fig. 1). The scenarios developed for the
NRA 6 are in green and underlined for ease of recognition.


**Figure 1 Position of each scenario in the risk diagram**

Worst-credible coastal food
Dyke Ring 14 food

Malicious prolonged electricity failure

Mass polarisation Criminal subversion of vital businesses

Weapens control in a failed state Cyber espionage

Nuclear incident IP network failure (ICT)

Confrontation between ethnic Geopolitical oil Manipulation of public administration
minorities and extreme right supply crisis Severe infuenza pandemic

Rhine-IJssel food Widespread unrest Mineral shortages

**Far-right extremism** Cyber confict

Malicious power supply failure **Lek Dike breach - fooding of polders**

Shipping accident

Unrest in problem neighourhoods Animal rights extremism Severe snow storm

Satelite disruption due to solar storm

Muslim extremismCrisis outside the EU Black ice

Response to exogenic jihadist threat

National power failure

Chemical incident Cyber hacktivism **Foreign enterprise unmasked as criminal TH**

Rail crash Malicious gas supply failure Malicious ICT disruption in critical sector Unrest regarding Salafsm

Very severe storm

Food shortages-soya beans Wildfre

Animal rights activism

Violent loner Right-wing extremism

Extreme heat and drought

Mild infuenza pandemic

Lef-wing extremism

Manipulation of share market

Internet exchange failure


Highly unlikely Unlikely Somewhat likely Likely Highly likely


-----

The risk diagram’s vertical axis represents the impact
score. The vertical axis is graduated logarithmically, so that
each category of impact is three times as high as the
preceding category. The diagram’s horizontal axis
represents the likelihood. The graduation of this axis is
such that each successive category represents a likelihood
ten times greater than the preceding category.

Table 1 shows the scores (expected values, upper and
lower limits) of each scenario for likelihood and impact
criteria.

#### Positions of the new scenarios in the risk diagram

The overall impact of the Far-right extremism and Lek Dike
_breach/flooding of Lopiker- and Krimpenerwaard scenarios are_
assessed as serious to very serious, with a lesser impact of
substantial to serious for the Foreign enterprise unmasked as a
_criminal Trojan horse scenario._

The Far-right extremism scenario is classified as unlikely
(albeit in the upper range of this particular category) and
the other two scenarios are classified as somewhat likely.

In the Far-right extremism scenario, various developments
result in an upswing in extremist activity against Muslim
and Jewish communities. Far-left and far right extremist
groups unite in their campaign against capitalist excess
and a European 'Neighbourly Assistance' movement with
far-right tendencies gains growing support in many
countries, including the Netherlands. There is an increa­
sing number of violent incidents carried out against
Muslims and Jews. The violence escalates when a number
of young members of various movements set up a new
group willing to collaborate with a German neo-Nazi
group. They assassinate entrepreneurs of Muslim and
Jewish descent, resulting in protest demonstrations that
escalate into serious riots. Extremely violent confrontati­
ons between far-right extremists, radical Muslims and
other groups also become a regular occurrence, resulting
in a number of fatalities.

Consequently, feelings of insecurity grow within many
sections of society, particularly the Muslim and Jewish
communities. In some areas, many people are afraid to
walk the streets due to the violence and intimidation
perpetrated by certain groups. Respect for and tolerance
of minority groups disintegrate. The government has
insufficient control over the situation and public confi­
dence in the government gradually declines. The extreme
violence also places a heavy strain on the emergency
services


These effects are manifest in high scores for the criteria of
violation of the democratic system and the socio-psycho­
logical impact. The events in this scenario result in the
Netherlands gaining an international reputation as an
unstable country. Tourism declines and some investors
withdraw from the country. In many nations, there are
calls to boycott Dutch products. Fatalities occur and a
number of people suffer psychological damage. The
material and economic damage caused is considerable.
Taking all of this into consideration, the impact rating has
been determined as serious to very serious.

The likelihood of this scenario occurring is estimated as
unlikely to somewhat likely. There is hard evidence that
certain developments described in the scenario could
occur in real life. However, most experts consider it
unlikely or highly unlikely that such a substantial spiral of
violence would occur. After all, our society is characterised
by a certain degree of resilience, making people less
amenable to activities that violate the democratic system
and unlikely to tolerate extreme violence. However,
experts do warn against further decline of social antennae
and advocate that curbing anti-democratic movements in
society should remain a focal point.

Rather unexpected flooding of the river district can result
in significant problems, such as evacuating the population
and keeping vital services running. This is shown from the
_Lek Dike breach/flooding of Lopiker- and Krimpenerwaard_
_scenario. In this scenario, following a long period of rain_
and snowfall in the Rhine river basin and high dischargewater levels in the rivers, a relatively weak section of the
dike on the River Lek is breached, resulting in the flooding
of dike ring 14.


-----

**Table 1 Likelihood and impact criterion scores**

**Far-right** **Lek Dike** **Foreign**
**extremism** **breach** **enterprise**

**criminal TH**

**Likelihood** EV Bhigh C Chigh
LL B C B
UL C Chigh Dhigh

**Impact criteria**

1.1 Encroachment on the territory of the Netherlands EV D D X
LL X D X
UL D D X

1.2 Infringement of the international position of the Netherlands EV D A A
LL B X X
UL E B D

2.1 Fatalities EV B C A
LL B C A
UL C C A

2.2. Seriously injured and chronically ill EV C C B
LL B B A
UL D E C

2.3 Physical suffering (lack of basic necessities of life) EV X B X
LL X A X
UL X D X

3.1 Economic security EV B D D
LL A D C
UL C D D

4.1 Long-term impact on the environment and on nature EV X A X
LL X A X
UL X B X

5.1 Disruption of everyday life EV A D B
LL A C A
UL B E B

5.2 Violation of the democratic system EV E A C
LL E X B
UL E D D

5.3 Socio-psychological impact EV D D C
LL D B A
UL E E E


EV = Expected Value, LL = Lower Limit, UL = Upper Limit, X = Not applicable
Likelihood: A = highly unlikely, B = unlikely, C = moderately likely, D = likely, E = very likely
Impact: A = limited, B = substantial, C = serious, D = very serious, E = catastrophic


Although the authorities begin to evacuate beforehand,
the breach is still fairly unexpected, resulting in the
drowning of several hundred people and the cattle in the
adjacent polder. The emergency services are sluggish and
chaotic, due in part to the need to reserve capacity for
possible breaches elsewhere. This is because at the same
time, a flood threat also exists in the Lower Rhine region in
Germany, which would result in excess river water flowing
into the Netherlands (although this situation does not
materialise). Several days after the breach, a large area has
been flooded and the vital infrastructure in this area is out
of action or has been cut off as a precautionary measure.
It takes ten months to pump the floodwaters away and
the entire recovery takes approximately two years


The impact with regard to encroachment on the territory
of the Netherlands is therefore high, as is also the case for
the disruption of everyday life. The total cost of the
damage is estimated at 13 billion euros (high impact). The
temporary/permanent failure of vital infrastructure in the
area (in the rest of the country it remains largely unaffec­
ted) results in a considerable lack of basic necessities of
life for the flood victims. The socio-psychological impact is
also substantial. The impact on the environment and on
nature remains limited as the area does not contain any
heavy industry or major storage sites of harmful agents or
other hazardous substances. The total impact score is
serious to very serious.


-----

The total scenario is considered somewhat likely. This
score is a direct reflection of the failure calculations
conducted within the scope of the study 'Veiligheid
Nederland in Kaart' (National Safety Analysis for the
Netherlands), which also took into account existing policy/
measures and the consequences described in the scenario.
It is noted that although the scenario is representative of
the situation in the river district as a whole, certain dike
rings have a lower or higher likelihood of failure. For this
reason, the likelihood is classified within a range (albeit a
rather narrow one) of somewhat likely to likely.

In the scenario Foreign enterprise unmasked as a criminal Trojan
_horse, a recently set-up enterprise from Dubai named_
Coralart decides to establish itself in the Netherlands. The
enterprise presents itself as an advanced investment
vehicle for the Middle East's up-and-coming billionaire
class. It invests heavily in the construction sector, the
logistics sector and the financial-services sector. With bold
projects and major investments, the enterprise makes a
considerable contribution to the Dutch economy (which is
in need of such a boost) resulting in a warm reception for
the organisation amongst politicians and authorities.

However, within a few years, it gradually becomes evident
that the enterprise is also involved in large-scale criminal
activities such as money laundering, fraud, drugs traffic,
extortion and bribery. With scandal piling on top of
scandal, the Coralart empire comes crashing down and the
directors of the Dutch subsidiary are arrested.

Consequently, more than 20,000 jobs are lost, a large
number of businesses go bust (with a total annual
turnover of 5 billion euros), social organisations lose a
great deal of funding and all kinds of construction projects
and charitable activities are halted. The economic impact
is therefore very serious. The demise of the enterprise also
relates in tension within Dutch society, politics and
government. Research shows that a number of politicians
and administrators had close ties with the enterprise and
turned a blind eye to numerous issues. Pressure from the
media and wider society results in the resignation of three
ministers and the instigation of a parliamentary inquiry.
There is also a great deal of disquiet amongst local
communities affected by the national judicial establish­
ment’s cancellation of projects and activities. Public
governance and the political system are considerably
affected, core social values come under pressure, a
proportion of the population is angry or insecure and trust
in government bodies, institutions and businesses is
severely damaged.

These effects are reflected in considerably high scores for
the criteria of violation of the democratic system and
socio-psychological impact A number of direct victims


(job losses, extortion or intimidation) can become
chronically ill from the stress. Our country's image also
takes a blow, especially in the eyes of other Western
countries. Taking all of this into consideration, the impact
rating has been determined as substantial to serious. It is
noted that the uncertainty level regarding a number of
impact scores – and therefore of the total impact – is high.

The likelihood of the scenario is also subject to a high
degree of uncertainty. On the one hand, it was stated that
although some of the events could occur independently of
each other, the scenario as a whole is considered unlikely.
On the other hand, arguments exist to justify a high
likelihood, for example, the fact that many of the elements
of the scenario have already become reality. Based on the
average value, the score has been set at somewhat likely
to likely, with an error margin ranging from unlikely to
highly likely.

#### What are the main effects of the new scenarios?

The three scenarios in this NRA differ greatly with regard
to cause, triggers, duration and consequences. These
differences are reflected by the different impact scores.

The natural disaster in the Lek Dike breach/flooding of
_Lopiker- and Krimpenerwaard scenario predominantly causes_
physical damage and the failure of a large proportion of
the vital infrastructure in the region. This is shown by the
high score for the corresponding criteria, such as the
encroachment of the territory of the Netherlands,
disruption of everyday life, lack of basic necessities of life
and economic damage. The flooding also results in many
fatalities, serious injuries and chronic illnesses, and the
socio-psychological impact is severe. There is also some
damage to the environment, albeit limited.

The scores for the social scenario of Far-right extremism
paint an entirely different picture. In this scenario, the
impact on the international position of the Netherlands
and the violation of the democratic system are the
dominant criteria in addition to the socio-psychological
impact. The latter criterion has a clearly different cause
compared to the flooding scenario, as it is caused by
unrest, fear and anger stemming from social tension and
extreme violence, not a natural disaster. There are deaths
and injuries, and the economic damage is considerable. As
a number of neighbourhoods and regions (of limited size
but with high population density) are controlled for
several months by violent and intimidating groups, a
number of experts interpret this as a substantial encroach­
ment on the territory of the Netherlands However others


-----

**Figure 2 Frequencies with which impact criteria are scored ‘not relevant’ or ‘limited’ (0 or A), ‘substantial’ or ‘serious’ (B or C) or ‘very**
serious’ or ‘catastrophic’ (D or E)

Score percentage

90%


80%

70%

60%


50%

40%


30%

20%


10%

0%


N/A or limited (O or A) Substantial or serious (B or C) Very serious or catastrophic (D or E)


#### Which are the most relevant impact criteria in view of all the scenarios?

The goal of the NRA is to analyse which capabilities need
to be developed or reinforced in order to properly prepare
our country for disasters, crises and threats. Furthermore,
it is important to ensure that these capabilities are
deployed in a way that reduces the impact of the criteria
deemed most relevant by the scenario evaluation. In this
way, the total impact of multiple threats can be limited.


shared the opinion that despite the threatening atmosp­
here, these regions could not be considered unusable.
These different interpretations resulted in a high degree of
uncertainty for the impact score.

In the scenario Foreign enterprise unmasked as a criminal Trojan
_horse, the economic impact is the dominant aspect. After_
all, this scenario relates to criminal activities involving
large sums of money, such as fraud and money laundering.
As it becomes gradually clear in this scenario that there is a
certain degree of conflict of interest between politicians,
authorities and the enterprise, that monitoring failed and
that society's trust in the government and businesses is
seriously damaged, the socio-psychological impact and
the violation of the democratic system are also rated as
serious. In addition to the fatalities, there are also other
direct victims (due to job losses, extortion or intimidation
by the criminal elements within the enterprise) who suffer
extreme stress, which can result in chronic illness
(substantial impact). Other criteria are rated as limited or
not applicable


Figure 2 gives an overview of the scores for the ten impact
criteria in all 48 scenarios that have been developed until
2013.

Disruption of everyday life and socio-psychological impact
are the most frequent high scorers, followed by the criteria
of costs and violation of the democratic system. Of the latter
two criteria, costs is most frequently awarded a B or a C.


-----

The lack of basic necessities of life (physical suffering) and
infringement of the international position of the
Netherlands are the next-highest scoring criteria on the
list (both have a roughly equal frequency of D-E or B-C
scores).

For the other four criteria, a high score (D or E) is not often
awarded, although the number of B or C scores for the
criteria of fatalities and seriously injured/chronically ill is
relatively high. Based on the similarity in the patterns,
these two criteria would seem to be related. The scores for
the criteria of encroachment on the territory of the
Netherlands and long-term impact on the environment


and on nature are mostly low (over 80% of the time), with
the former criterion scoring a D or an E slightly more often.
These criteria correspond to just a small set of a specific
category of emergencies, such as floods or major nuclear
disasters.

It was noted that for other criteria also, the frequency of
high scores mildly correlates to particular types of
disasters and threats. For example, violation of the
democratic system mainly occurs during scenarios relating
to Polarisation and Radicalisation, Criminal Subversion of
_Mainstream Activities, Energy Supply Security and Cyber Threats,_
as these themes generally involve deliberate acts.


-----

# Appendix 1

### The National Network of Safety and Security Analysts


The National Network of Safety and Security Analysts
(ANV) is an authoritative knowledge network, which is
tasked by the Ministry of Security and Justice with
performing the annual National Risk Assessment (NRA) on
behalf of the National Steering Committee for National
Safety and Security (SNV).

The ANV has a permanent core of six organisations (the
NRA Task Group), plus an extended network (the 'ring'),
made up of knowledge institutions, civil services, private
companies, research agencies and consultancy firms,
whose input is utilised for the NRA whenever a relevant
topic arises. The permanent core consists of the following
six organisations:

-  The National Institute for Public Health and the
Environment (RIVM)

-  The Research and Documentation Centre (WODC),
Ministry of Security and Justice

-  General Intelligence and Security Service of the
Netherlands (AIVD)

-  The Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific
Research (TNO)

-  The Netherlands Institute of International Relations
'Clingendael'

-  The International Institute of Social Studies (ISS) of the
Erasmus University Rotterdam

The core organisations possess wide-ranging, multidisci­
plinary expertise and thus collectively span the National
Security work field. The structure ensures the NRA's
_all-hazard approach, as well as methodological uniformity_
and cross-disciplinary analysis.

The six core organisations share responsibility for the
material quality of the NRA. Specific, supplementary
expertise is provided by the other organisations in the
network. The organisations in the core and the ring make
experts and analysts available to sit on panels, which are
temporarily convened to undertake the various NRA
activities. There is also a supporting secretariat (the NRA
Secretariat) made up of a general secretary, panel
coordinators, and project support personnel, who provide
process control, progress monitoring, and support for the
NRA. The NRA Secretariat acts as the fixed point of contact
for the SNV the IWNV (Interdepartmental National


Security Committee), and the associated departments. The
NRA Secretariat also supports the Task Group and the
scenario panels in the production of the NRA, and directs
and monitors the process. The NRA Secretariat is accom­
modated within the RIVM.

The Methodology workgroup[2] – made up of experts of a
number of knowledge institutes and businesses, including
several organisations belonging to the Task Group – is not
part of the ANV, but operates under the responsibility of
the Ministry of Security and Justice. The Methodology
workgroup supports the ANV in the production of the
NRA, particularly monitoring of the NRA method,
answering methodical questions, and preparing refine­
ments and changes to the method.
The ANV's main tasks are:
1. To produce the annual NRA, on the basis of themes
selected by the SNV

2. To advise the SNV about appropriate themes for the
(next) NRA, taking account of incident scenarios as well

as developments in the (medium to) long term and

very gradual processes

3. To produce other scenarios and analyses and organise
expert meetings regarding National Safety and Security

issues, on request of the Ministry of Security and

Justice

The ANV's working methods, organisational structure,
tasks and responsibilities as well as the planning cycle, the
production process, the arrangements for handling
knowledge and confidential information, the communica­
tion, the transfer to the panels for capability analysis, and
quality and expertise assurance are all set out in a Quality
Plan.

2 This workgroup has developed the NRB methodology and has been

active since the National Safety and Security Strategy was

introduced in 2007


-----

# Appendix 2

### Organisations involved in the NRA


This appendix lists the organisations involved in devising
the scenarios for this NRA. The following information is
provided regarding each scenario: the organisation that is
responsible for the content (the scenario author), the
organisations that contributed to the development of the
scenario (by providing essential information)[3], and the


organisations that participated in the analysis (scoring) of
the scenario.
Each scoring session was attended by a representative of
the Methodology Working Group to handle methodologi­
cal problems and questions and to ensure consistent
analysis and scoring.

3 Note: often, before work starts on the production of scenarios, one

or two brainstorming sessions are held, at which a number of

experts and organisations exchange and generate ideas and

information for use in development of the scenario and agree a

storyline (including scope) that will enjoy sufficient support amongst

the relevant experts. Only those organisations that have made a

material contribution to the scenario by providing essential

information or building blocks are listed. It should be noted that a

number of the experts who took part in the brainstorming sessions

and reviews were also involved in the scoring session


-----

**Far-right extremism**


Scenario author General Intelligence and Security Service of the Netherlands (AIVD)

Contributors University of Amsterdam, Overstag Uitvoering (organization providing support to young
people with multiple problems), National Police, Ministry of Security and Justice, Ministry
of the Interior and Kingdom Relations

Participants in scoring session AIVD, University of Amsterdam, Overstag Uitvoering, LindenLink consultancy, VerweyJonker Institute, International Institute of Social Studies, Ministry of Security and Justice


**Lek Dike breach/Flooding of Lopiker- and Krimpenerwaard**

Scenario authors Blueland Consultancy and TNO, in cooperation with HKV Consultants

Contributors Deltares, Rijkswaterstaat (Department of Public Works of the Ministry of Infrastructure and
the Environment), Stedin, Foundation Arq/Impact, National Institute for Public Health and
the Environment (RIVM), Regional Medical Assistance Organisation (GHOR), Safety region
Utrecht, Safety region Rotterdam-Rijnmond, Safety region Hollands Midden, Schieland en
de Krimpenerwaard District Water Board, University of Amsterdam, Ministry of Defence,
Ministry of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Security and Justice

Participants in scoring session Deltares, Rijkswaterstaat), Stedin, Foundation Arq/Impact, RIVM, TNO, HKV Consultants,
International Institute of Social Studies, Naeff Consultancy, Safety region Zuid-Holland
Zuid, Safety region Hollands Midden, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Security and Justice,
National Operational Coordination Centre (LOCC)


**Foreign enterprise unmasked as a criminal Trojan horse**



Scenario author Clingendael Netherlands Institute of International Relations, in cooperation with the Police
Academy of the Netherlands

Contributors International Institute of Social Studies, AIVD, WODC (Research and Documentation
Centre), Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations, National Police

Participants in scoring session Clingendael, The Hague Centre for Strategic Studies, Erasmus University, Foundation Arq/
Impact, Arcadis, Public Prosecution Service, Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations,
Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Security and Justice


-----

-----

**The Network of Analysts for National Security**
**Dr. M.G. Mennen (editor)**

This is a publication of:

**National Institute for Public Health and the**
**Environment (RIVM)**

**Research and Documentation Centre (WODC),**
**Ministry of Security and Justice**

**General Intelligence and Security Service of the**
**Netherlands (AIVD)**

**Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific**
**Research (TNO)**

**Netherlands Institute of International Relations**
**‘Clingendael’**

**International Institute of Social Studies (ISS),**
**Erasmus University Rotterdam**

P.O. Box 1 | 3720 BA Bilthoven
The Netherlands
www.rivm.nl/en

September 2014

### Committed to h l h d b l


-----

