Military doctrine comprises fundamental principles which armed
forces use to direct their actions. Over the past few years, the need for
an integrated defence doctrine has increased. In its fi nal report in April
2002, for example, the advisory committee on the introduction of a joint
high commander stated that joint operations were fast becoming the
norm and that close, internal cooperation in such operations was so vital
that an overarching doctrine was required. The Netherlands Defence
Doctrine (NDD) serves as a ‘doctrinal basis’ from which various doctrine
publications, for instance for the individual Services, will be drawn and
developed.

In order to meet this recognised need, it was proposed that doctrine
be developed for all the main tasks of the Defence Ministry, using the
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) doctrine as a basis. This
NDD fi lls the gap between Service-specifi c doctrine and defence policy.
The usual procedure is that Service doctrine is drawn from national
defence doctrine. The situation in the Netherlands has until now
been different. There was no defence doctrine, but the Services had
nonetheless developed their own doctrine. Because of this situation, a
signifi cant part of the contents of the NDD has been taken from the
existing doctrine publications of the various Services, underpinned by a
strategic foundation from current policy documents from the Ministry
of Defence. The distinction between the policy documents and the
various doctrine publications lies particularly in the fact that the policy
documents determine the ambitions and the capabilities of the armed
forces and the doctrine publications provide guidance for the conduct of
military operations.


The realisation of the NDD has fulfi lled the requirement for guidelines
for joint military operations by the Services. The NDD also marks the
progression to the next phase in the development of Dutch military
doctrine. The NDD will serve as an important foundation for the training
for and the planning and execution of joint military operations by the
Dutch armed forces in a national or international context.


##### Netherlands       Defence    Doctrine


-----

#### NETHERLANDS DEFENCE DOCTRINE


-----

-----

## NETHERLANDS DEFENCE DOCTRINE


-----

**Illustrations:**
All photographs (unless otherwise specifi ed) from collection of the
Netherlands Institute of Military History/RNLA.

Cover photograph: Royal Netherlands Marechaussee; Dutch F-16s over
the West Frisian Islands; SFOR patrol; Ratings of the Royal Netherlands
Navy on board a frigate.

Exercise Gainful Sword, Poland, October 2003 (Introduction); NRF
Change-of-Command Ceremony, 27 June 2004 (Chapter 1); Ground
Zero, New York, September 2001 (Chapter 2); RNLAF assisting Kosovar
refugees during Operation Allied Harbour, Fazdja (Albania), May 1999
(Chapter 3); National task: marines in the Netherlands Antilles (Chapter
4, photo: RNLN Centre for Audiovisual Services); Information being
updated with the most recent data in the Joint Operations Centre of NRF4 in the Veluwe area, 19 November 2004 (Chapter 5); Special Assistance
Unit (Annex A); Coastguard of the Netherlands Antilles (Annex B, photo:
RNLN Centre for Audiovisual Services).

**Comments to:**
Defensiestaf
DS/DOBBP/OB/TV
Afdeling Toekomstverkenningen
Postbus 20701
2500 ES Den Haag
Netherlands

Printing: PlantijnCasparie, Zwolle
Typesetting and design: Graphic Design Section, RNLA

Translation: Netherlands Ministry of Defence Translation Service

© Netherlands Defence Staff, The Hague, September 2005

No parts of this book may be reproduced in any form, by print, photoprint, microfi lm or

any other means without written permission from the publisher.

ISBN - 10: 90808440920
ISBN - 13: 9789080840928


-----

###### Foreword

Military doctrine comprises fundamental principles which armed
forces use to direct their actions. Over the past few years, the need for
an integrated defence doctrine has increased. In its fi nal report in April
2002, for example, the advisory committee on the introduction of a
joint high commander (known as the Franssen Committee) stated that
joint operations were fast becoming the norm and that close, internal
cooperation in such operations was so vital that an overarching doctrine
was required. The Netherlands Defence Doctrine (NDD) serves as a
‘doctrinal basis’ from which various doctrine publications, for instance for
the individual Services, will be drawn and developed.

In order to meet this recognised need, it was proposed that doctrine be
developed for all the main tasks of the Defence Ministry, using the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) doctrine as a basis. This NDD fi lls
the gap between Service-specifi c doctrine and defence policy. The usual
procedure is that Service doctrine is drawn from national defence doctrine.
The situation in the Netherlands has until now been different. There was
no defence doctrine, but the Services had nonetheless developed their own
doctrine. Because of this situation, a signifi cant part of the contents of the
NDD has been taken from the existing doctrine publications of the various
Services, underpinned by a strategic foundation from current policy
documents from the Ministry of Defence. The distinction between the
policy documents and the various doctrine publications lies particularly
in the fact that the policy documents determine the ambitions and the
capabilities of the armed forces and the doctrine publications provide
guidance for the conduct of military operations. The structure of the NDD
is largely derived from the British Defence Doctrine. The British armed
forces can pride themselves on extensive experience of military operations
and on meticulously written doctrine publications. It is for that reason
that the same structure has been adopted in this publication.

The NDD serves as a guide for operations by the armed forces as a whole
and by the individual Services. Raising awareness of the importance of an
umbrella doctrine for the armed forces is crucial for the reinforcement of
the cooperation between the Services. All fl ag, general and fi eld offi cers,
as well as civilians working at the Ministry of Defence in similar functions
should have an understanding of the content of the NDD. Other military


-----

and civilian personnel in the Defence organisation should at least be aware
of its existence. A further purpose of doctrine at the military-strategic level
is to inform a wider audience, both in the Netherlands and abroad, of
the tasks and deployment capabilities of the Dutch armed forces. The
wider audience abroad could include armed forces, defence departments,
academic and other institutes and international organisations such as the
United Nations (UN), NATO and the European Union (EU).

The realisation of the NDD has fulfi lled the requirement for guidelines
for joint military operations by the Services. The NDD also marks the
progression to the next phase in the development of Dutch military
doctrine. I expect the NDD to serve as an important foundation for the
training for and the planning and execution of joint military operations by
the Dutch armed forces in a national or international context.

CHIEF OF THE DEFENCE STAFF

D.L. Berlijn
General


-----

###### Table of contents

Foreword i
Table of Contents iii
List of illustrations iv
Abbreviations v
Introduction 5
Changed circumstances and doctrine development 5
Move towards a defence doctrine 7

**1 Military doctrine, strategy and types of confl ict** **13**
1.1 Military doctrine 13
1.2 Strategy: the levels of military operation 17
1.3 Types of confl ict 20

**2 Politico-strategic environment** **29**
2.1 International security situation 29
2.2 Legal context for military operations 31
2.2.1 National legislation 31
2.2.2 International regulations 32
2.3 Dutch foreign and security policy 35
2.4 Tasks of the armed forces 37
2.4.1 Main tasks of the Defence organisation 37
2.4.2 Defence tasks 39
2.5 Decision-making process and command 41
2.5.1 Integral national direction of military operations by the CDS 41
2.5.2 Direction of operations by the operational commanders 43

**3 Military operations** **47**
3.1 Spectrum of force 47
3.2 Methods of deploying military power 49
3.3 Military capability 50
3.4 Essential operational capabilities 51
3.5 Manoeuvrist approach 52
3.6 Basic principles of military operations 53
3.7 Developments in military operations 58
3.7.1 Joint operations 59
3.7.2 Multinational operations 61
3.7.3 Integrated operations 62


-----

**4 Operational execution of the armed forces’ main tasks** **69**
4.1 International frame of reference for operations 69
4.2 Dutch conceptual framework for crisis management operations 71
4.2.1 Peace-support activities 72
4.2.2 Other activities and tasks 74
4.3 Complexity of operations 75
4.4 Main tasks of the armed forces and their operational execution 76
4.4.1 National deployment 77
4.4.2 International deployment 80

**5 Command and control** **85**
5.1 Command and control structure 85
5.2 Decision making and command 87
5.3 Mission command 89
5.4 Providing leadership 91

Annex A: Defence Tasks 97
Annex B: Defence and National Security 105
The armed forces’ own tasks in the Netherlands 105
Military support and assistance 107
Bibliography 109
Accountability 112
Index 113

###### List of illustrations

Figure 0-A: Hierarchy of Dutch doctrine and policy documents 9
Figure 2-A: Deployment of the armed forces versus Defence tasks 40
Figure 3-A: Components of military capability 50
Figure 4-A: List of possible activities within a single military operation 70
Figure 5-A: Command and control system 86
Figure 5-B: Decision-making cycle: the OODA loop 87


-----

###### Abbreviations

ADP Army Doctrine Publication
AJP Allied Joint Publication
APD Air Power Doctrine
_BBE_ Special Assistance Unit
C2 Command & Control
_CBK_ Corporate Frame of Reference for Defence
CBRN Chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
_CDC_ Support Command
CDS Chief of the Defence Staff
CIMIC Civil-Military Cooperation
_CMBA_ Civil-Military Administrative Agreement
DEU Germany
DT Defence Task
EBO Effects-based Operations
EOC Essential Operational Capabilities
ESDP European Security and Defence Policy
EU European Union
GBR Great Britain
LOAC law of armed confl ict
_MIVD_ Military Intelligence and Security Service
NA5CRO Non-Article 5 Crisis Response Operations
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
NCC National Coordination Centre
NDD Netherlands Defence Doctrine
NEC Network-enabled Capabilities
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
NLD The Netherlands
NMD Netherlands Maritime Doctrine
_OCKM_ Royal Netherlands Navy Operational Concept
OSCE Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe
PfP Partnership for Peace
PSO Peace Support Operations
QRA Quick Reaction Alert
RNLA Royal Netherlands Army
RNLAF Royal Netherlands Air Force
RNLM Royal Netherlands Marechaussee
RNLN Royal Netherlands Navy


-----

ROE Rules of Engagement
UK United Kingdom
UN United Nations
UNSC United Nations Security Council
US United States

_[Abbreviations in italics are Dutch abbreviations that have been used in the text.]_


-----

-----

### Introduction

 Changed circumstances and doctrine development


-----

-----

###### Introduction

**Changed circumstances and doctrine development**

001. **Mission. During the Cold War, the protection of national and Allied**
(NATO) territory was central to the thinking behind military operations. After
the end of the Cold War, things began to change. Changes in the political
situation and in political viewpoints had implications for military operations.
The Dutch armed forces were transformed into a military apparatus which,
besides performing the protection task and providing support for civil
authorities in upholding the law and providing disaster relief and humanitarian
aid, both nationally and internationally, also had to be deployable at short
notice for crisis management operations anywhere in the world.

002. **Change in attitude towards doctrine. Doctrine development**
underwent a revival after the fall of the Berlin Wall. During the Cold War,
the creation of Dutch doctrine had been confi ned to operations in a major
confl ict against aggression from the Warsaw Pact. This changed at the
beginning of the 1990s. The increased importance of crisis management
operations and the intensifi cation of the cooperation between the Services
(joint) and between the armed forces of NATO, EU and Partnership for
Peace (PfP) countries (multinational or combined), meant that the ‘old’
doctrine had to be revised and new doctrine developed.[1]

003. Allied doctrine development. During the 1990s, NATO recognised the
need to revise existing doctrine. On the basis of the American approach,
a decision was made to create a hierarchy of doctrine publications,
the Allied Joint Doctrine Hierarchy. At the top of this hierarchy is a
capstone publication, the Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-01, Allied Joint
Doctrine, the general NATO doctrine. Immediately below that is a series

1 JOINT is used to describe the integrated deployment under a single command of opera
tional units or personnel from more than one Service or part of the Defence organisation

(including the Support Command (CDC) and the Military Intelligence and Security

Service (MIVD), as well as the measures, organisation, etc, that lead to such a deployment

(Source: CBK). COMBINED/MULTINATIONAL describes activities, operations and orga
nisations in which elements of more than one nation participate (Source: AAP-6, NATO

Glossary of terms and defi nitions, Brussels, February 2005, p.2-C-7).


-----

of functional publications, the keystone publications, such as the AJP2 Joint Intelligence and the AJP-3 Joint Operations. The capstone and
keystone publications form the highest level of the hierarchy. The level
below that comprises publications which support the conduct of joint and
multinational operations. These publications describe the contribution of
the various components (land, air and naval forces) and also the underlying
activities, such as joint special operations, performed in support of joint
and multinational operations. The lowest level consists of publications of
which the overall content is not joint but parts of which would be relevant
to joint operations, for example combat search and rescue. By ratifying
the Allied publications, the Netherlands has indicated its approval of the
content. These publications can thus be used in part or in their entirety in
the development of national doctrine.

004. **Development of doctrine in the Services. In the 1990s, the Royal**
Netherlands Navy (RNLN) concentrated mainly on the naval doctrine, tactics
and procedures developed within the context of NATO. In 1997, the RNLN
published an Operational Concept (OCKM in Dutch), which focused on
operations by a naval task force and which served as a policy foundation for
the RNLN plans. This OCKM was later revised, with the aim of describing
the naval contribution to joint (and multinational) operations. The RNLN
will shortly be publishing its own Service doctrine, the Netherlands Maritime
Doctrine (NMD). In doing so, the RNLN will rely particularly on NATO’s
perspective on naval operations and also on the views of the main Allies (in
particular the United States (US), the United Kingdom (UK) and Belgium).
The Royal Netherlands Army (RNLA) has been publishing Army Doctrine
Publications (ADPs) since 1996. In the development of its ADP series, the
RNLA drew on the latest NATO doctrine and that of the main Allies (UK
and Germany), but at the same time opted for a Service-specifi c translation
into Dutch. The Royal Netherlands Air Force (RNLAF) also published the
fi rst version of its Air Power Doctrine (APD) in 1996. The RNLAF relied
mainly on the NATO view of the role of air power and the other elements
of air forces as well as on the opinions of the main Allies (in particular the
US, the UK, Germany and Belgium). The Royal Netherlands Marechaussee
(RNLM) does not have its own Service doctrine. For its operations abroad,
during exercises and on missions, the RLNM refers to the doctrine of the
RNLA, the RNLAF and the RNLN.[2]

2 With the exception of situations in which the RNLM acts in accordance with the Service

doctrine publications, joint operations/actions for the RNLM also mean the actual per
formance of its police task in accordance with article 6 of the Police Act. Its actions are

governed not by doctrine but by the authority in the Code of Criminal Procedure. This is

in contrast to the military police forces of the US and the UK, which are assigned to the

Services. The Netherlands does not use the same system.


-----

005. **Doctrinal cooperation. The three Services which have their own**
doctrine -the RNLA, the RNLAF and the RNLN- are gradually increasing
their cooperation in respect of doctrine as well. For instance, representatives
from the various Services are involved in an advisory capacity in the
creation of doctrine for another Service. One example of this is the RNLA’s
Army Field Manual on Air Manoeuvre, which was approved by both the
RNLA and the RNLAF. There are also discussions within the interservice
body set up in 2002, the Armed Forces Doctrine Consultations, on issues
such as the Dutch point of view with regard to NATO doctrine. A move
had thus already been made towards the development of a Service-wide
doctrine, which would serve as a stepping stone for the individual Service
doctrine publications.

**Move towards a defence doctrine**

006. AJP as national doctrine. Because the development of doctrine was
becoming more important, the question arose as to what the implications
would be for the Dutch armed forces. The main question was whether there
was a need for a defence doctrine, such as the American Joint Publication
_– 1, the British Joint Warfare Publication (JWP) 0-01 and NATO’s AJP-01. A_
decision was then made to meet the need for a national defence doctrine by
declaring the AJP-01 applicable to the entire Dutch armed forces wherever
joint operations were concerned.

007. Position of the CDS in doctrine development. A major step in the
development of a Dutch defence doctrine was made in the form of the
report by the Franssen Committee. As one of the preconditions for a new
defence organisation, this committee stated that operational deployment
should be conducted jointly. And that ‘joint’ would refer to the preparation,
support, doctrine and command and control in staffs and teams in
which all Services and disciplines were represented.[3] The commission
thus fully endorsed the need for joint doctrine in whatever form. The
recommendation of the Franssen Committee confi rmed that doctrine was
one of the instruments available to the CDS to fulfi l his role as Corporate
Operator. The role of the director in respect of doctrine development by
and within the Dutch armed forces should, therefore, be played by the
Defence Staff.

3 Recommendation of the Advisory Commission on the Future Role of the Chief of Defence

Staff (Franssen Committee), ‘From an uneasy balance to a strengthened Defence organisa
tion’ (The Hague, 19 April 2002), p.25.


-----

008. CDS Guidelines and NDD. In 2002, documents were produced at
CDS level describing the thinking with regard to military operations. These
were the CDS Guidelines 1 – Operational Concept for Peace Operations,
and 2 – CDS Planning Process for (Peace) Operations. The Guidelines are
operational regulations which govern the planning of military deployment
in actual operations from CDS level. These documents are not, however,
regarded as doctrine. The RNLA and RNLAF doctrine publications need to
be revised and the RNLN is currently developing its own Service-specifi c
doctrine. The defence doctrine was the missing link in the hierarchy of
Dutch doctrine publications (see Figure 0-A). With the disappearance of
the commanders-in-chief and their staffs, the increased responsibility and
authority of the CDS and the fact that operations are increasingly shaped
by the joint deployment of the RNLN, the RNLA, the RNLAF and the
RNLM, it was no longer possible to do without a defence doctrine. For this
reason, the introduction of the NDD is highly expedient.

009. **Structure of the NDD. The structure of the NDD is based on the**
following underlying principles. The planners opted for an approach
going from theoretical to practical, from international to national and
from general security policy to military operations. First of all, the NDD
clarifi es terms that are normally used in doctrine documents. To do so,
the NDD begins with a theoretical chapter (Chapter 1), drawn from the
fi elds of international relations and strategy, which focuses on doctrine,
strategy and confl icts. This theory is then applied to the prevailing national
and international circumstances. The chapter on the politico-strategic
environment (Chapter 2) outlines such aspects as the international
security situation, the resulting Dutch foreign and security policy and
the tasks they entail for the armed forces. Subsequently, a more in-depth
look will be taken at military operations (Chapter 3), including elements
such as the spectrum of force, the use of force, military capability and
the fundamentals of military operations. These general aspects of military
operations will then be applied to the operational execution of the (main)
tasks of the armed forces (Chapter 4), whereby a distinction will be made
between national and international deployment. Effective military action
is impossible without unambiguous and effi cient direction. The last
chapter on command and control (Chapter 5) looks, therefore, at decision
making and command, in terms of structures and processes, as well as the
leadership provided by the commander.


-----

_Figure 0-A: Hierarchy of_

_Dutch doctrine publicati-_

_ons and policy documents_

|Levels of operation|Doctrine Publications and Policy Documents|
|---|---|
|Grand strategy|Policy documents Minister of Defence|
|Military- strategic|Policy documents Chief of the Defence Staff NDD|
|Operational|NMD ADPs APD|


-----

-----

### Chapter 1

 Military doctrine, strategy and types of confl ict


-----

-----

###### Military doctrine, strategy and types of confl ict

101. This chapter offers an insight into concepts which are generally
accepted as being fundamental to military doctrine. First of all, therefore,

# 1

explanations will be given regarding the term ‘doctrine’ and the various
doctrine levels as well as the formulation of Dutch doctrine. The section
will then outline the strategy at the different levels of military operation,
thus illustrating how (political) decision making is translated into military
activities. The armed forces can be deployed in a wide variety of confl icts.
For military actions to be successful, there has to be an understanding of
the nature of the confl ict in which they are carried out. The last section
caters for this requirement by looking at different methods of confl ict
categorisation.

**1.1 Military doctrine**

102. In the dictionary, doctrine is defi ned as ‘teachings’, or in other words,
something that is taught. It is a body of knowledge and understanding
that is primarily derived from study and analysis of practical experience.
In that sense, military doctrine defi nes the most effective way of using
military assets on the basis of that practical experience. Doctrine is thus
not dogmatic, but is intended to guide and advise. New experiences and
equipment might necessitate amendments to the doctrine.

103. Range in distance and time. Military doctrine represents the collective,
offi cially approved advice in respect of the best way of deploying the armed
forces to realise the objectives determined in the strategic process. That advice evolves with experience and changing ideas. Doctrine is the formal expression of military thinking, valid for a particular period. Doctrine is general in nature and describes fundamentals, principles and preconditions for
military operations at the various operational levels[4]. It describes the nature

4 A MILITARY OPERATION is any form of actual military action in peacetime, during an

armed confl ict or in times of war, that is conducted for a specifi c purpose. When military

personnel or units take part in a military operation, it is by defi nition limited in time and

is of a specifi c nature. (Source: CBK)


-----

and characteristics of current and future military operations, the preparations for these operations and the methods for the successful completion of
military operations[5]. Doctrine stems largely from experience gained during
military operations in the past. Doctrine also has a forward-looking element.
Doctrine can indicate shortcomings and can affect the armed forces’ requirement for organisation, personnel and equipment in future operations.

104. Functions. NATO defi nes military doctrine as fundamental principles
by which the military forces guide their actions in support of objectives.
Doctrine is authoritative but requires judgement in application[6]. However,
it is neither dogmatic nor compulsory. The function of military doctrine
is not to draw up a series of specifi c rules, but to guide the thinking on
the use of military capability and thus promote better understanding or
unity of opinion. Military doctrine provides a framework for operational
activities. Doctrine thus contributes to the interoperability of a joint/
combined operation. Doctrine also has a function within the armed forces
in military training and education. Doctrine can also be a factor in the
professional motivation of Defence personnel by clearly defi ning the tasks
and deployment methods of the armed forces. Lastly, doctrine also serves
at the military-strategic level to provide information for a wider audience in
respect of the tasks and deployment options of the Dutch armed forces.

105. Importance. Like other similar organisations, the armed forces must
be able to perform complex activities successfully. In the case of operational
activities, however, there are not many hard and fast rules. For military forces
to operate successfully, they need to be able to adapt quickly to changing
circumstances and work effectively in chaotic situations. If they want
to represent a credible deterrent, it must be clear that they are physically
able and psychologically and morally prepared to engage in the confl ict.
Military personnel must be absolutely sure of how to cope with the complex
situations, problems and hardships that crises and wars bring with them.
Everyone in the organisation should be familiar with the relevant doctrine
prior to the operation. This will also enable military personnel to understand
the actions of their commanders and to continue to support the operation as
a whole, even when they are not in contact with their superiors.

5 MILITARY OPERATIONS entail the authorised use of force by military personnel or the

threat of force, which means that military combat power is a prerequisite for success.

The methods for military operations in the long term (15-20 years) is laid down in what

is known as a concept of operations, which means that part of the military operation will

be conducted with future assets. Doctrine, on the other hand, describes the way in which

military operations are conducted with existing assets.

6 AAP-6 NATO Glossary of terms and defi nitions, p. 2-D-7.


-----

106. The place of doctrine in security policy. A nation’s security policy is
traditionally intended to promote or maintain the independence, integrity,
stability and welfare of that nation. To this end, a nation undertakes political,
diplomatic, economic, socio-cultural, humanitarian and military activities.
Every nation has national interests. The deployment of the armed forces is
often determined by the perception of the extent to which those interests
are threatened. The translation of interests into objectives is done by the
politicians. A nation’s politics can also be viewed from the point of view
of security. Seen from this angle, the nation’s security policy encompasses
the body of measures relating to internal and external security. As one
of the assets available to the nation, the military instrument can be used
to achieve the objectives of the grand strategy[7]. The planning of military
operations to achieve the political objectives is done at a lower level, that
of military strategy. And this is where we fi nd military doctrine. Doctrine
provides guidance for the conduct of military operations.

107. **Categories. Depending on the level of military operation, we talk**
about strategic, operational and tactical doctrine.

a. **Strategic doctrine publications describe the use of the military**
instrument as part of national or multinational security policy. A national
defence doctrine, also referred to as interservice or joint doctrine, is to
be found at this level. There are also international or combined joint
doctrine publications. This type of doctrine applies to joint activities by
naval, land and air forces in international operations. It describes the
best way to organise the integrated deployment of the armed forces of
countries in an alliance or coalition and thus enhances interoperability.
The basis principles, structures and fundamental procedures agreed
by Allied or coalition forces are set out in this doctrine. Doctrine of
this type supports joint defence treaties, agreements or organisations
and promotes commonly applicable arrangements relating to the
deployment of military forces in international military operations.

b. **Operational doctrine publications describe the interservice or joint**
activities (joint forces commander) and the operations planned and
conducted by naval, land and air components within this framework.
The individual contributions by the Services to the national and
international defence organisation complement each other.

7 B.R. Posen, The sources of military doctrine – France, Britain and Germany between the world

_wars (New York, 1984), p. 13. Dutch security policy is examined in Chapter 2._


-----

c. **Tactical doctrine publications, usually in the form of handbooks and**
fi eld manuals, look at activities within the particular Service and are
mainly Service-specifi c in nature. The fi ve dimensions of military
operations -sea, land, air, space and the information domain- differ in
nature. Partly because of that, naval, land and air forces have different,
specifi c characteristics and individual applications[8].

108. **Defence doctrine. Defence doctrine is a strategic doctrine publica-**
tion which forms the guidelines for military thinking in respect of joint
operations by naval, land and air forces and also in respect of independent
operations by a Service. It defi nes the best way of integrating the deployment
of the Services. Defence doctrine provides fundamental principles which
will steer the deployment of military forces in pursuit of the objectives set
by the political leadership.

109. **Development of Dutch doctrine. Over the past few decades, the**
Services have been particularly busy at operational level with the development of their own land, air or naval doctrine. The RNLA has done so by
publishing a number of ADPs. The RNLAF has written an Air Power
Doctrine and the RNLN has drawn up an Operational Concept (OCKM)
and will be publishing a Netherlands Maritime Doctrine[9]. The Services
were guided in their doctrine development by the joint NATO doctrine
publications referred to in the introduction and by the Service doctrine
publications of a number of countries with which intensive cooperation
has been taking place for many years.

110. Netherlands Defence Doctrine. The NDD describes Dutch doctrine at
the military-strategic level and is set out by the Chief of the Defence Staff
(CDS). The aim of this publication is to illustrate what the contribution
at this level is towards the armed forces’ product, namely the effective
conduct of military operations. Whereas the policy documents of the
Minister of Defence and the CDS pave the way for the organisation and
thus the capabilities of the armed forces (the ‘what with’), the NDD looks
at the way in which military activities are performed (the ‘how’). The
NDD is thus a publication which complements a number of important
policy documents and which provides guidance for the underlying Service
doctrine publications.

8 The Netherlands does not operate independently in the space domain. All Services operate

jointly as well as individually in the information domain.

9 ADP I, Military doctrine (1996); ADP II, Combat operations (Parts A and B 1998, Part C

2003); ADP III, Peace operations (1999) and ADP IV, National operations (2001)

[not translated]; APD (2002); OCKM (1997).


-----

**1.2 Strategy: the levels of military operation**

111. The strategic process is about translating national interests into national
objectives. Assets and capabilities must then be made available to achieve
those objectives. Military power is only deployed in the case of serious violation of national or international values, rights or interests. The way in which
military power is deployed will be examined at various levels of operation.

112. **Levels of operation. There are fi ve levels in the conduct of military**
operations: grand strategy, military-strategic, operational, tactical and
technical level. It is impossible to draw a clear dividing line between the
levels; there is usually a gradual overlap between the successive levels.

a. **Grand strategy level. Grand strategy is the coordinated, systematic**
development and use of the economic, diplomatic, psychological,
military and other political instruments of a state, alliance or
coalition to protect national, Allied or coalition interests. The aim of
a grand strategy is to provide guidance and cohesion for the use of all
instruments of power available to a country or alliance and coalitions
to which a country is party. The grand strategy is thus the exclusive
responsibility of a government, regardless of whether it is operating
autonomously or acting in conjunction with other governments in a
security organisation such as the UN, in an alliance such as NATO or
in an _ad hoc coalition such as the one formed during the 1990-1991_
Gulf War. In short, the grand strategy defi nes the context of objectives
against which governments indicate what must be achieved. The grand
strategy also determines the instruments of power that will be used to
achieve those objectives. It also indicates what restrictions apply to the
use of those instruments of power, but without determining in detail
how those assets should be deployed.

b. **Military-strategic level. Military strategy is the coordinated, systematic**
development and use of military means of power of a state or alliance
to achieve the military elements of the objectives in the grand strategy.
It thus forms an integral component of the grand strategy. In addition,
national, multinational or Allied military-strategic authorities, such as
the CDS, the Supreme Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR) or the
Supreme Allied Commander Transformation (SACT), are responsible
for setting out the requirement for military assets[10]. Part of this militarystrategic authority is also responsible for the deployment of military
means of power in any given operation.

10 SACEUR and SACT are the strategic commanders in NATO.


-----

c. **Operational level. Operational strategy involves the design and direction**
of joint campaigns (conducted by means of joint activities by different
Services) and/or multinational campaigns (conducted by military forces
from different countries) in order to achieve a military-strategic objective
defi ned in a strategic directive. The operational level provides the link
between the military strategic objectives and the tactical deployment
of units in a particular area of operations. At operational level, military
assets are used to achieve the objective that has been set by the
military-strategic authority for that area of operations. A commander
at operational level will plan a campaign for the operation(s) for which
he is responsible. He designs and directs secondary campaigns and
operations within that campaign. This requires a high level of specifi c
expertise regarding the activities of the different Services and also a
general understanding of the essence of military operations. Those
military operations cover all task areas (ranging from all-out war, via
crisis management operations to support for civil authorities) and
relate to the whole spectrum of force, from high to low. There is a clear
distinction between the operational level and the military-strategic
level. The operational commander, who will theoretically be situated in
the area of operations, commands the formations and units assigned to
him in order to carry out his own plan. By implementing this plan, he
will achieve the necessary effects to realise his objectives. In this way,
he contributes to the strategic aims. The military-strategic authority,
which leads the operations in or near the area of operations, allocates
targets and equipment and, in consultation with the politicians, imposes
restrictions on the deployment thereof, without getting involved in the
fi ner details of implementation.

d. **Tactical level. The term tactics refers to the way in which units are**
deployed and operate in order to help achieve the operational aim of
a campaign by means of combat and other forms of military action, in
a particular arrangement and sequence. At tactical level, units fi ght to
complete tactical assignments which form part of the campaign plan.
Units also operate tactically during crisis management operations.
There may also be fi ghting during such operations, although this will
be on a relatively small scale in most cases. An important lesson learned
from taking part in crisis management operations after the Cold War
is that even in crisis management operations, under certain, usually
rapidly changing circumstances, tactical units need to be able to shift
to combat operations (even in the highest part of the spectrum of force:


-----

escalation domination)[11]. In contrast to the operational level, at tactical
level units are deployed directly for combat. This often contributes
indirectly to the military-strategic objective. However, there are also
examples in which tactical units contribute directly to the militarystrategic objective(s). This applies, for instance, to the deployment of
special forces, depending of course on their task. Other examples are
the deployment of a submarine to gather strategic intelligence and
strategic bombing by one or more combat aircraft.

e. **Technical level. The technical level determines the way in which small**
units, sometimes even individual personnel or weapon systems, are
deployed and operate in order to achieve the tactical objective of a battle
or other type of tactical activity, in a particular arrangement and sequence.
The technical level deals with the actual execution of combat actions,
usually with a specifi c weapon system. The technical level also deals with
the actual execution of other tasks in support of combat actions in the
broadest sense. Examples are equipment repairs, keeping a radio station
operational, supplies at sea, air-to-air refuelling or a staff function.

113. Correlation between grand strategy and military strategy. The decision
to use military force falls within the primacy of politics. Military strategy
must be in keeping with the political strategy and international law and
must bring the realisation of the objectives at grand strategy level closer.
It is the responsibility of the CDS and the operational commanders to
translate the political objectives and guidelines into feasible military
objectives down to tactical level. The military objectives must be specifi c,
measurable, attainable, realistic and limited in time. The defi ning of
grand strategy and military objectives may not, however, be the result of
a one-way process. There must be close cooperation between the political
and military leaders and between the Ministries involved, such as those
of General Affairs, Foreign Affairs, Development Cooperation, Economic
Affairs and Defence. In practice, there is often no clear distinction between

11 General Krulak (former commander of the US Marine Corps) introduced the concept of

the ‘three-block war’, in which he states that future operations will be characterised by an

extremely rapid alternation between combat and peace support operations and humani
tarian relief, in terms of both time and a limited geographical area. Regular operations

against an adversary operating in virtually the same way will increasingly give way to

asymmetric confl icts in which opponents conduct more and more irregular operati
ons. British General Jackson, Chief of the General Staff, uses the term ‘cross-spectrum

operations’ rather than ‘three-block war’ (Source: Jackson, M., ‘The UK Medium Weight

Capability: A Response to the Changing Strategic Context’, RUSI Defence Systems, Autumn

2003, pp 42-44). See also the section on the complex nature of operations in Chapter 4.


-----

grand strategy and the military-strategic level. In effect, there is often
an overlap between the two levels, where top civil servants and military
leaders work intensively to draft and prepare decisions for the deployment
of the military instrument.

114. Not all political objectives are attainable in military terms, nor are the
armed forces the only instrument of power available to the politicians. It may
well be that other instruments, such as diplomacy or economic sanctions,
are more appropriate for realising the objectives. That decision rests with
the politicians, with the advice of, for example, the military leaders. The
selection or the combination of the various instruments of power is one of
the fundamental strategic decisions which the political leaders must take
in any confl ict in which they are (and want to be) involved.

115. Interaction between the levels. Partly because of the increased technological capabilities for more intensive and real-time reporting about confl icts
and the associated crisis management operations and/or humanitarian
relief organisations, the demand for such reporting has also increased.
Partly because of this, the relationship with the political level has changed.
In such operations, it may be the case, for example, that the actions of units
or even individuals operating at tactical level have strategic implications. It
is not only the politicians who keep a close track of events (often in minute
detail), but also other actors, such as the Public Prosecution Service and
the judiciary. Commanders should be mindful of the fact that in certain
circumstances the politicians will want to exert infl uence down to tactical or
even technical level. Commanders should appreciate at which level they are
working so that they are aware of the responsibilities they have at that level.
The nature of command differs at each level of operation[12].

**1.3 Types of confl ict**

116. If the nature of a confl ict changes during an operation, this will
also have implications for the military activities. Nowadays the nature of
confl icts is so variable that different forms of military activity might occur
at the same time or successively in a single operation. Identifying and
responding skilfully to the characteristics of a confl ict form the basis for the
successful use of military capability in support of political objectives[13].

12 In the section on mission command, Chapter 5 describes how the Dutch armed forces

interpret the concept of command and control.

13 Chapter 4 looks at the classifi cation of operations and at the complex nature of operations

which could be conducted as a result of a changeable confl ict situation and which involve

different types of military activities.


-----

117. **Confl ict distinction. Different types of confl icts have certain unique**
characteristics. The nature of each confl ict depends on the characteristics of
the parties involved, the causes of the confl ict, the method of operating and
the geographical and climatological conditions in the area of operations.
Apart from the more strategic classifi cation referred to earlier, military
activities can also be categorised according to their nature, in other words
the way in which the parties involved operate. These activities differ on the
one hand in terms of the nature of the weapons deployed in that confl ict and
on the other by the way in which the parties operate, the combat methods.
Although no two confl icts are the same, they can be categorised on the basis
of three characteristics: parties to the confl ict, weapons and methods.

118. **Parties to the confl ict. In this respect, confl icts can be divided into**
interstate, intrastate and transnational confl icts:
a. **Interstate. An interstate confl ict is fought between sovereign states or**
alliances thereof. It is thus a confl ict between two or more states. A
state is defi ned as an area in which a particular population lives and
which falls under the authority of an autonomous government.
b. **Intrastate. In an intrastate confl ict, one party is usually a sovereign state**
and the other party (or parties) is/are not. This type of confl ict occurs
within the territorial borders of a single state and is one in which an
armed group mounts resistance against the government (anti-regime
war). In a civil war, there may also be more than two armed factions, as
was the case in the former Yugoslavia. It may also be the case that an
intrastate confl ict is fought out between two or more parties (warlords,
for example), where the ultimate aim is to seize power. This could
happen, for example, in a failing state, where there is no longer any
legitimate government authority, such as Somalia.
c. **Transnational. A transnational confl ict is one in which one party is**
usually a sovereign state and the other(s) is/are not. This confl ict is not
confi ned to the territorial boundaries of a state. It transcends territorial
and political boundaries, partly because of the fact that politiconationalistic, ethnic-religious and other cultural boundaries do not
coincide with state borders (as in the Kurdish confl ict). A transnational
confl ict could be caused by, for example, the spread of an intrastate
(national) confl ict to neighbouring countries.

119. There are no hard and fast dividing lines between the various types
of confl icts classifi ed on the basis of the parties involved. It is clear that
an intrastate confl ict could become a transnational confl ict and that a
transnational confl ict may turn into an interstate confl ict. A geographical
expansion such as this is called ‘horizontal escalation’. A confl ict that
starts as an interstate confl ict could also evolve into an intrastate (or
transnational) confl ict.


-----

120. Weapons. In this category, confl icts are divided into conventional and
non-conventional. If weapons of mass destruction are used (chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear – CBRN), the confl ict is non-conventional. In foreign literature, there are sometimes several defi nitions of the
term ‘conventional’. Sometimes the term is also used to refer to a method.
British terminology includes the term ‘unconventional warfare’, which is
used to refer to irregular methods of operating, such as guerrilla warfare
or terrorism[14]. In this context, however, the terms conventional and nonconventional refer to the classifi cation of confl ict in terms of weapons.

a. **Conventional. A confl ict in which only weapons other than CBRN are**
used.
b. **Non-conventional. A confl ict in which CBRN weapons are also deployed.**

121. Methods. The methods used by the parties in a confl ict (state forces
or warring factions) are divided into regular or irregular methods.
Traditionally, regular forces rather than guerrilla warfare or terrorism are
used in operations. It is not inconceivable that the armed forces will in
certain situations operate in confl icts of an irregular nature. The type of
confl ict and its characteristics will determine the possibilities for and the
restrictions on the operational deployment of various weapon systems and
units. It should be mentioned here that the distinction between regular and
irregular operations is not always a clear one. Emphasising the complex
nature of today’s operations, as set out in Chapter 4, endorses the view
that in military operations account should be taken of the possibility that
these methods will be used in combination.

a. **Regular operations. These are characterised by the use of organised,**
military units, the deployment of which is usually overt, structured, allout and coordinated and in accordance with established doctrine. The
activities are characterised by a structured command and control and
proceed in accordance with practised procedures. Regular operations
may have the following characteristics:

-  rules of engagement governing the use of force by regular units with
uniformed troops;

-  operating within the framework of international law;

-  operating overtly;

14 TERRORISM: The unlawful use or threatened use of force or violence against individuals

or property in an attempt to coerce or intimidate governments or societies to achieve

political, religious or ideological objectives. (Source: AAP-6, NATO Glossary of terms and

defi nitions, 2-T-4).


-----

-  using organic formations or units, e.g. army corps, divisions, fl eets,
squadrons;

-  usually under centralised authority/command;

-  political objectives of the confl ict are usually rational (territory,
strategic raw materials, etc).

b. **Irregular operations. These are actions conducted by smaller groups,**
often insurgents, who usually operate with the element of surprise
and may conduct high-intensity actions in certain areas. There might
be a (collapsed) command and control structure in which local commanders exercise a great deal of power. Typical activities are covert
operations, designed to create confusion and chaos. Irregular troops
are mobile and often operate at night and in obscure terrain, which
allows them to fully exploit the effects of surprise. Irregular troops can
fi nd shelter in built-up areas, mountainous terrain, dense woodland
and jungles. In irregular operations, it will not always be clear which
party is the aggressor. There are different forms of irregular operation.
It may, for instance, be a case of armed resistance by guerrilla fi ghters
(usually in cells operating independently of each other), insurgents,
terrorists, bandits or rebelling military forces. Irregular confl icts, particularly in the Third World, are usually founded on politico-ideological
differences. The leaders look after the gathering, processing and communication of information, funding, recruitment, a shadow government and the formulation of plans of action. The objectives consist
of the indoctrination of the population and gaining popular support.
Military activities are secondary to that and are not vital. The defeat of
an irregular opponent, therefore, means primarily that the political
leadership of that opponent must be overthrown. Of secondary importance, this means the military defeat of the opponent, although that
may not be necessary. Irregular operations could have the following
characteristics:

-  usually no (or partial) observance of the law of armed confl ict
(international humanitarian law);

-  troops are rarely in uniform;

-  conducted with or without the use of force;

-  opponent cannot always be clearly identifi ed;

-  often covert methods of operating (location of operations/movements
unknown and activities not visible);

-  bases unknown – probably only the area in which activities are
conduc-ted is known;

-  activities at tactical level highly decentralised or not usually under
centralised authority;

-  scale of operations varies;


-----

-  activities often conducted from a position of absolute weakness,
sometimes a position of local superiority;

-  size of units varies;

-  activities designed to cause confusion, fear and damage;

-  willingness to accept sacrifi ces and sustain the confl ict in the long
term;

-  intensity of the confl ict ranges from low to high;

-  causes of the confl ict are usually politico-ideological, ethnic-religious
and/or economic;

-  a military solution in operations against irregular forces is not the
only factor that determines success: the hearts and minds of the
people also need to be won;

-  no limited political objectives whereby the use of force can be
controlled.

122. Importance of the assessment of a confl ict. The characteristics and
thus the nature of a confl ict can change over time. The distinction between
regular and irregular methods of operating is not always a clear one. In
one confl ict, regular and irregular enemy forces may be operating at the
same time. To achieve the desired result in resolving a confl ict, therefore,
the correct assessment of the nature of the confl ict is vitally important.


-----

-----

-----

### Chapter 2

 Politico-strategic environment


-----

-----

###### Politico-strategic environment

201. The aim of this chapter is to describe the politico-strategic framework
within which the armed forces receive and perform their tasks. Given

# 2

the emphasis on international military operations, the fi rst task is to
evaluate the international security situation. An important element in
the development of doctrine is the national philosophy. The basis for
this is established in the Constitution, which is used by the government
and the States-General (Dutch Parliament) as the criteria for evaluating
such aspects as foreign and security policy. The government also makes
choices in respect of the level of ambition, the tasks of the armed forces
and participation in international structures. As a result of the political
choices, the Dutch armed forces have to be able to operate as part of various
international coalitions. It is for this reason that the international legal
framework for military operations is also important. The armed forces are
directed by the government. This chapter will close with an explanation
of the national politico-military decision making and the command of
military operations.

**2.1 International security situation**

202. In today’s world of globalisation and international borders which
constitute less and less of a barrier, internal and external security are
inextricably linked. The growth in the international movement of people,
money and goods and in information and communication technology
(real-time information by, for example, GSM, the Internet and the mass
media) has helped to bring about a situation in which national borders
have become signifi cantly less important. At the same time, non-stateaffi liated factions have succeeded in making their presence felt in the
arena of international developments. The large-scale military threat has
given way to a more diffuse one. Generally speaking, there are currently
fi ve interrelated security issues which will affect the scale, composition
and organisation of our armed forces in the years ahead[15]:

15 Policy agenda 2005, in: 2005 Defence Budget (29 800 X, no. 2), page 7.


-----

a. failing states;
b. terrorism;
c. rogue states;
d. proliferation of weapons of mass destruction;
e. interstate relations[16].

203. Failing states. Political instability and the poor economic and social
conditions in many parts of the world also have repercussions for Europe
and thus for the Netherlands. Examples are migrant movements and
organised crime as well as drug and human traffi cking, the proceeds
of which are also used to fi nance terrorist networks and their activities.
Especially in sub-Saharan Africa and Central Asia, countries are facing
serious administrative problems; in some instances it is even a case of
a ‘failing state’, where central authority is absent or no longer functions.
Generally speaking, there is an increasing correlation between internal
and external security. The promotion of stability and the fi ght against
international terrorism by Dutch military personnel elsewhere in the
world can be seen less and less in isolation from the security of Dutch and
European citizens in their own environment. Our active involvement in
developments in countries outside Europe and with the fate of the people
there affects our own security in both a positive and negative sense. That
active involvement could, after all, also mean that the threat (small-scale,
possibly terrorist) to national territory will increase.

204. Terrorism. The rise of international terrorism is a cause for concern,
particularly because it involves networks that must be considered capable
of acquiring weapons of mass destruction and of deploying them. It has
become apparent in recent years that international relations are being
largely defi ned by this new threat. The Netherlands is no exception and is
unable to escape the consequences of these developments.

205. Rogue states. Outside Europe, the situation in the Middle East, the
Persian Gulf and large parts of Asia and Africa continues to give cause
for concern from a security perspective. A further issue for Africa is that
the restoration of peace and stability is also an essential precondition
for sustainable development in that part of the world. In rogue states,
instability may be coupled with such dangers as the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and the violation of human rights.

16 For the Dutch Defence organisation, the security issues referred to have resulted in,

for example, more attention for Theatre Missile Defence, emphasis on expeditionary

deployment of the armed forces and interdepartmental cooperation against terrorism.


-----

206. **Weapons of mass destruction. The ongoing spread of weapons of**
mass destruction and their delivery systems, such as ballistic missiles with
an increasing range, to rogue states remains a source of serious concern.

207. **Interstate relations. In various parts of the world, such as the Far**
East and Africa, interstate instability has increased rather than decreased
in recent years. This instability could result in new confl icts. Meanwhile,
in Europe the stabilisation of the Balkans has not yet been completed
and unresolved confl icts in Eastern Europe, especially in and around the
Caucuses, continue to cause concern.

208. Positive developments. Although security risks can therefore be said
to have increased in many respects, in others they have in fact decreased.
We now no longer need to be concerned about a large-scale attack with
conventional weapons on Allied territory and the military preponderance
of the armed forces of the West appears to be assured for the foreseeable
future. Since the middle of the 1990s, the problems in the Balkans have
become manageable, even though they continue to demand our constant
attention. The expansion of NATO and that of the EU are helping to
reinforce the positive developments in the security situation in and around
Europe since the end of the Cold War[17].

**2.2 Legal context for military operations**

_2.2.1 National legislation_

209. National legal framework. Stipulations concerning the existence, the
direction and the deployment of the armed forces can be found in the
Dutch Constitution:

Article 90
The government will promote the development of international law.

Article 97
1. The armed forces exist for the defence and protection of the interests
of the Kingdom, and in order to maintain and promote the international legal order.
2. The government has supreme authority over the armed forces.

17 Towards a new equilibrium: the armed forces in the coming years (referred to from this

point as the 2003 Defence Budget and Policy Letter) in: 2004 Defence Budget, House

of Representatives of the States-General, Parliamentary Year 2003-2004 (The Hague, 16

September 2003), pp. 7-8.


-----

Article 100
1. The government will supply the States General with advance
information on the intended use of the armed forces for the purposes
of maintaining or promoting the international legal order. This also
includes the supply of advance information on the intended use
of the armed forces for the provision of humanitarian relief in the
event of armed confl ict.
2. The fi rst paragraph will not apply if there are compelling reasons
for withholding the supply of advance information. In that case,
information will be provided at the earliest possibly opportunity.

210. Article 90 defi nes the promotion of the international rule of law
as a Dutch interest. According to Article 97(2) of the Constitution, the
government has supreme authority over the armed forces. The meaning
of the provision on the supreme authority is that the use of the armed
forces is an exclusive power of the government: the primacy of politics.
The government has a political responsibility towards parliament. If the
government assigns troops to an international organisation, it does not
surrender supreme authority. Deployment for the purpose of defence takes
place on the basis of an international support obligation[18]. Deployment for
the purpose of defence could also occur as a response to a threat, acute or
latent, to national territory (in Europe or the Caribbean region), including
the airspace above it and territorial waters. In such cases, parliament does
not have to be informed in advance. Advance information is required,
however, in the event of deployment for the purpose of maintaining or
promoting the international legal order (Article 100).

_2.2.2 International regulations_

211. **Distinction between states and individuals. A distinction must be**
made in international regulations between the rules of law (for the use
of force) between states and the law that deals with the use of force by
individuals.

212. Regulations pertaining to states. States must refrain from the threat
or actual use of force[19]. The term force in this context refers to military
force. This stipulation means that any use of military force by a state
against another state, or in the territory of another state, is prohibited
unless it relates to one of the two exceptions provided for in the Charter:
individual and collective self-defence (article 51) or the right of the UN

18 Article 5 of the NATO treaty or Article V of the WEU treaty.

19 The prohibition on the use of force: article 2, section 4 of the UN Charter.


-----

Security Council (UNSC) to take coercive measures in accordance with
Chapter VII of the UN Charter. Humanitarian intervention could also
constitute justifi cation for the use of force. A state might also consent to
the use of force in its territory. In a case such as this, there is no violation
of the prohibition on the use of force.

213. Right of self-defence. If a nation is attacked in contravention of the
ban on the use of force, it does not need to wait until the UNSC takes
action. Article 51 of the Charter allows it to use the inherent right of
self-defence in the event of an armed attack. An armed attack primarily
involves operations by regular forces in the territory of another nation.
Other cases, such as terrorist actions, can also be regarded as such under
certain circumstances. Article 51 of the UN Charter also provides for the
right of collective defence. The condition is that a state is the target of an
armed attack, thus invoking the right of self-defence, and that the nation
under attack requests the assistance of another state. Measures for selfdefence may not go beyond what is reasonable in relation to the threat.
The right of self-defence exists until the UNSC has taken the necessary
measures to end the aggression.

214. Coercive measures. In this case, economic or military means of power
are used to enforce a Security Council resolution on the basis of Chapter
VII of the UN Charter[20]. A further elaboration of such a resolution can
lead to a ‘situational mandate’ within which a state or organisation can
deploy instruments of power. The Netherlands subscribes to the view that
intervention to prevent or alleviate widespread human suffering must be
possible under certain conditions (humanitarian intervention), even if it is
blocked by the decision making in the Security Council.

215. **United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea III (UNCLOS).**
The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea III, or UNCLOS (Montego
Bay, 1982), gives the Defence organisation, and warships in particular, the
right to conduct military operations at sea in a number of specifi c cases.
These cases include piracy, slave trading and the ‘statelessness’ of ships
(article 110 of the UNCLOS). There is also a duty to render assistance to
persons in distress at sea (article 98 of UNCLOS).

20 Chapter VII defi nes the powers of the UNSC relating to action with respect to threats to

the peace, breaches of the peace and acts of aggression. Besides non-military means, such

as the severing of economic and diplomatic relations (article 41), this also covers military

action (article 42).


-----

216. Regulations pertaining to individuals. When conducting military operations, account must be taken of the rules of national and international law.
This law provides a framework for military operations and rules for their
execution. Dutch military personnel act in accordance with national law in
the Netherlands, even if they are operating under the responsibility or command of an international organisation or otherwise in an international coalition. It goes without saying that the law of war is extremely important. It has
to be recognised that sometimes completely different rules of law apply to
the different types of operation. For instance, in combat operations the law
of armed confl ict (LOAC) is paramount; in crisis management operations
the status of forces agreements are vitally important. In both cases, the rules
of engagement (ROE) play a major role. ROE also have a mainly operational
objective. Legitimate operations add to the credibility of the force and help
to maintain public support in the theatre of operations and at home.

217. ROE. ROE are guidelines for commanders in respect of the nature
and manner of the use of force within the political and legal frameworks.
They are designed to ensure that the political leaders can control the use
of force. ROE provide information for commanders about the extent to
which they are restricted or free to perform their allotted tasks. They are
not a means of assigning specifi c tasks. They apply to all military activities
within an operation, but in practice are often declared effective for each
phase or activity. The ROE which often apply when diplomatic negotiations
are still being conducted are thus different to those which apply once that
avenue has been closed. Commanders make suggestions for the ROE
when they develop their plan. Once established, they form the basis for
the execution of the mission.

218. Self-defence of a unit. The ROE do not limit the explicit authority or
the right of a commander to use all available and necessary means and to
take appropriate action for the self-defence of his unit or of Allied troops
in the immediate vicinity. This applies to self-defence against an attack or
an imminent attack. The principles of necessity and proportionality apply
in all cases. These principles should help the commander when he is
considering an appropriate countermeasure. The principle of self-defence
may also apply to other persons in the immediate proximity.

219. **LOAC and ROE. Not all situations in which military force is used**
are covered by the LOAC. When the ROE are established, it will have to
be determined whether the LOAC will apply to that particular confl ict. In
those situations where the LOAC -in accordance with strict legal rulesdoes not apply, Dutch and NATO policy must be observed. In those cases
the ROE should be used to establish the appropriate level of force that is
to be applied.


-----

220. **Principles for the use of force. The LOAC has four fundamental**
principles for the use of force: military necessity, proportionality, the
prevention of unnecessary suffering and the principle of distinction.
Necessity means that force may only be used if it is essential to achieve
the military objective. Proportionality means that force and destruction
must be kept to the minimum required to achieve that objective. A natural
consequence is that collateral damage must be avoided at all costs and
that, in view of this, all reasonable measures have to be taken to prevent
collateral damage. Lastly, a distinction must be made between military
targets and civil objects and between combatants and civilians.

**2.3 Dutch foreign and security policy**

221. **National interests. The fundamental objective of every nation is to**
secure its (vital) interests while maintaining its own standards and values.
Partly for this reason, the foreign policy of the Netherlands focuses on this
national interest in the strictest sense. However, in view of international
relationships, the strictest sense of national interests should always be
considered as part of a wider framework, also referred to as national
interest in the broadest sense. The latter is translated into aiming for a
well-structured international society in which human rights are respected
and the international legal order is upheld and promoted.

222. Foreign, security and defence policy. The main aim of Dutch foreign
and security policy is to ensure the independence, integrity, stability and
welfare of the home nation. The Netherlands also sets great store by the
promotion of the international rule of law and has long demonstrated
a deep involvement in cases of human suffering and actions against
human rights violations. Our market economy, which is one of the larger
economies in the world, benefi ts from the unrestricted movement of
goods and free access to trade areas and raw materials. Dutch defence
policy has an objective that is derived from this: to form, maintain and
deploy a military force in the context of the government’s security policy.
Dutch security policy distinguishes between an internally and an externally
oriented component. The armed forces can be deployed in the context of
both components. Internal and external security have become increasingly
interwoven in the security situation in recent years.

223. Coordination of policy. The defence activities of the Netherlands are
focused on a combination of security interests, the protection of values
and foreign affairs objectives. Our country sets great store by a stable and
peaceful international environment, for it is dependent to a large degree
on good international relations and security institutions that function
properly. The Netherlands pursues an active peace and security policy. In


-----

practice, that means that our country wants to help to resolve security
problems within and outside Europe, even those that are a considerable
distance away. Experiences in Afghanistan have shown that our security
and other interests can be threatened by developments that take place a
long way from home. An active security policy also involves, therefore,
the willingness to respond swiftly to crisis situations elsewhere in the
world, obviously in an international context. It is important in this respect
to apply the various policy instruments that the Netherlands has at its
disposal -diplomatic, economic, fi nancial, humanitarian and militarycohesively. Foreign policy, development cooperation and defence issues
are increasingly becoming extensions of each other[21].

224. The armed forces in an international context. The Dutch armed forces
now have a much fi rmer footing on the international stage. Bilateral and
multinational military cooperation with Allies and partners have been further
strengthened over the past few years. NATO and the EU form the main institutional frameworks for military cooperation. Because of the recent expansion of both the EU and NATO, especially as a result of the accession of East
European states, the politico-strategic environment has changed radically.
Both organisations now share borders with potentially unstable regions.

225. NATO. NATO is the most important pillar of Dutch security policy
and epitomises the transatlantic connection. Good transatlantic relations
will continue to be essential for our security in the future. Thanks to
NATO, previous threats have been consigned to the past. The Alliance is
the most important asset we possess to ensure our security and to nip in
the bud any threat that may arise. NATO is also an important forum for
political consultation and for harmonisation of the defence plans of the
member states. Since the end of the Cold War, NATO has adapted to the
new international relations and has successfully sought cooperation with
Russia, Ukraine and other countries. It has conducted crisis management
operations in the Balkans and in Afghanistan and has proved itself
capable of providing effective leadership in complex operations. This has
once again demonstrated the value of the integrated military structures of
the treaty organisation. A rapid reaction force, the NATO Response Force,
has also been established. This reaction force of some 25,000 military
personnel from land, air and naval forces, to which the Netherlands also
contributes, has to be deployable at extremely short notice for the most

21 2003 Defence Budget and Policy Letter, p.6. An example of this coordination is the

interdepartmental consultative body CIMIC, in which the Ministries of Foreign Affairs

(including offi cials from Development Cooperation) and Defence are represented and

which other Ministries and NGOs may attend by invitation.


-----

demanding operations at the upper end of the spectrum of force. The
military aspects of combating terrorism and the risks of the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems have been
placed high on the Alliance’s agenda.

226. EU. The Netherlands attaches great value to the further development
of the European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP), including civil crisis
management tasks. Within the ESDP, the EU member states have agreed
to counter threats such as terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, regional confl icts and failing states. The EU is thus able to
make a signifi cant contribution to global security and stability. The EU has
suffi cient structures to be able to take decisions with military implications
and to undertake the implementation of those decisions by calling upon the
member states. For example, with its ‘Headline Goal 2010’, the EU has taken
on a capabilities objective which aims to improve the quality of the units
supplied. The emphasis in this respect is on deployability, sustainability
and the capacity for mounting combined operations (interoperability). The
Netherlands wants to contribute to the EU high-readiness capability in the
form of the EU battle groups, which are to be operational by 2007. These
formations of over 1,500 military personnel are to be capable of deployment
in crisis management operations outside EU territory, notably at the request
of the United Nations, at very short notice. The development of the ESDP has
strengthened the European input into NATO, which will help to ensure that
the burden is shared more evenly and will benefi t transatlantic cooperation.
The EU-NATO arrangements provide for the necessary dialogue and
cohesion between the two organisations[22].

**2.4 Tasks of the armed forces**

_2.4.1 Main tasks of the Defence organisation_

227. The Defence White Paper 2000 sets out the three main tasks of the
armed forces as follows[23]:

1. Protecting the integrity of national and Allied territory, including the
Netherlands Antilles and Aruba;
2. Promoting stability and the international rule of law;
3. Supporting civil authorities in upholding the law, providing disaster
and humanitarian relief, both nationally and internationally.

22 2003 Defence Budget and Policy Letter, pp. 8-9; The European Security and Defence

Policy, Ministry of Defence (The Hague, August 2004), pp. 3 and 11; Policy Agenda 2005,

in: Defence Budget 2005 (29 800 X, no.2), pp 4-7.

23 _Defence White Paper 2000, Ministry of Defence (The Hague, 29 November 1999), p.53._


-----

228. First main task. The meaning that should be attached to the three
main Defence tasks and the way in which they have to be carried out have
changed in recent years. Although the general defence task still exists, the
way that it has been implemented in the past -the capacity to repel a largescale conventional attack on NATO territory- has been overtaken by events.
Terrorism and weapons of mass destruction, with all their implications,
now pose the most acute threat. There is agreement on this point within
NATO. Because it explicitly benefi ts the security of the population of the
EU and the NATO member states, NATO forces are now deployed outside
the treaty area as well. The military capabilities of the Alliance, however,
continue to safeguard the territorial integrity of the member states and
the Defence organisation naturally remains responsible for the territorial
integrity of the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba.

229. Second main task. The conduct of international operations continues
to gain importance. The size and the organisation of the armed forces
are gradually being aligned more deliberately with this second main
task and that trend is continuing. The number of missions conducted
under Chapter VI of the UN Charter -‘blue helmets’ who try to keep the
peace with the consent of the warring parties- has decreased since the
middle of the 1990s, although such missions have not yet disappeared
altogether[24]. Particularly those operations which aim to prevent or resolve
intrastate confl icts increasingly require robust action. These operations
are increasingly characterised by an intense but relatively short initial
phase at the upper end of the spectrum of force, usually followed by a
stabilisation phase that may be of short or long duration. Such operations
are usually conducted by regional organisations such as NATO and the
EU or by ad hoc coalitions, with the role of the UN being limited to that
of the mandating authority. It is in the interest of the Netherlands that
as much use as possible is made of existing organisations of which
our country is a member, such as NATO and the EU. The missions in
Bosnia, Kosovo and Afghanistan are prime examples of this. The antidrugs operations conducted by the RNLN in the Caribbean also help to
maintain the international legal order. Organised crime and the terrorism
associated with it (for example, the FARC in Columbia) are thus targeted
and regional stability improved.

24 Chapter VI of the UN Charter contains a pacifi c settlement of disputes, for example

by negotiations or the installation of a UN peace force. Examples include the UNMEE

mission, in which the Netherlands participated in 2000-2001, and the UNMIL mission

(Liberia) in 2003-2004.


-----

230. Third main task. Under the third main task, account needs to be taken
in the event of military assistance and support to civil authorities of the
threat of international terrorism, measures to counter the proliferation of
the weapons of mass destruction and the task of limiting the consequences
of terrorist attacks. Units can also be deployed to conduct humanitarian
and civil activities in the context of the third main task. Over the last few
years, civil authorities have requested military assistance more and more
often. Examples of such instances have been the deployment to control
swine fever and bird fl u and to provide support in the fl oods, as well as
the international deployment of engineer support battalions in Iraq and
Kosovo. The deployment of RNLAF transport planes for the evacuation
of Dutch citizens from Indonesia, Liberia and Thailand comes under
this heading. Deployment for the third main task also takes place on a
routine basis, for example activities such as explosive ordnance disposal,
coastguard operations and, as also mentioned under the second main
task, anti-drugs operations in the Caribbean.

_2.4.2 Defence tasks_

231. The three main tasks of the Defence organisation can be extrapolated
in a list of more specifi c Defence tasks (DTs). The level of ambition -the
qualitative and quantitative level at which the Defence organisation wants
to be able to conduct military activities- deals in general terms with the
nature of the tasks[25]. In order to bridge the gap between ambition and
means, the nature of the tasks that Defence needs to be able to perform
has to be specifi ed. We refer to ‘Defence tasks’ and not exclusively
‘military tasks’ in order to indicate that the Defence organisation also
performs non-military tasks, often at the request and under the control
of civil authorities. For instance, many activities performed by the Royal
Netherlands Marechaussee stem from laws which place the authority
for them with Ministers other than the Minister of Defence. Given the
fact that the Defence organisation has to provide the means to conduct

25 Since 2003, the level of ambition at the higher end of the spectrum of force has been as

follows: the Netherlands has to be able to contribute a brigade or the equivalent thereof to

operations at the higher end of the spectrum of force. This refers to the following contri
butions from the Services or a combination thereof. The army must in future be able to

assemble a brigade (task force) for operations in an international setting at the higher end

of the spectrum of force. The maximum contribution from the air force to an operation at

the upper end of the spectrum of force can be reduced from three to two squadrons with

18 fi ghter aircraft each, and that of the navy from a task force with six to eight frigates to a

maximum of fi ve frigates. In practice, these contributions are composed according to the

mission requirements (Source: 2003 Defence Budget and Policy Letter 2003, pp. 24-25).


-----

such tasks, this list also includes the tasks which are performed under
the authority of others. The fi gure below lists the Defence tasks under
the different forms of deployment of the armed forces. The list contained
at Annex A to this doctrine shows the tasks which can be performed at
this time[26]. The list of Defence tasks is reviewed regularly to determine
whether or not any change is required.

|Military operations|Col2|Military assistance|
|---|---|---|
||Aid to the Civil Authorities||
||Upholding the rule of law|Support|
|• C ommand of land and sea territory as well as airspace • Engaging sea, land and air forces • Securing sea and land territory, as well as airspace • Protection at sea, on land and in the air • Command & control • Evacuation • Extraction • Prevention, forward deployment • Special operations • Engaging strategic targets • Strategic Transport • Hydrography • Geography • Strategic Military Intelligence Gathering|• Separating parties • Stabilisation • Military support • Coastguard • Marechaussee tasks • Verification|• Personal security • Ceremonial duties • Explosives clearance • Host-nation support • Coastguard • Military support • Emergency assistance • Instruction & training of foreign units • Disaster response • (Hydrography) • (Geography)|



26 List of Defence tasks and capabilities, Defence Staff (The Hague, October 2004), pp. 5-8.

27 For defi nitions and/or explanations of tasks, see Chapter 4 and Annex A.


_Figure 2-A: Deployment_

_of the armed forces versus_

_Defence tasks [27]_


-----

**2.5 Decision-making process and command**

_2.5.1 Integral national direction of military operations by the CDS_

232. The central implementation of the planning on behalf of the CDS
and the national unifi ed and integral direction of military operations
by the CDS are conducted in the context of Article 5 operations, crisis
management operations, humanitarian operations, and national
deployment for military assistance and support[28].

233. Grand strategy actors. Decisions to conduct military operations are
taken at grand strategy level. The decision makers determine the grand
strategy objectives of a military operation. The national key players are
the Prime Minister and the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Defence.
Internationally, an operation in a NATO context involves NATO’s North
Atlantic Council. A request for participation in a military operation could
also come from authorities within the EU, the OSCE or the UN.

234. National decision making. The national political decision making in
respect of a contribution of Dutch units or personnel to a military operation
is closely connected to that in an international context, but always exists
in its own right. There is, after all, no obligation to participate in a crisis
management operation. In the context of national political decision making
about and military planning for participation in a military operation, three
instruments are particularly crucial:

a. The risk and threat analysis by the Military Intelligence and Security
Service (MIVD in Dutch);
b. The 2001 Frame of Reference for Decision-making for the Deployment
of Military Units Abroad (the ‘Toetsingskader’, hereinafter the 2001
Frame of Reference)[29];
c. The CDS planning process for operations.

235. A decision is made at grand strategy level as to which countries or
regions should be monitored by the MIVD as a matter of priority. In this
context, the MIVD performs a warning function. In its risk and threat
analysis, the MIVD gives a rundown of all the risks associated with the
operation as a result of, for example, the state of the terrain, the climate
and whether the parties involved in the confl ict have consented to the
operation. The outcome of this analysis is used in the application of

28 For an explanation of the different types of operation, see Chapter 4.

29 MFA and MoD letter 23591, no. 7, dated 13 July 2004.


-----

the parliamentary criteria as well as in the operational planning for the
mission. The set of parliamentary criteria (the 2001 Frame of Reference)
is used by the government and the House of Representatives and consists
of a number of points to aid the decision in respect of participation by
units of the Dutch armed forces in a crisis management operation[30]. At
the same time as the evaluation of the objectives, risks and other features
of the operation is conducted, the Defence Staff will consider, in the event
of a positive decision on participation, what form the Dutch contribution
should take. The result of the CDS planning process for operations is
a recommendation from the CDS regarding Dutch participation in the
operation: the units, personnel and equipment which can be supplied
for deployment. Once a positive political decision has been made
regarding participation, the CDS will issue what is known as a CDS
operational directive stating the national guidelines, assignments, tasks
and responsibilities in connection with the deployment, as well as the
arrangements that have been made for the transfer of authority (TOA) to
the operational troop commander of the crisis management force[31].The
TOA to an international commander only ever concerns the operational
element of the authority. The government (or the CDS on its behalf) will
retain ultimate control (full command). The decision to approve Dutch
participation in an operation may be linked to national caveats in respect
of deployment. The government or parliament can (and often does) attach
conditions to the deployment of the armed forces. The CDS will ensure
that the multinational force commander will take account of the stated
caveats.

236. **Command in the hands of the CDS. After consultation with the**
national and international authorities, the Dutch government will
establish the military-strategic objective(s) and preconditions for the
deployment of its contingent. The national military-strategic authority, the
CDS, is responsible for the use of military means in a particular area of
operations. He is also responsible for directing the operational units of the
RNLN, the RNLA and the RNLAF[32].

30 The points include political aspects, legal basis, attitude of the parties in the confl ict and

military aspects.

31 CDS Guideline 1: ‘Operational concept for peace operations’ (The Hague, September

2002), pp. 36-37.

32 The top structure of the Defence organisation. Letter from the Minister of Defence to the

House of Representatives (The Hague, 28 May 2003).


-----

_2.5.2 Direction of operations by the operational commanders_

237. Besides being directed by the CDS, the armed forces can also be
deployed by the operational commanders of the Services. The principle
of unifi ed national direction by the CDS does not apply in the case of the
following tasks:

a. In the RNLN: coastguard tasks for the Netherlands and for the
Netherlands Antilles and Aruba, as well as anti-drugs operations in the
Caribbean; deployment of the marines for the Special Assistance Unit.
b. In the RNLAF: the deployment of F-16s for the Quick Reaction Alert
(QRA); the airspace surveillance centre in Nieuw Milligen.
c. In the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee: the police tasks specifi ed in the
1993 Police Act (with the exception of those conducted for the purpose
of support as referred to, and insofar as it is applicable, in section 59);
the deployment of the Armed Forces Special Assistance Unit[33].

33 For more information on these tasks, see Chapter 4 (national deployment) and Annex B.


-----

-----

### Chapter 3

 Military operations


-----

-----

###### Military operations

301. This chapter looks at the principles for military operations in general
and for the Dutch armed forces in particular. Military means are one of

# 3

the instruments of power available to the state. The use of this instrument
usually results in the use or the threat of force. First of all, this chapter
gives a more detailed defi nition of terms used within the spectrum of
force, such as peace, armed confl ict, war and crisis management. There are
various methods of deploying military power. For the successful conduct
of operations, the interrelated concepts of military capability, operational
capabilities and the manoeuvrist approach are vitally important. The
chapter will then look at the basic principles of military operations. It will
end by looking at operational and technological developments which have
implications for future military activities.

**3.1 Spectrum of force**

302. **Frame of reference. The spectrum of relations between parties or**
states is divided into three main groups: peace, armed confl ict and war.
This doctrine is based on the following defi nitions.

303. Peace. There is peace between parties or states if there is no armed
confl ict and if the intention exists to conduct talks between the parties
in the event of disputes. Such disputes could thus indeed arise between
parties or states in times of peace. A dispute could arise if the interests and
objectives of parties or states differ to what they regard as an unacceptable
degree, without there being any actual use or threat of force to resolve
that dispute. In principle, other political means, such as diplomatic, legal
or economic measures, are chosen to settle the dispute. It may also be
the case that certain (terrorist) groups use force in peacetime to achieve
their objectives. This would then be verging on the boundary between
peace and (internal) armed confl ict. In peacetime, the authorities will use
‘normal’ means to react to the use of force, such as the deployment of the
police. If the authorities use special means (for example, military means)
to combat terrorist actions, the state of peace will gradually give way to one
of armed confl ict.


-----

304. **Armed confl ict. There is said to be an armed confl ict if a foreign**
force, a warring faction[34] or a terrorist unit (organisation or individual)
uses force to promote its own interests or objectives, or threatens to use
force to do so. In the context of an armed confl ict - at least in the views
of the parties involved - the objectives or values are irreconcilable. The
parties involved use the best possible combination of political means. In
addition to military means these may include diplomatic, economic and
psychological means.

305. **War. In its most extreme form an armed confl ict can take on the**
form of a war. A characteristic difference between an armed confl ict and
a war is that in a war a signifi cant proportion of the community of the
parties involved is mobilised, also in a literal sense because of the callup of reservists. Another prominent difference is that, in the case of war,
the parties involved consider the threat to their objectives or values to
be so serious that they believe they have no other option than to employ
large-scale military force, often over a prolonged period. A state of war
will certainly exist if a nation violates the sovereignty of another state by
attacking that state with its armed forces.

306. **The primacy of politics. Armed confl ict and war in particular are**
instruments controlled by the politicians: it is the deployment of an extra
means of power of the state, namely military capability. In the case of an
armed confl ict or war, the military means of power will take precedence
over the country’s other means if this is decided by the political leaders.

307. Crisis. In a political sense, the term ‘crisis’ can be defi ned in various
ways. One defi nition that is relevant to this doctrine is that disagreement
(between nations or parties) leads to a crisis if there is a question of a
critical point in the relationship of a country or party with any other
(inter)national actor at some point in the peace-war continuum. It might
also be the case that the balance has been disturbed. Given the defi nition
referred to earlier, a number of time-defi ned periods (critical points) can
be identifi ed within the peace -armed confl ict- war spectrum which can
be regarded as a crisis. This refers particularly to the shift from peace
to armed confl ict. Another defi nition of a crisis is the period in which
various disturbances of the equilibrium occur. An example of this is the
constant and radically changing disturbance of a balance in an ongoing

34 The term WARRING FACTION refers to both civilian and military insurgent groups. An

insurgent group is designated as a warring faction if it meets the following criteria: an

organised armed force and (irregular) paramilitary groups; functions under a command

that bears responsibility; takes part in hostilities; possesses part of the territory.


-----

armed confl ict. The situation in the former Yugoslavia at the beginning of
the nineteen nineties is a case in point.

**3.2 Methods of deploying military power**

308. A state has various means such as diplomatic, economic, fi nancial
and military instruments of power that it can use to achieve its objectives.
These means are intended to induce an opponent to take a course of
action that is favoured by the party using the instruments of power. In
this section, the emphasis is placed on the military instrument. Military
operations can be distinguished from other instruments of power by the
use or the threat of force.

309. Deterrence. If the threat posed by the compelling military power is
suffi cient to ensure that the opposing party (even before military means are
deployed) refrains from its intended undesirable action (an armed attack,
for example), such a situation is referred to as deterrence. If deterrence
works, the threat of armed force will not have to be carried out. There is
a distinction between general deterrence, such as the situation that exists
between nuclear powers, and acute deterrence, such as the generation of
a threat during a crisis.

310. Coercion or compellence. This is the use of military means with the
aim of forcing an opponent to change his behaviour. This could mean
either that he switches from inactivity to action or that he interrupts his
actions. In the case of coercion or compellence, pressure is exerted on
the coerced party to change his attitude or behaviour and he is given a
choice: do as required or face the consequences. These consequences can
range from diplomatic and economic sanctions to a physical attack on
important elements of the opponent’s system. Credibility is crucial in the
case of coercion; it plays a key psychological role in the successful course
of an operation. Credibility stems mainly from four elements: a feasible
operation plan, the right assets, high morale and dedicated execution.

311. Deterrence and coercion are both diplomatic forms of the use of force.
In the case of deterrence, the opponent is forced not to do something,
while coercion is designed to force the opponent to do something that
he would not otherwise have done. The way NATO acted towards the
Warsaw Pact during the Cold War is an example of successful deterrence.
An example of coercion is Operation Deliberate Force, during which NATO
used air strikes in 1995 against arms depots, heavy weapons, command
centres and communications systems to force the Bosnian Serb leaders to
cease their armed actions against the Bosnian Muslims and to engage in
constructive negotiations.


-----

312. Applying military force. The use of military force involves on the one
hand the possibility of destruction or, on the other, the denial of certain
objects to the enemy. In the case of successful deterrence, destruction
is threatened; in the case of combat (even in defence), force is applied.
Denial means denying the enemy the use of terrain and other objects, also
in the context of defensive actions.

**3.3 Military capability**

313. Military capability is the capacity for conducting military operations.
It consists of three interrelated components: conceptual, mental and
physical. The conceptual component is made up of basic principles,
doctrine and procedures. The mental component comprises three aspects:
the motivation to perform the task as well as possible, effective leadership
and the responsible organisation of the deployment of all assets in
terms of personnel and equipment. Lastly, the physical component is
the operational capacity of these assets, referred to by the term combat
power[35].

**Military capability**

**Conceptual** **Physical component**
**component** Operational

- Basic principles capacity of:

- Doctrine - Personnel

- Procedures - Material

(combat power)

**Morale component**

- Good motivation

- Effective leadership

- Responsible
organisation of
the deployment


35 COMBAT POWER is the capacity of a military unit to conduct a combat action or battle

(source: CBK). The elements of collective performance, readiness and sustainability also

form part of combat power (source: draft AJP 3-2).


_Figure 3-A: Components of_

_military capability_


-----

**3.4 Essential operational capabilities**

314. In order to be able to successfully perform the entire range of tasks
as part of an operation, the military unit needs to have various operational
capabilities within its military capability. These are based on the Essential
Operational Capabilities (EOCs) which have been drawn up by NATO
and which have been adapted in terms of their wording and meaning to
suit national interests in this area[36]. The common denominator in the
operational capabilities described below is that they are essential for the
successful performance of units and staffs: they should be available in the
right quantities and at the right time and place in order to facilitate the
effective conduct of operations, even under primitive conditions and over
prolonged periods, and to provide the necessary protection for troops and
equipment. The seven essential capabilities listed here are closely related
to one another and each reinforces the other. There are of course other
capabilities, which can make just as much of a contribution to the conduct
of an operation; these are not, however, essential for the success of the
operation. The following operational capabilities are recognised as being
vital for the performance of all conceivable tasks as part of an operation:

a. **EOC 1: Timely force availability expresses the capacity to build up and**
support a suffi cient and effective military presence within a given
response time, thus allowing the assigned tasks to be carried out.
b. **EOC 2: Effective intelligence aims to build up a picture of the environ-**
ment by means of the timely collection, processing and dissemination
of effective information in order to be able to anticipate and where
necessary respond to any situation in which the security of own or
Allied troops is compromised.
c. **EOC 3: Deployability and mobility makes it possible for military units**
and their equipment to displace within a set time period to the required
location and then to perform a task while retaining their military
capability.
d. **EOC 4: Effective engagement means the capability of deploying troops**
and weapons systems throughout the entire spectrum of force, thus
damaging the military capability of the other party or parties.
e. **EOC 5: Effective command, control and communications focuses on**
providing effective direction and steering for units and staffs in order
to achieve the set objective(s).

36 The EOCs are contained in the NATO document entitled MC400/2 Guidance for the Mili
tary Implementation of Alliance Strategy. For the Dutch explanation, see CDS Guideline 1:

‘Operational Concept for Peace Operations’, pp. 14-16.


-----

f. **EOC 6: Logistics sustainability is the range of activities designed to**
provide, manage, care for and maintain as well as supply and remove
personnel and equipment to and from units and staffs, in order to
enable them to conduct their assignment.
g. **EOC 7: Survivability and force protection focuses on retaining the**
military capability by limiting the effects of activities of others, including
the deployment of lethal and non-lethal weapons, and by ensuring
freedom of action and deployment of weapons.

**3.5 Manoeuvrist approach**

315. Characteristics. The fact that a force has suffi cient military capability
and essential operational capabilities does not guarantee success. The
method of warfi ghting or conduct of operations is also vitally important
in this respect. In combat operations, the Dutch armed forces take the
manoeuvrist approach as their starting point. The central principle of the
manoeuvrist approach is not to eliminate the enemy’s combat power (his
personnel and equipment) but to break the enemy’s general cohesion
and his will to fi ght. Manoeuvrist warfi ghting concentrates on deploying
military capability against identifi ed weaknesses on the part of the enemy.
Important features are momentum and tempo, which can in combination
bring about disruption and surprise. The capture and holding of terrain
is not a key feature of the manoeuvrist approach, but losses are infl icted
on the enemy by seizing the initiative and applying constant pressure at
times and places where he least expects it. This will effectively dislocate
his force structure. Manoeuvrist warfi ghting requires a mental attitude
which allows unexpected, rapid and creative actions to be combined with
an unremitting determination to succeed.

316. Infl uence of the decision-making process. The manoeuvrist approach
can be applied in all military activities within an operation. This method
offers the prospect of fast results or an outcome that is signifi cantly better
than could have been expected purely on the basis of the assets used. It
is for this reason that this method is ideal for a force that is smaller in
number than that of the other party, or for a strong force which wants to
deploy as few assets as possible. The manoeuvrist approach involves the
taking of calculated risks, since the enemy is not going to be faced with
a superiority in terms of troops or equipment. On the contrary, the aim
is to use a relatively small force to dislocate the enemy, psychologically
or otherwise. However, the enemy will not always react as expected. A
risk analysis should, therefore, form part of the planning for military
operations. Contingency plans will then be drawn up on the basis of this
analysis. Just as direct attacks can be alternated with indirect attacks in
every operation, the use of attrition is also possible in the manoeuvrist


-----

approach. An important aim in the manoeuvrist approach is to attack the
enemy’s decision-making process in order to achieve a higher operational
tempo than that of the enemy. This is intended to force the enemy to make
decisions faster than he is actually able to cope with, so that he increasingly
takes the wrong course of action or takes no action at all, thus paralysing
his reaction capability[37].

317. Centre of gravity. For successful military operations, commanders at
all levels of warfi ghting need to analyse how the enemy force is structured
and deployed and what the weak and strong points are. A military force
has a series of planning instruments for this purpose in order to ensure
that the development of the operation plan corresponds to the analysis
of the enemy. The identifi cation of the enemy centre of gravity is one of
these planning instruments. A centre of gravity is that element of the
enemy capability of which the destruction or neutralisation will lead to the
defeat of the enemy or to his desire to reach a peace settlement through
negotiation. The centre of gravity is thus a feature, capacity or location
from which the enemy derives his freedom of action, physical strength
or the will to continue the confl ict. Examples are the political and military
leaders, armed forces, command and control structures, public opinion,
the nation’s strength of will and an Allied or coalition structure. The centre
of gravity is a planning instrument that is used at the strategic as well
as the operational level. At the strategic level, the centre of gravity will
often be more abstract in nature. One example could be the opinion of a
people in respect of its leaders. In contrast to the strategic centre of gravity,
the operational centre of gravity is so concrete that it can be eliminated
or neutralised by military means, for instance the enemy’s operational
reserve. Success is based on whether the enemy’s centre of gravity is
identifi ed and destroyed while at the same time the friendly centre of
gravity is recognised and secured. One should realise here that it is often
easier for a military historian to identify a centre of gravity from the past
than it is for a commander on the ground who has to do so at a given point
in time[38].

**3.6 Basic principles of military operations**

318. Relationship between basic principles and military capability. Despite
advances in technology, the theory of warfi ghting has in effect changed
very little over the centuries. Theorists have tried to defi ne war with formal

37 The decision-making process can be shown in what is known as the OODA loop;

see Chapter 5, Command and Control.

38 British Defence Doctrine, JWP 0-01 (Shrivenham, 2001), pp. 3-5 and 3-6.


-----

and generally accepted principles. These basic principles of military
operations serve as a guide for military activities, but commanders apply
the necessary fl exibility in their use, not least because compromises
often have to be made. The success of military operations is a result of
the right interpretation of and adherence to the basic principles. These
fundamentals are rules for the use of military means. Although these
fundamentals form the basis for any military operation, they are not in
themselves instruments for direct use by the commander and his staff. It
is possible, however, to use these principles, formed by training and years
of military experience, to produce a practical summary of the concepts
and ideas that they incorporate for the commander and his staff. The
application of these principles requires not only common sense, but also
professional judgement. The fundamentals form part of the conceptual
component of military capability and as such contribute to the mental
component, particularly in terms of the responsible organisation of the
deployment of assets.

319. **Dutch perspective on basic principles. The basic principles are not**
the same the world over. Countries and alliances make choices, and the
Netherlands is no exception[39]. The Dutch armed forces use the basic
principles of military operations as fundamental rules for the use of
military means at the strategic, operational and tactical levels of operation.
The basic principles must always be considered in relation to one other.
Complying fully with one principle may make it impossible to take another
into consideration. The application of these principles thus needs to go
hand in hand with an evaluation of their importance in a specifi c situation.
In this evaluation, the commander should take into account the objective
of the higher commander, his own orders and objective, the actions of
other parties involved in the confl ict and the factors of time and space. The
basic principles adopted by the Dutch armed forces are listed below.

a. **Maintaining morale. The morale of the personnel is a key factor in the**
success of an operation. For the benefi t of the operational deployment,
the commander must therefore promote a sense of self-respect and a
unity of effort among his personnel. One aspect that affects morale is
the duration of an operation, which can affect the unit’s perseverance.
Crisis management could require the long-term involvement of the
international community, including international organisations and
non-governmental organisations (NGOs), and of a military force.

39 See for example British Defence Doctrine, pp. 3-1 to 3-4 and Allied Joint Doctrine,

AJP-01(B) (Brussels, 2002), pp 2-3 to 2-5.


-----

This means that account must be taken of, for example, the desired
objectives in the longer term and the political and legal restrictions
which the military force may encounter in the course of the operation.
It is precisely in a long-term mission that keeping up morale is not
only essential to ensure the sustainability of the military force but also
requires particular attention from the commander.
b. **Protection. Security is a vital condition for the preservation of friendly**
assets, the freedom of action, the concentration of the force and the taking
of risks outside the point of main effort. A certain level of security is
achieved by denying information to the enemy and by physical protection.
Protection includes active precautions to prevent being surprised by the
enemy or other parties, such as the active protection of bases, securing
a favourable situation in the airspace, defending the fl eet, protecting the
fl anks or keeping a suffi cient reserve available. It also includes passive
measures, such as ensuring that information regarding friendly assets
and plans does not fall into the hands of other parties.
c. **Concentration. In order to force a decision, a point of main effort has**
to be established at the right time and in the right place by means
of the concentration of effects. This should ensure that the local
effect is such that the set objective can be successfully achieved. The
capacity to concentrate the effort quickly depends on an effective and
effi cient command and control system and the ability to displace
rapidly. Concentration (particularly of equipment) means that relative
weaknesses are accepted elsewhere.
d. **Objective. Any military operation has to have an objective which is**
unequivocal, clearly defi ned and attainable. If a military unit lacks an
objective or loses sight of what has to be achieved, the military operation
will usually fail as a result. At higher levels, the objective can be expressed in guidelines or a directive setting out the desired end state. At the
tactical level, subordinate commanders derive their objective from the
intent of the higher commander and from the orders issued to them.
These aspects are a central feature of the operational decision-making
process, which ultimately produces orders for the lower level. This leads
to targeted action at all levels involved in an operation. Taking account of
this principle becomes diffi cult if the objective has to be changed in the
course of the operation. Obviously, the new objective must then be communicated as quickly as possible to all those involved: higher commander, adjacent units and subordinate commanders. Mutual respect for all
laws, beliefs, customs and cultures -not only between the military and
civil contingents of the forces of different countries, but also between the
leaders and units of the coalition partners- will further the objective.
e. **Economy of effort. Partly because of the required formation of a main**
point of effort, a commander has to deploy a reasonable minimum of
assets outside it. This means that he commits his means according to


-----

type and quantity in proportion to the set objective. The commander’s
challenge is to establish the right time and place to achieve success.
Only then can he decide where he can afford to be weak. In this way he
is also expected to take calculated risks.
f. **Unity of effort. All the available assets and efforts for a given objective**
need to be harmonised with each other. As a result, the commander
will be able to deploy the entire range of military capacity (combat
power) available to him effectively in order to achieve his objective,
while simultaneously reducing his vulnerability to the opponent.
Cohesive operations also affect the morale of friendly troops, credibility
and consequently the will of the opponent or other parties to continue
the confl ict. Given that nowadays an increasing number of assets
from different units, national and international, work together on
the same objective, modern military operations place heavy demands
on the combined action of the elementary functions. Unity of effort
can be achieved partly by a joint doctrine, unifi ed leadership and
synchronisation of friendly and supporting assets. It requires training,
team spirit, a positive attitude, a common purpose, a clear delineation
of responsibilities, integrated procedures and an understanding of each
other’s capabilities and limitations.
g. **Simplicity. Because of the rapid succession of events and the complexity**
of modern military operations, chaos, stress and friction are inevitable.
These are typical features of military operations. Complex plans
and orders that are diffi cult to understand increase the likelihood of
confusion. Straightforward plans and clear orders during the conduct
of an operation increase the chances of success.
h. **Flexibility. Although the commander’s objective will in theory remain**
unchanged, he must be adaptable in order to be able to adjust his plans. It
may become necessary to adapt the deployment to suit a new situation in
order to react to unexpected opportunities or threats. A precondition for
fl exibility is the right attitude and an organisation which is (traditionally)
accustomed to quickly meeting new demands. Warfare is often a test
of strength of the relative fl exibility of the two forces. A commander
can use his own mental fl exibility and the acumen and pliability of his
formation or unit to utilise the chaos of combat. The opponent will then
be overwhelmed by the pace at which various events take place. One
aspect of fl exibility is mobility. Mobility is essential to be able to attack
the enemy by surprise at an unexpected location, thus putting him at
a disadvantage in respect of friendly troops. This success can then be
exploited. The degree to which mobility comes into its own depends not
only on enemy actions and the technical mobility of units and materiel,
but also particularly on the mobility in the thinking and consequent
actions of commanders and staff at all levels. The speed with which the
decision-making process proceeds at all levels is crucial for the necessary


-----

progress of an operation. Following on naturally from mobility is freedom
of movement. A military force which cannot move to or within an area of
operations will fail to carry out its tasks and will be unable to accomplish
its mission. Other factors of infl uence should be taken into consideration
in this respect, such as refugee movements and road use by civil actors.
i. **Initiative. Commanders should always strive to achieve and maintain**
freedom of action. The aim is to act sooner and faster instead of merely
reacting to the actions of the enemy. Only by acting faster than the
other parties can their will to achieve their goals be broken. This does
not mean, however, that patience is not required in some cases. Here,
too, a precondition for success is a style of leadership which allows for
taking the initiative and, consequently, taking risks.
j. **Offensive actions are the most important means available to a**
commander for acting effectively and decisively in order to achieve his
objective. As well as physical offensive actions, offensive operations
also require the right attitude for constantly gaining and keeping the
initiative. By choosing where to act, the commander can make sure that
at least part of the enemy’s combat power cannot be brought to bear
in the right place. Even in defensive operations, the commander must
exploit every opportunity to attack the enemy and regain the initiative.
k. **Surprise is defi ned as an attack on the enemy at a place and/or time or**
in a way he does not expect. The commander may also deploy means
for which the enemy is not prepared. Surprise actions can produce a
decision in favour of friendly forces, even if friendly combat power is
more limited. The commander constantly has to try to destabilise the
enemy by his speed of thinking and acting, by means of secrecy and
deception, as well as by varying the method of operation and the use of
unexpected means. On the other hand, it might also be necessary in an
operation for a military force to act overtly so that a particular action by
the force is not misinterpreted by parties involved in the confl ict or by
local inhabitants. In a situation such as this, the motives, the mission
and the intentions of the force may need to be absolutely clear to the
parties involved. Any errors in communication will arouse suspicion
and could damage credibility and trust. This will be detrimental to
cooperation and any prospect of a successful end to the operation. In
that case, surprise should give way to transparency for the sake of the
success of the operation.
l. **Sustainability. Once an operation has been started, the deployed**
military force must be able to sustain it as long as is necessary to
achieve the desired result (i.e. success). To ensure sustainability in an
operation, provision must be made for all the necessary conditions for
the successful implementation of the operation plan, including the
logistic and personnel support. This support should focus on providing
the commander with as much freedom of action as possible in order


-----

to carry out his plan. Although the logistic process is for the benefi t of
combat power, it is vital for the conduct of the entire operation. Logistic
preparations must, therefore, be incorporated in the planning from the
outset.

**3.7 Developments in military operations**

320. There have been a number of important changes in recent years
in the military operations by Western armed forces. These operations
are increasingly characterised by the ability to achieve well-defi ned
military effects using technologically advanced resources across great
distances. This applies to all operations. In recent years, the focus in
military operations has shifted further towards the conduct, support and
infl uence of land operations and towards the engagement of land targets.
Capabilities in all dimensions of military operations contribute to that
focus. Developments on land are infl uenced to a great extent from the air
or the sea. The air operations above Kosovo, above Afghanistan as part
of operation ‘Enduring Freedom’ and above Iraq, as well as the launch of
cruise missiles from the sea to ground targets are all examples of this[40].
But although developments on land are largely infl uenced by events in
the air or at sea, the decisive battle is fought out on land. Despite the fact
that the emphasis has shifted towards expeditionary actions, a number of
the armed forces’ tasks remain non-expeditionary, although this does not
in any way make them any less important. A great many units are also
involved in these tasks[41].

321. **Joint, expeditionary and initial entry forces. To be able to conduct**
expeditionary operations, the armed forces must have high-quality
units which can demonstrate a high level of independence within an
international coalition[42]. More and more joint operations are conducted

40 2003 Defence Budget and Policy Letter, p. 13.

41 These are tasks such as the quick reaction alert (RNLAF), coastguard tasks (RNLN and

RNLAF), national tasks performed by the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee, search-and
rescue (RNLN and RNLAF) and disaster support for civil authorities (RNLA, RNLN and

RNLAF). See also the responsibilities of the CDS and the Services, as set out in Chapter 2.

42 EXPEDITIONARY OPERATIONS involve the conduct of a military operation at a relati
vely great distance from the home base by a logistically self-suffi cient and integrated force

which, by projecting its military capability in a defi ned area of operations, achieves a speci
fi c objective. Expeditionary operations by the Dutch armed forces are characterised by the

following aspects: 1) it is an operational deployment of units, formations or fl eets; 2) the

deployment takes place outside Dutch territory, including the Dutch Antilles and Aruba; 3)

actions are in principle conducted in a joint and multinational context (Source: CBK).


-----

in settings which can be regarded as expeditionary. The term ‘initial entry
forces’ is to be seen in this context. The fi rst military units that are deployed
in the mission area will have to be suffi ciently robust but also capable of
rapid displacement. However, maximum strategic mobility must not be
allowed to result in a situation in which once the unit has arrived in the
area of operations it has virtually no more tactical mobility or protection.
There must, therefore, be a mix of strategic mobility on the one hand and
robustness and tactical mobility on the other. The growing frequency of
deployment outside the NATO area increases the importance of range,
strategic mobility and good, fl exible logistic support.

322. The actions of armed forces do not follow a fi xed pattern. Military
operations are thus made-to-measure, with high demands placed on
fl exibility. The terrain, the composition of the coalition and of friendly
units, the enemy, the attitude of the local inhabitants, the desired effects
and the method of operation will all differ in each operation. Furthermore,
a wide range of operations is conceivable, from confl ict prevention by
means of preventive deployment to post-confl ict operations, from smallscale to large-scale operations, under diverse conditions, from low to high
in the spectrum of force. The tempo of military operations is high and
circumstances can change rapidly even during an operation and necessitate
a different type of operation[43]. For this reason, today’s operations can no
longer be clearly delineated but are highly complex in nature, as set out
in further detail in Chapter 4. At the same time, there is also a tendency
towards operations of longer duration. As well as periods in which events
take place at a high tempo, there might also be periods, sometimes of
considerable length, in which no irregularities occur. Actions conducted
as a matter of routine could jeopardise morale.

_3.7.1 Joint operations_

323. The different Services of the armed forces are operating jointly to an
ever increasing extent, combining their capabilities to achieve the optimal
result. Their contributions will be determined according to the nature of
an operation and the desired effects. A joint operation is not necessarily
one conducted with another Service from the same military force. In
practice, the Services conduct joint/combined operations far more often
than purely joint actions. One example is the joint operation by a Dutch
air defence frigate with F-16s from the American air force.

43 2003 Defence Budget and Policy Letter 2003’, p. 13-14.


-----

324. **Joint operations. Joint operations refer to integrated operations**
involving at least two Services. The cooperation between the Services is
based on the operational level. That is where the joint force commander
plans the activities of the Service components of his force. Cooperation
between the components mainly takes place at the tactical level. Examples
of cooperation between land and air forces are the deployment of combat,
transport or support helicopters for the benefi t of army units, or air support
by aircraft for close air support, air reconnaissance and air transport, and
the integrated actions of 11 Airmobile Brigade (Royal Netherlands Army)
and the helicopter squadrons of the Tactical Helicopter Group (Royal
Netherlands Air Force) in 11 Air Manoeuvre Brigade. In air defence by
ground-based units, too, the air force plays a key role with its combat planes,
airborne radar systems and surface-to-air missile systems. Examples of
cooperation between the navy and units from the army are naval gunfi re
support for ground-based units and air defence in coastal waters. There
are also possibilities for cooperation between army and marines units in
infantry tasks that are similar in some respects. The air force and the navy
work together in air defence above the sea (with air defence vessels and
fi ghter aircraft), ground-based air defence (RNLA and RNLAF Stingers),
coastguard tasks and search-and-rescue operations. An example of joint
action by the Services as part of national operations was the military
assistance provided during the fl oods of 1998. RNLA and RNLN military
personnel and RNLN and RNLAF helicopters worked together closely to
evacuate people and animals and to construct defences against the rising
waters. Another example of a jointly conducted national operation is the
support provided in 1997 to control the swine fever epidemic in the south
of the country.

325. **Joint campaign. A joint campaign is a coordinated series of**
successively or simultaneously conducted operations, designed to
achieve the operational objective within a given time or in a particular
area, involving the synchronisation of land, naval and air forces. A joint
campaign is usually made up of the following elements:

a. Enforcing and protecting lines of communications on land, at sea and
through the air to and within the theatre of operations.
b. Enforcing a desired situation in relevant parts of the area of operations,
the sea and in the airspace above the theatre of operations.
c. Allocating troops and assets for the intermediate and fi nal objectives.
d. Conducting ground, sea and air operations in accordance with the
nature and capabilities of the individual troops and assets. Operations
are also conducted in the information domain (and possibly in space,
by Allies).
e. Ensuring the provision of adequate support, including logistic support.


-----

f. Command and control operation: the conduct of information operations,
in which our own supply of information and command and control
is safeguarded and those of the enemy are attacked with the aim of
achieving a faster pace in the decision-making process than the enemy.
g. Withdrawing the force, including rescue and recovery operations.
h. Preparing and conducting special operations.
i. Preparing and conducting post-confl ict peace building.

_3.7.2 Multinational operations_

326. Multinational operations. Multinational operations refer to integrated
operations by the armed forces of at least two nations. All operations are
in principle conducted in conjunction with other countries; this will often
involve cooperation with NATO countries. Some examples are 1(GE/
NL)Corps, of which the RNLA forms part, the UK-NL Amphibious Force, in
which the RNLN participates with units from the Marine Corps and various
naval units such as the Landing Platform Docks and the European Airlift
Cell, in which the RNLAF is involved[44]. In many cases non-NATO nations
will also participate in a military operation. This was the case, for instance, in
the NATO operation SFOR in Bosnia, in which troops from NATO countries
worked alongside those from non-NATO countries such as Ukraine and
the Russian Federation. In Ethiopia and Eritrea, Afghanistan and Iraq too,
troops from NATO states worked and are still working with those from
other countries, such as India and Australia respectively. Multinationality
also increases the legitimacy of the participation in a military force as well as
the solidarity between the participating nations (burden and risk sharing).

327. Success factors. The cooperation between the various nations is also
established at the operational level. That is where the force commander
plans the activities of the troops of the various nations of his force; actual
cooperation also takes effect at tactical level. Various preconditions play a
key role in the successful conduct of multinational operations. The main
ones are as follows.

a. **Respect. Mutual respect for the ideas, culture, religion and customs of**
partner nations helps to lay the foundations for cooperation and unity
of effort. One way to achieve unity of effort is through joint doctrine.

44 In accordance with the NATO Standardisation Agreement STANAG 1059 (Ed. 8) – Letter

Codes for Geographical Entities (Brussels, 2004), the abbreviations for countries have

been changed from two to three-letter codes, such as NL to NLD, GE to DEU and UK to

GBR. It is expected that the names of these military units will be amended in accordance

with this STANAG.


-----

b. **Harmony. Good personal relations.**
c. **Interoperability. Use by the participating nations of a similar system**
of command and control and the availability at all command levels of
communication systems which are compatible with each other and with
those of the relevant civil organisations both contribute signifi cantly to
the success of the operation.
d. **Allocation of tasks. A multinational force commander should give**
each individual international partner tasks which are in keeping with
the capabilities of that nation’s units and which do not confl ict with
national guidelines. He should take account of the views of the various
multinational partners in his planning.
e. **Management of assets. Multinational partners can request help from**
one another in respect of logistic support. The more similar the logistic
systems of the various partners, the greater the opportunity for support
of this kind. Arrangements can be made for this prior to the operation
and adjusted if necessary as the operation progresses.

_3.7.3 Integrated operations_

328. As well as the developments referred to above, in which the emphasis
lies on the conduct of military operations, there are also new technological developments which are changing military operations. Several of these developments are outlined here, taking integrated actions as the common feature.

329. Information operations. Information has always played a major role in
decision-making processes. Without the right information, it is impossible
to make the right decision. More and more often, the Dutch armed forces
are faced with an increasing fl ow of information, both operationally and
organisationally. More and more support is provided by computerised
information systems. These assets form a vital part of the command and
control (C2) system. Successful operations require free access by the user
to all relevant information and to the systems through which information
is transferred. This demands a high level of reliability and availability from
these information systems. Poor information management means that the
task cannot be accomplished. As a result, information is thus increasingly
regarded as a potential target. The sphere covered by information operations
is extensive since they can be used in peacetime as well as in wartime. In
an offensive form, information operations combine command and control
warfare with political, diplomatic, civil-military and information activities
with the aim of changing the perception of the parties. The defensive form

45 For further details regarding the protection of the decision-making process and the disrup
tion of that of the enemy, see the section on the OODA loop in Chapter 5.


-----

of information operations involves the protection of friendly headquarters,
units and systems against similar activities by the enemy[45].

330. **Effects-based operations (EBO). In the future too, politicians and**
society will continue to demand that the deployment of military units
produces positive results in a short space of time. At the same time, it
is becoming increasingly important that casualties among friendly
troops and among the civilian population be avoided, as should damage
to the social infrastructure in the area of operations. Actions against
military opponents also remain subject to strict conditions (ROE). The
increasingly close relationship between time and success underlines the
growing need to focus attention on the desired effects of an operation.
This approach is known as EBO. EBO stands for the integrated use of
military and non-military instruments of power to achieve grand strategy
objectives. Although the term EBO itself is relatively new, the underlying
principles are based on the current approach to the use of military assets.
With the formulation of his intent, the commander is after all setting out
the objective he ultimately wishes to achieve. In an EBO context, he then
sets out the desired effects which should allow the ultimate objective to
be achieved. The principle here is that the available military (and other)
capabilities are used with fl exibility so that they can be deployed as
effectively and effi ciently as possible. It should not be forgotten, however,
that these are intended effects. EBO requires constant evaluation of the
actual effects achieved. If it transpires that the intended effect is not being
realised or that the effect achieved will not lead to the accomplishment of
the ultimate objective, the original plans will have to be adjusted.

331. **Network-enabled capabilities (NEC). The description of EBO**
highlighted the fact that the key factor is now the intended effects and
no longer the available assets (platform-centric planning). To achieve the
intended effect, the joint forces commander (JFC) will deploy all available
assets (land, naval and air) which are suitable for the task. In order to be
able to coordinate such a deployment effi ciently and effectively, all those
units must form part of a network. Operating in a network such as this,
as well as the interoperability of weapons and sensors and of information
and communications systems, will shorten the decision-making cycle;
an important condition for using the manoeuvrist approach successfully.
This is referred to by the term NEC. The increasing availability of these
technologically advanced systems has major implications for the nature of
military operations. The central premise of the NEC concept is to improve
the management of operational information by eradicating restrictive
functional and organisational shortcomings in order to make optimum use
of all available capabilities in a joint coalition. Changes in connection with
procedure, personnel, culture and organisation are inextricably linked to


-----

aspects in the development of NEC. The key issue is how better networks
can lead to better decision-making processes and to better effects. Making
better use of information leads to information superiority, which in turn
leads to decision superiority and effects superiority. The enhancement
of interoperability between sensors and shooters (weapon systems) of
different nations and multinational capabilities serves as a force multiplier
for operational effectiveness. Effectiveness can be improved with relatively
little investment in interoperability[46].

332. NEC and Dutch military operations. The Ministry of Defence has been
endorsing the strategic importance of the NEC developments for years. In
respect of the level of ambition with regard to NEC, the Dutch armed
forces want to join the international development of network-enabled
capabilities in order to be able to supply an appropriate, high-quality and
technologically advanced military contribution to international operations
at any level of the spectrum of force[47]. The Defence organisation views NEC
as a prerequisite for a fl exible and modular military capability. It wants to
make an active contribution to the realisation of NEC, in order to at least
ensure that our capabilities will continue to be compatible with those of
our major Allies. It is also about interoperability with civil partners, such
as nationally with other government agencies and, for instance, with nongovernmental organisations (NGOs). For the Defence organisation, the
realisation of NEC is a necessary process which occupies a key position in
the modernisation and transformation of military capabilities.

46 Delivering Security in a Changing World: Defence White Paper, Supporting Essays

(London, 2003), pp. 5, 10, 12 and 14.

47 ‘Network operations – NEC policy development study’, version 21 February 2005,

pp. 7 and 17.


-----

-----

-----

### Chapter 4

 Operational execution of the armed forces’ main tasks


-----

-----

###### Operational execution of the armed forces’ main tasks

401. This chapter will examine how the military instrument of the Dutch
state, as set out in the main tasks of the armed forces, can be deployed in

# 4

the form of military operations. To do so, the Dutch frame of reference
for operations and the international defi nitions from which it is derived
will be explained fi rst. It is important to note in this respect that today’s
military operations are highly complex in nature. This chapter will end
by looking at the main tasks of the Dutch armed forces in national and
international deployments.

**4.1 International frame of reference for operations**

402. Different classifi cations. A straightforward defi nition of operations
is complicated by the fact that the Dutch armed forces are part of NATO,
which means that the national views on operations must be harmonised
with those of the Alliance. The Netherlands also takes part in operations
by other international organisations (UN, OSCE, EU) or coalitions,
in which the same considerations apply. It is for this reason that this
section will fi rst look at the classifi cation used by NATO, followed by the
classifi cation of crisis management operations used by other international
organisations. It will then focus attention on the national defi nitions. In all
classifi cations, operations nowadays can no longer be defi ned according to
a single task, as one operation now entails a range of tasks.

403. **NATO classifi cation: Article 5 and NA5CRO. NATO divides its**
operations into two categories: operations in the context of collective
defence, as defi ned in Article 5 of the NATO treaty, and other operations.
The situation in the Cold War was a preparation for wartime under Article
5, whereby NATO would use collective defence to respond to any attack
by Warsaw Pact countries. A recent example in this respect was the
declaration by NATO, immediately after the terrorist attack on the US on
11 September 2001, offering support to the US under Article 5. This was
the fi rst time that Article 5 had been invoked. NATO’s other operations are
referred to under the heading of non-Article 5 Crisis Response Operations
(NA5CRO). The Netherlands has decided to translate NA5CRO with a term
meaning ‘crisis management operations’ and to use NATO’s defi nition of


-----

NA5CRO as the starting point for the defi nition of crisis management
operations. Both terms (NA5CRO and crisis management operations)
should be regarded as ‘umbrella’ terms rather than as a narrowly defi ned
type of military operation.

404. **Crisis management operations. A crisis management operation is**
defi ned as an operation which comprises political, military and civil activities,
and which is initiated and conducted in accordance with international law
(including international humanitarian law), whereby a contribution is made
to the prevention and resolution of confl icts as well as to the management
of crises in order to achieve the internationally determined objectives. A
crisis management operation may be an operation in which mainly civil
organisations are supported, an operation which supports peace, or a combat
operation conducted by a coalition. As part of a multinational operation (for
example, one led by NATO), extraction operations may also be conducted,
as well as tasks in support of disaster relief and humanitarian operations,
search-and-rescue operations and non-combatant evacuation operations.
Operations involving the use or threat of military force encompass military
actions which range from the enforcement of sanctions, such as embargoes,
to military combat operations. All this shows that operations can be
conducted throughout the spectrum of force, ranging from a situation in
which no force is used to one in which the use of force is essential. Crisis
management operations can be divided into peace-support activities and
other activities and tasks (see Figure 4-A).

**Crisis management operation (NA5CRO)**

**Peace support** **Other operations**
**operations (PSO)** **and tasks**

Conflict prevention Humanitarian relief

Peacemaking Disaster relief

Peacekeeping Search and Rescue
activities

Extraction

Enforcement
activities

Evacuation of

Peace-building non-combattants
activities

Military support

Humanitarian activities for civil authorities

Enforcement of sanctions


48 Not only in NA5CRO but also in Article 5 operations might many of these activities take

place in a single operation.


_Figure 4-A: List of possible_

_activities within a single_

_military operation[48]_


-----

405. **Peace-support operations. The defi nition of crisis-management**
operations contains the phrase ‘an operation which supports peace’. NATO
uses the term ‘peace-support operations’ (PSO). The Dutch equivalent is a
direct translation of that term. A peace-support operation is an operation
that is conducted with the objective of achieving a lasting political solution
to a confl ict and in which the deployed military force stands above the
parties involved in the confl ict. The force’s mandate is generally based
on a UN resolution or a corresponding decision by another international
organisation, such as the OSCE.

406. Peace-support operations take the following forms:

a. Confl ict prevention, for example by means of the preventive deployment
of military units.
b. Peacekeeping
c. Peacemaking/peace enforcement
d. Peace building
e. Humanitarian activities

407. **Perception of organisations with regard to crisis management**
**operations. Although NATO’s conceptual framework has been used for the**
defi nition of crisis-management operations, these can also be conducted
by the UN, the EU, the OSCE or a coalition of the willing and the able.
The conceptual framework for the peace-support operations referred to
above was established by the UN in 1992 in the policy document entitled
‘An Agenda for Peace’, to which the so-called ‘Supplement’ was added later,
in 1995. The EU refers to what are known as the ‘Petersberg Tasks’. These
include humanitarian relief operations, peacekeeping operations and crisismanagement operations in which combat forces may be deployed to enforce
compliance with an agreement[49]. The OSCE does not use a separate set of
defi nitions. Where the defi nition of crisis management operations refers to
‘NATO’, therefore, as far as the different manifestations are concerned, the
defi nition also applies to the UN, EU, OSCE and international coalitions.

**4.2 Dutch conceptual framework for crisis management operations**

408. The Dutch armed forces play an active role on the international
stage in carrying out the activities referred to above in the context of crisis

49 Source: European Council, June 1999: the entire range of tasks relating to confl ict pre
vention and crisis management as defi ned in the Treaty concerning the European Union,

known as the ‘Petersberg tasks’: Article 17.2. Treaty on European Union: Questions referred

_to in this Article shall include humanitarian and rescue tasks, peacekeeping tasks and tasks of_

_combat forces in crisis management, including peacemaking._


-----

management. Using the defi nitions of the Corporate Frame of Reference
for Defence (CBK), the following section will examine the Dutch perception
of these operational activities.

_4.2.1 Peace-support activities_

409. Diplomatic and military activities. The term ‘peace-support activities’
is the generic term used to describe military activities in which what is
often a multinational force is used to support a peace process. This covers
the entire range of activities focused on keeping or restoring the peace.
These activities are usually the result of UN authorisation to intervene
in regional or local confl icts. These armed confl icts could be interstate,
intrastate or transnational in nature. In peace-support activities, there is a
distinction between diplomatic and military activities.

410. Diplomatic activities:

a. **Preventive diplomacy consists of diplomatic actions which are**
undertaken before an anticipated crisis and which are designed to
remove the causes of the confl ict. This should prevent the outbreak of
violence. Preventive actions can also be taken to prevent the spread and
intensifi cation of low-level force. Confl ict prevention activities support
this process with military means.
b. **Peacemaking is a peace-support activity that consists mainly of diplo-**
matic activities but that can also involve the threat of the use of force;
this is conducted after a confl ict has started and is designed to achieve
and enforce a cease-fi re or a quick peace settlement.

411. **Military activities. The manifestations of military peace-support**
activities shown in Figure 4-A comprise the following activities.

a. **Confl ict prevention. This is a peace-support activity which includes a**
wide range of diplomatic and military activities, such as the identifi cation
of potential causes of confl ict, the monitoring of confl ict indicators and
the early deployment of activities to prevent the development or the
(re-)emergence of a confl ict between states or within a state. Confl ict
prevention normally requires the consent of the parties involved.
Confl ict prevention involves instruments such as early warning,
surveillance, implementation of stabilising measures, preventive
deployment of troops, dialogue, cooperation, peace-building activities
(including arms control agreements) and socio-cultural activities. The
forward deployment of naval units at sea (near to the crisis area but not
in it), including any embarked aircraft and/or troops, is an example of
confl ict prevention which does not require consent from the parties


-----

involved. This could, however, send a strong political and military signal
to the parties involved. The level of force will be comparatively low in the
execution of these activities. Confl ict prevention is primarily a diplomatic
process and requires diplomatic skills to avoid escalation. In a situation
such as this, the military force acts in support of the civil authorities in
the quest for peace and must take the necessary steps to ensure that
the situation is closely monitored. Only if diplomatic and/or political
preventive measures fail to have any effect can military means be used.
b. **Peacekeeping activities. These are activities which fall under Chapter VI**
of the UN Charter and which are conducted after a peace agreement or
cease-fi re has created an environment in which the level of compliance
by the parties is high and the threat of renewed hostilities is low.
Peacekeeping activities are conducted in an international context and
include such aspects as the deployment of military troops in the area
of operations (examples of such ‘UN blue helmet operations’ are the
Dutch participation in UNIFIL from 1979 to 1985 and in UNMEE in
2001). Military action must be based on the permission (or at least
assent) of the parties involved. If parties do not abide by the agreements
that have been reached, escalation may follow and coercive measures
may be necessary.
c. **Peace-enforcement activities. These activities are normally conducted**
on the basis of the principles laid down in Chapter VII of the UN
Charter. They are conducted to restore peace between warring parties
which, in principle, do not all necessarily consent to the intervention of
the peace force. These operations can be either interstate or intrastate
and often involve the use or threat of a relatively high level of force.
Peace-enforcing activities could include a presence, embargo, blockade,
control, interim coercive measures or intervention. Generally speaking,
these actions will not be led by the UN, but will be ‘outsourced’ to a
security organisation or an ad hoc coalition led by one state. The 19901991 Gulf War is an example of a peace-enforcement operation with
an interstate character, in which a military operation to enforce Iraq’s
compliance with the UNSC resolutions was conducted by a US-led
coalition. The UN’s UNOSOM II operation in Somalia in 1993 is an
example of a peace-enforcement operation with an intrastate character.
d. **Peace-building activities. These activities are in principle conducted by**
civil organisations, if necessary with military support, in the form of

50 CIMIC, civil-military cooperation, is the cooperation between the armed forces and civil

and government organisations. CIMIC can be split into CIMIC activities and CIMIC

operations. CIMIC activities focus on the support of military units by civil organisations

(infrastructural provisions, supply of goods and services, etc). CIMIC operations relate to

actions by military units in support of civil organisations (assistance in reconstruction,

repair of infrastructure, mine clearance, etc). (Source: CBK).


-----

civil-military cooperation (CIMIC)[50]. These activities are conducted to
sustain a fragile peace after the settlement of an armed confl ict. Their
aim is to enable a country to maintain its sovereignty so that the confl ict
does not fl are up again after the departure of the intervening forces. It is
a political process that consists of, for example, attempts to support the
structures which will be able to consolidate peace in the long term and
that will promote a sense of trust and well-being among the population.
Peace-building activities focus attention on building up infrastructure,
economic activities, a democratic form of government and establishing
and reorganising the security sector, which comprises the police
apparatus as well as the armed forces. They can also help to demobilise
the military force or dismantle and disarm formerly warring factions.
Other activities in this respect are the restoration of law and order, the
repatriation of refugees, advice and training for security personnel,
acting as observers in elections, promoting efforts for the protection of
human rights and the reorganisation and strengthening of government
agencies (also at local and provincial level).
e. **Humanitarian activities. Humanitarian tasks, such as the deployment**
of medical relief teams, could be performed in the context of peacesupport activities, but could also be undertaken independently (see other
activities). Humanitarian activities as part of peace support operations
are primarily intended to further stabilise the situation and thus
contribute to the peace process. In this case, therefore, humanitarian
relief is a means. Humanitarian activities also include aid to refugees
and displaced persons.

_4.2.2 Other activities and tasks_

a. **Humanitarian relief. In humanitarian relief actions, the deployment of**
relief organisations, which might include military units, is intended to
alleviate human suffering, in circumstances in which the responsible
authorities are no longer able -and in some cases are also unwilling- to
provide adequate support for the people. In this context, unlike that in
the case of peace support operations, the sole objective of humanitarian
relief is to relieve human suffering. In the case of emergency
humanitarian aid, there is an emergency situation in which the (local)
relief effort is not enough, leading quickly to a temporary need for
support, possibly also military, in order to provide the basic necessities
for survival.
b. **Disaster relief. Disaster relief entails activities designed to provide the**
facilities to alleviate human suffering and to save lives in the event of a
disaster. Disaster relief could also include humanitarian activities.
c. **Search and Rescue. This task involves the use of aircraft, surface**
vessels, submarines or vehicles, as well as specialised rescue teams and


-----

equipment, to search for and rescue personnel in distress on land or at
sea.
d. **Extraction. In this activity, a military force provides support for another**
force returning from a confl ict area.
e. **Evacuation of non-combatants. This activity is used to relocate non-**
combatants who are at risk abroad to a safe location.
f. **Military support for civil authorities. This military support encompasses**
the assistance provided by (parts of) the armed forces -other than
(special) military assistance- at the request of administrative or judicial
authorities at home or abroad, in situations in which public interests
are affected. The provision of support for civil authorities could include
the same activities as those conducted in the case of humanitarian
relief and disaster relief, but in this case the civil organisations lead
the operation and the armed forces merely provide the capacity (for
example, the military deployment during the swine fever epidemic in
1997 and the military support in controlling the outbreak of foot-andmouth disease in 2001.
g. **Enforcement of a sanction, such as an embargo. The aim of this**
activity is to force a state to observe rules of international law, such as
a resolution from the UN Security Council or another international
(security) organisation.

**4.3 Complexity of operations**

412. **Disappearance of distinction between categories of operations.**
There is national and international consensus that the experiences of
international operations during the 1990s and at the beginning of the 21[st]
century have shown that operations can no longer be divided into strict
categories, for example in accordance with the manifestations of the peace
support operations referred to earlier[51]. Almost all operations will now
contain elements of more than one form of the individual operations. A
unit could, for instance, coordinate humanitarian relief with international
organisations and NGOs during combat actions, or coercive actions could
be conducted during a peacekeeping operation, while elsewhere in the area
of operations reconstruction activities are being carried out, cooperation is
taking place and discussions are being held with civil authorities. All these
elements can take place within the time and space of the same operation.
It is also impossible nowadays to make a clear distinction in the spectrum
of force between combat operations and crisis management operations.

51 Wiggen, O.P. van, Eijl, C.A.M. van, Nieuwenhuis, P., ‘The transformation process of the

RNLA in perspective’, Militaire Spectator, no. 10 (2004), p.484; Jackson, M., ‘The UK

Medium Weight Capability: A Response to the Changing Strategic Context’, RUSI Defence

_Systems, autumn 2004, p.42._


-----

The distinction between operations under Article 5 of the NATO treaty and
those in the context of NA5CRO (crisis management operations) has thus
also become blurred, since the same operational aspects could be present
in both types of operation. For the commander of an operation, there is,
therefore, no difference. When the mandate, the objectives and the ROE
are drawn up for an operation, account must be taken of the fact that a
broad spectrum of operational aspects could occur simultaneously.

413. Continued distinction according to mandate and multifunctionality.
In contrast to the shift towards a broad and non-differentiating spectrum
of activities within an operation, the distinction on the basis of mandate
(peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with Chapter VI of the
UN Charter as opposed to coercive measures in accordance with Chapter
VII), which plays a particularly key role in the political decision making,
continues to apply. This distinction remains important in political and
legal terms and thus has repercussions, for instance for participation in
such an operation and the level of force that is authorised. An additional
distinguishing aspect continues to be whether the operation has a
multifunctional mandate (for instance, whether it includes humanitarian
relief).

414. Activities in a single operation. As stated earlier, today’s operations
could include activities which have until now been regarded as separate
operations. Given that each operation is likely to include aspects of more
than one type of crisis management operation, the term ‘operations’
has been replaced in the foregoing defi nition by the term ‘activities’, in
order to emphasise that different activities can feature simultaneously or
successively in one operation (see Figure 4-A).

**4.4 Main tasks of the armed forces and their operational execution**

415. As set out previously in Chapter 2, the Dutch armed forces have three
main tasks:

1. Protecting the integrity of national and Allied territory, including the
Netherlands Antilles and Aruba;
2. Promoting stability and the international rule of law;
3. Supporting civil authorities in upholding the law, providing disaster
relief and humanitarian relief, both nationally and internationally.

416. **Intertwining of main tasks. Partly because of the increasing**
intertwining of internal and external security, the distinction between
the main tasks of the armed forces has become blurred over the past few
years. The Defence White Paper 2000 had already established that the


-----

resources that were necessary for the fi rst and second main tasks were
virtually identical, given that defending Alliance territory in practice
amounts to regional crisis management at the borders of the Alliance.
The importance of the third main task has increased and the link with
the fi rst two has become stronger because of the threat of terrorism[52].
To get a good understanding of the deployment of the armed forces, the
Defence tasks that are derived from the main tasks must also be taken
into consideration[53]. For reasons of clarity, the operational execution of the
main tasks is divided into national and international deployment.

_4.4.1 National deployment_

417. **Fundamentals. National deployment is the result of national and**
international rules. In this way, host nation support arises from international
agreements and the provision of military assistance is based on legislative
arrangements. The provision of support is not based on legislative
arrangements but on agreements with government organisations. The
execution of a national deployment can place exceptional demands on
those involved. This could be because of the (special) circumstances in
which the deployment has to be conducted, the allocation of assets or
response times.

418. Characteristics. National operations have the following characteristics:

a. National operations take place in principle in national territory.
The logistic support of Dutch military personnel participating in
multinational operations outside the Netherlands is also regarded as a
national operation.
b. National operations can also be conducted in peacetime. They can also
be conducted in special circumstances in which measures under state
emergency law apply.
c. The units or organisations to be supported are described in general
beforehand, but are not named specifi cally. This is because the support
is provided for ‘civil authorities or Allies’, but the particular authority or
ally concerned may be different in each operation.
d. In most national operations, the level of force will usually be low,
although certain activities, such as the tasks of the Special Assistance
Unit, coastguard tasks and security tasks, could entail a (much) higher
level of force.
e. National operations can be conducted in combination with other (crisis
management) operations.

52 ‘2003 Defence Budget and Policy Letter’, pp. 15-16.

53 See the description of Defence tasks in Chapter 2 and in Annex A.


-----

f. National operations can be conducted under the command of and also
in cooperation with civil authorities.

419. **Types of national operations[54]. National operations can be divided**
into the following categories:

a. **The protection of Dutch territory. The protection of national territory is**
carried out by surveillance of the airspace (QRA by the RNLAF) and of
territorial waters (RNLN coastguard tasks).
b. **Security on the ground. This task includes the security of military**
operations as well as the guarding and protection of (temporary)
military objects and military transports on land.
c. **The provision of host nation support. This task entails the provision of**
support for the armed forces of Allies, including security in the service
support areas and during movements along the lines of communication
located in Dutch territory.
d. **Logistic support for expeditionary actions. This task relates to the**
logistic support from the Netherlands for units on deployment abroad
during operations and exercises.
e. **Explosive ordnance disposal. This task involves the detection and**
clearance of explosives found in the Netherlands (including the Dutch
sector of the Continental Shelf).
f. **The provision of military assistance and support to the Dutch**
**government and society at large. Military assistance is the help**
provided by the armed forces in support of public order, for the
purpose of maintaining law and order under criminal law (including
measures against terrorist actions and drug traffi cking, for example
personal protection by the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee and the
deployment of Special Assistance Units) and in the case of a disaster
or an impending disaster (for example, dike fortifi cations against
impending fl oods and assistance after the passage of hurricanes over
the Netherlands Antilles). Military support is the help given by the
armed forces -unlike military assistance- in the public interest (for
example, military hydrography by the RNLN). The armed forces may
also provide services to third parties on an ad hoc basis. This is referred
to as community support.

420. All operational units can be used in a national deployment. The
armed forces also have capacity in the National Reserve Corps that can be
deployed within a short space of time for tasks in respect of surveillance
and security, military assistance and support and the provision of host
nation support.

54 See also Figure 2-A: Deployment of the armed forces versus Defence tasks.


-----

421. Cooperation with civil authorities. Armed forces may cooperate with
civil authorities in the execution of national operations. When providing
military assistance in the event of a disaster, for example, the armed forces
will work with the fi re service, police and other emergency services. One
example of this is the deployment of helicopters in disasters and for
fi re-fi ghting activities. The national responsibility for the coordination
of this deployment rests with the National Coordination Centre (NCC)
of the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations. Locally, work is
carried out under the responsibility of a Queen’s Commissioner or a
mayor (depending on the geographical size of the area of operations).
Cooperation with civil authorities may also be necessary in the case of the
presence of foreign military units in Dutch territory.

422. National security and interdepartmental cooperation. In conducting
all its main tasks (protection of territory, international crisis management,
support for civil authorities), the Ministry of Defence contributes to
national security. Society also expects the presence of the armed forces
in the Netherlands if that becomes necessary. In the event of an incident
or a disaster, civil and military authorities must know exactly where to
fi nd each other and know precisely what they can expect from each other.
This requires clear agreements in advance in respect of capabilities to
be supplied, good synchronisation of the procedures that will be used,
joint plans and exercises. It is no longer simply a question of the Defence
organisation acting as a safety net in the event of shortfalls in civil
capabilities, but more a matter of fulfi lling a structural role as a security
partner.

423. The Defence organisation’s own tasks in respect of national security and
**military support and assistance. The fact that the new role of the Defence**
organisation in the Netherlands comprises more than that of a safety net
is demonstrated by the organisation’s own, usually legally supported tasks
that it performs in respect of national security. This refers to the structural
tasks carried out by Defence on a permanent basis, as well as to the
incidental deployment of high-quality niche capabilities. The tasks of the
Royal Netherlands Marechaussee and the Coastguard for the Netherlands
Antilles and Aruba are examples of the national tasks performed by the
Defence organisation on a structural basis. These are performed under civil
authority and under their own operational command. Niche capabilities
are specialist capabilities, such as the explosive ordnance disposal service
and the special assistance units, which can support the civil authorities
on a more _ad hoc basis to counter specifi c or more violent threats (for_
example, bomb threats or extreme terrorism). Deployment such as this
occurs on the basis of the legal stipulations for military assistance. The


-----

deployment of niche capabilities is mentioned here, however, as one of
the armed forces’ ‘own’ tasks, since they are exclusively available to the
Defence organisation and not, as is customary in the case of military
support and assistance, only available to supplement any shortfalls in
civil capabilities. Besides the tasks mentioned here, the armed forces can
also support the civil authorities with other forms of military support and
assistance. This relates to the military assistance and support in the event
that the capacities of civil emergency services fall short or are in danger
of doing so. The assistance and support provided by Defence are rooted
in kingdom-wide legislation and regulations and are administered under
civil authority. Annex B of this publication provides a summary of the
main tasks in respect of national security performed by the armed forces
and of the main forms of military support and assistance which have been
realised in an interdepartmental context over the course of time[55].

_4.4.2 International deployment_

424. **First main task and combat operations. The protection of the**
integrity of national and Allied territory involves operations in the context
of collective defence, as defi ned in Article 5 of the NATO treaty. Examples
of this are the Allied defence in the Cold War, and also NATO’s invocation
of this article immediately after the terrorist attacks on the US on 11
September 2001 and the subsequent participation of Dutch military units
in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan and the Persian Gulf. In
the context of the fi rst main task, operations can also be conducted on
the borders of the NATO treaty area, if an unstable situation there could
have implications for the territorial integrity of the treaty area. One such
example was the deployment of Patriot air defence units during Operation
Display Deterrence in Turkey in 2003.

425. **Second main task and crisis management operations. The aim of**
the second main task of the Dutch armed forces is to manage or resolve
confl icts by contributing to crisis management operations[56]. An important
aspect in this regard is to minimise the risk of escalation by intervening
at an early stage. The last few decades have seen a great many confl icts
which have spread or threatened to spread to neighbouring countries (for
example, in the former Yugoslavia and Africa). Confl ict prevention, in
which military and civil organisations join forces to try to nip a confl ict in

55 Source: Letter from the Minister of Defence to the House of Representatives of the States
General on the subject of ‘The Defence organisation and national security’, dated 22 April

2005.

56 The RNLN’s anti-drugs operations referred to in Chapter 2 also come under the second

main task.


-----

the bud, has become more high profi le. It is crucial to have military units
on hand whose level of readiness and mobility is such that they can be
deployed quickly virtually anywhere in the world as soon as the political
decision making about the operation has been completed. These units also
need to be suffi ciently robust to be able to operate effectively in military
operations, even in the event of escalation.

426. **Operating throughout the spectrum of force. The range of crisis**
management operations in which, in accordance with the level of
ambition formulated by the government, the Dutch armed forces have to
be able to participate means that personnel may be required to participate
in operations which involve the use of force. In the conduct of crisis
management operations, Dutch military personnel could be confronted
with a great many actors, risks and situations, ranging from humanitarian
emergencies to combat actions. Dutch units will not only be confronted
with combat actions as a third party, but they will also have to be able to
take part in them themselves in the context of a peace-enforcing operation,
possibly even initiate them. This places heavy demands on the personnel
and equipment of the military units in question and could mean that
heavy assets, such as tanks, fi ghter planes and naval guns also need to be
deployed.

427. **Variable intensity and duration of deployment. Depending on the**
desired political and military end state, crisis management operations can
be limited in terms of objective, assets, area of operations or duration.
It might be a question of a specifi c and limited operation, such as the
evacuation of non-combatants, for example from Côte d’Ivoire in November
2004, or it could be more general and longer-term in nature, such as
the Dutch contribution to the IFOR/SFOR/EUFOR operation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Crisis management operations could be intended to
prevent an armed confl ict (for example, the UN operation UNPREDEP
in Macedonia from 1995 to 1999), or to help with the reconstruction of
a country after an armed confl ict (for instance, ISAF in Afghanistan). At
different times and in different places, a crisis management operation
can be just as intense as the collective defence (Article 5) of (parts of) the
NATO treaty area. The greater the likelihood that the parties in the confl ict
will use force against each other or against the foreign force (for example,
because of diminishing support for the presence and tasks of the foreign
force), the more robustly the crisis management operation should be
conducted. The international military force must also have a certain level
of escalation dominance. The basis for this lies in the operation’s mandate
and the ROE and can be expressed in the operation plan, the composition,
the size and/or equipment of the military force.


-----

-----

### Chapter 5

 Command and control


-----

-----

###### Command and control

501. Command and control is the process of leading and steering a
military organisation in order to achieve its objective. The command of

# 5

a unit is the authority assigned by a higher commander to an individual,
the commander, to lead his unit, to take decisions about deployment
and to control the execution of an operation. Along with this authority,
the commander is given instructions regarding the deployment, often
refl ected in an assignment or a goal to be reached. He is also allocated
personnel and equipment to enable him to carry out that assignment. This
chapter begins with an explanation of the command and control structure
and the related decision making and command. It will then look at the
style of command exercised by the Dutch armed forces, namely mission
command. The chapter will end by focusing on the aspect of providing
leadership, which plays a vital role in command and control.

**5.1 Command and control structure**

502. Process and system. The process comprises activities such as collecting
information, taking decisions and monitoring the implementation of
those decisions. To be able to exercise command, the commander must
have a (full) command and control system.

503. **Process: command & control. Exercising command includes the**
process by which a commander makes decisions, communicates his
intent and imposes his will on his subordinates. The exercise of command
gives the commander the authority, the responsibility and the obligation
to act, or to deliberately refrain from action, in order to achieve his
assigned goal within the framework of the higher commander’s intent.
At all levels of operating the exercise of command is an art in itself in
terms of motivating and directing military personnel of all ranks. First
and foremost, the commander has to decide on a method of operation
and lead his unit in the pursuit of his objective. Decision-making and
leadership are, therefore, the primary responsibilities in the exercise of
command. The commander is also responsible for the control of the unit.
The term command & control can be abbreviated to C2, which is used
internationally. Command & control is thus made up of the elements of


-----

leadership, decision-making and command.

504. **System. In exercising his command, the commander is supported**
by his staff and by any advisors or liaison offi cers. The staff operates from
a (fl oating) headquarters or command post. Another requirement for
command and control is support by communications and information
systems (CIS), which are essential for decision-making and command.
Together they make up the command and control system. A system such
as this is a collection of different elements: doctrine, plans and procedures,
a command structure, infrastructure (national and international
headquarters, mobile operations centres, etc), technical systems
(including computers, sensors, displays, communications equipment,
radar) and personnel. The following diagram shows a command and
control system.


**Doctrine**
**Plans**
**Procedures**

**Technical**
**systems**


**Command**


_Figure 5-A:_

_Command and control_

_system_


checklist

personnel

**Infrastructure**


505. **Command and control at all organisational levels. Command**
and control is not confi ned solely to the highest levels in the military
organisation. The C2 process and parts of the C2 system occur in many
places in the military organisation, in a horizontal as well as a vertical
sense. By horizontal, we mean in different parts of the organisation, such
as fi ghter aircraft squadrons, infantry battalions and ships. C2 takes place
in all units and C2 systems, plans and procedures are present throughout.
Vertical refers to the different hierarchical levels. C2 takes place at every
level. At high level, for instance, decisions are taken about the deployment
of formations and units in military operations. An example of this level


-----

of C2 -at national level- is the operational direction of the operational
commanders of the Services by the CDS, as outlined in the penultimate
paragraph of Chapter 2. The lower level is more involved in directing actual
combat actions. C2 is, therefore, about the C2 process and the systems
it needs at all levels and in all parts of the military organisation. This
complexity in the military organisation and in military operations means
that command and control is not easy to identify from the outside.

506. Top-down interaction. It is also important that C2 does not take place
in isolation in each department and at each level, but that it is integrated
‘from top to bottom’. At each level, the orders from above are translated
into a number of coordinated actions which may in turn contain orders for
the underlying levels. This ensures the synchronisation that is necessary
to enable joint actions. A line also runs from the bottom to the top in
C2. The execution of the orders and the results are relayed back to the
higher commander at each level. This enables him to make any necessary
adjustments or to deploy extra assets.

**5.2 Decision making and command**

507. Cyclical process. Decision making and command cannot be viewed in
isolation from each other. Both are part of a management loop, a cyclical
process. This cyclical process is applied constantly at all levels. The cyclical
decision-making process is also known as Boyd’s loop, after the man who
came up with this concept, or the Observation-Orientation-DecisionAction loop (the OODA loop).

Observation


Orientation


Action


_Figure 5-B: Decision-ma-_

_king cycle: the OODA loop_


Decision

508. **Decision making. Decision making starts with the collection of**
information about the existing military situation, which will then be
analysed and assessed (observation). Possible options and actions to
change the situation as required are then worked out (orientation) and a


-----

choice is made as to which plans will be realised (decision). An order is
then issued to implement the plans (action)[57]. Obviously, the idea is that
the actions will bring about the desired situation. To establish whether that
is the case, information about the situation is collected once again and the
whole process starts again. In order to retain the initiative, the commander
must proceed through the full cycle more quickly and meticulously than
his opponent[58]. The one who acts slowest will lose the initiative and will be
forced to act reactively. A constant overview of all processes in the cycle is
essential in order to be able to speed things up when necessary and exploit
the element of surprise. The tempo of the operation is not only determined
by the speed at which and the accuracy with which the decision-making
cycle progresses, but also depends on the speed with which the plan is
executed and on the adjustment of the plan.

509. Disruption and protection of the OODA loop. The disruption of the
enemy’s OODA loop in order to be able to progress through the decisionmaking cycle with greater speed and accuracy has become an important
objective. By the same token, protection of our own OODA loop has also
become a major aim. The enemy will try to disrupt our own C2 process
and thus gain the initiative. The disruption of the enemy OODA loop and
the protection of our own decision-making cycle are referred to by the
term ‘command and control warfare’ (C2W)[59].

510. **Command. Command is the process used by a commander, with**
the assistance of his staff, to organise, direct and coordinate the units
assigned to him as well as any support units. Particular attention is
paid to the synchronisation of the different activities taking place within
a unit’s operations in order to achieve a particular result. Command
refers, therefore, to the execution of the order. Command starts with an
operation plan or an operation order which contains tasks and objectives
for subordinate commanders. As well as the formulation of plans and
orders, command also entails the communication of the decision to
all those involved. It is then concerned with monitoring the execution,
and checking and evaluating the results, in accordance with the OODA
loop described previously. The commander will make any necessary
adjustments to the execution by means of a supplementary order, ideally
issued orally or otherwise in writing or through CIS means (e.g. e-mail).

57 The issue of an order to implement (action) forms part of the command process.

58 This again shows the importance of NEC in relation to the shortening of the decision
making process, which is so essential in the manoeuvrist approach in particular

(see the last paragraph of Chapter 3).

59 Command and control warfare is one of the focal areas of information operations,

which are described in Chapter 3.


-----

**5.3 Mission command**

511. Unity of effort and autonomy. The philosophy of the Dutch armed forces
is based on the guiding principle of mission command (Auftragstaktik)[60].
The aim of this principle is to ensure a robust system of command and
control throughout the entire organisation in order to guarantee unity of
effort at all operational levels. There are various techniques for ensuring
unity of effort. A precondition is a command and control system which is
based on the principle of unifi ed leadership and clear chains of command.
The tasks, powers and responsibilities of commanders at various levels
have to be laid down clearly and should, if necessary, be enforceable. This
method of command and control must be increasingly regarded as an
urgent requirement. Instability, unpredictability and lack of clarity, in other
words chaos and friction, typify all military operations: every situation is
thus unique. Commanders at all levels must, therefore, be allowed to
decide for themselves how best to conduct their mission. This is the only
way to achieve the speed of action which is required to gain and maintain
the initiative, particularly in rapidly changing circumstances. The unit
can thus develop a high operational tempo and stay one step ahead of
the enemy. Although command and control will be mission-oriented in
theory, a higher or even the highest command level will in certain cases
be required to decide how the mission is to be conducted, in which case it
could still be necessary to impose directions and restrictions.

512. Decentralisation. Mission command is based on the decentralisation
_of authority for the execution of all military operations, on the basis of_
the historical experience that, in all the chaos and friction to be expected,
decisions can best be made at the level directly involved in the operation.
Decentralisation provides subordinates with a sense of involvement.
Another advantage is that only a limited amount of essential information
has to be passed along the chain of command from top to bottom and vice
versa. It also ensures that local commanders take decisions on the basis
of the most recent and up-to-date information. It could be said that, as a
general rule, the more unstable the circumstances, the lower the level of
decision-making should be.

513. **Indivisibility of responsibility. Decentralisation does not affect the**
indivisibility of responsibility. The delegation of powers does not relieve
the commander of his ultimate responsibility: he remains responsible
both for his own actions and for those of his subordinates. This means
that he has to monitor the execution of a mission from a distance and

60 For the British defi nition of mission command, see British Defence Doctrine, p. 3-7.


-----

intervene if there is no alternative. His awareness of this indivisibility
of responsibility, his powers of persuasion as well as the principle of
implementing a decision loyally and obediently once it has been made
will enable a commander and his unit to be successful, even under the
most diffi cult circumstances.

514. **Tempo and team spirit. The decentralisation referred to above in**
the context of mission command should ensure that a high tempo of
command can be achieved at all levels. This is essential for the penetration
of the decision-action cycle of other parties and, should the need arise, the
enemy. This will help to break the enemy’s unity of effort and cohesion
of operations. Mission command can only be successful in military
operations if there is a sound understanding of the underlying principles,
if practice thereof is encouraged and if there is regular training in its use:
it must be second nature for the unit in question and for those at the
superior command level. A primary condition is that continuity in the
allocation of functions creates a good sense of team spirit within the unit
so that commander and subordinates know each other well, will support
each other through thick and thin and all know exactly how the others
will think and act. Regular training creates the necessary foundations for
this.

515. Mutual trust. For mission command to function effectively a superior
not only needs to inspire confi dence but he must also have confi dence in
his subordinates. On the one hand, mutual trust refers to the confi dence
personnel have in the leaders of the operation; on the other, it refers to
the commander’s confi dence in his personnel that they will perform their
mission well and in accordance with his intent. Trust is the cornerstone of
command. Trust cannot be demanded but, like respect, has to be earned.
The basis for this is laid in the day-to-day business: ‘work as you fi ght’.
Mutual trust provides a vital contribution to good morale.

516. **Mutual understanding has a broad meaning. Firstly, commanders**
should understand the issues and concerns facing their subordinate
commanders. On the other hand, subordinate commanders should
have an understanding of command at higher levels. Secondly, mutual
understanding is also about sharing a common perception of military
problems. A professional knowledge of the doctrine and the style of
command will bond commanders and subordinates. This also means
that unity of opinion will exist in respect of the intended results of the
actions. It is less important that they agree on the way in which they are
carried out. The aspect of mutual understanding is particularly important
in international operations. For this reason, this doctrine is derived from
NATO doctrine and is in line with those of the major Allies.


-----

517. **Timely and effective decision making. Mission command requires**
timely and effective decision making at all levels. Much of the art of
command consists of the ability to judge correctly the circumstances in
which and the times at which a new decision is required. The commander
must also consider whether one of his subordinate commanders should
take a decision rather than he himself. In certain circumstances it may
be advisable to postpone making a decision, particularly if insuffi cient
information is available or if the decision depends on other decisions that
still have to be made, although this must not result in a state of indecision.
Mission command is, however, founded on the principle that commanders
at all levels will seize the opportunities that arise during the operation. As a
result, many tactical decisions in particular have to be made on the basis of
incomplete information. Those who always wait for the latest information
will not usually be able to act decisively. One of the conditions for timely
decision making is continuous command. A commander, assisted by his
staff, has to be constantly able to command the units assigned to him.
Consequently, the command system has to function 24 hours a day.

**5.4 Providing leadership**

518. Leadership. Leadership refers to those activities designed to infl uence
the behaviour of others so as to conduct the mission effectively. Leadership
is the projection of the personality and character of an individual, usually
the commander, to motivate soldiers to do what is expected of them. The
possession of leadership skills is one of the prime qualities a commander
needs to exercise his command; it is an extremely important precondition
for achieving a unit’s success at all levels of operation. There is no formula
for leadership. Each commander will motivate his soldiers in different
ways using, for instance, his persuasive powers, coercion, the strength of
his personality, charm or a combination of these methods.

519. **Leadership skills. The way in which a commander leads his unit**
largely determines the extent to which his unit functions successfully. His
personal qualities are very important in this respect. The ability to exercise
command requires a combination of conceptual and human qualities,
supplemented with a number of personal skills, which certainly include
the ability to communicate effectively. Leadership is a decisive factor in
that respect. It is the commander who ensures the execution of a mission
by conveying action, motivation and energy, the will to “go for it”, to his
personnel. For effective command, the commander’s location is extremely
important. He will position himself at a point from which he can infl uence
the military action decisively. He must be able to see and be seen as far as
operational conditions allow; his staff should not form a barrier between
himself and his unit.


-----

520. Necessary qualities. The leader has a huge infl uence on the morale
of the troops. Showing an interest in the human being behind the soldier
and in the way his mind works will help the commander to estimate the
level of combat readiness of his unit, and in particular the state of the
morale of the troops. Leadership, together with discipline, comradeship
and self-respect contributes to good morale. This is a condition for success,
even under the most diffi cult circumstances. In addition to leadership, a
commander needs a number of other, often related, qualities. Examples
of these necessary qualities are vision and intelligence, originality, insight
and good judgement, intuition, initiative, professional expertise, courage
and resolve, self-confi dence (if based on his own qualities), knowledge and
experience, integrity and the ability to set an example, as well as the ability
to communicate and to act in an ethically correct manner.


-----

-----

-----

### Annex A:

 Defence Tasks


-----

-----

###### Annex A: Defence tasks

**DT1 Control of maritime territory. Measures to ensure dominance in**
a maritime area, thus enabling national and coalition units to operate
without hindrance from enemy naval forces. To this end, enemy units will
be destroyed or neutralised if necessary.

**DT2 Control of land territory. Measures to ensure dominance on land, thus**
enabling national and coalition forces to operate without hindrance from
enemy forces. To this end, enemy assets will be destroyed or neutralised
if necessary.

**DT3 Control of the airspace. Measures to ensure air dominance, thus**
enabling national and coalition units to operate without hindrance from
enemy air forces, including surface air defence assets. To this end, enemy
assets will be destroyed or neutralised if necessary.

**DT4 Engagement of naval forces. Measures to eliminate or disable regular**
forces and/or insurgent groups on, under or above the surface, in actions
extending to and including a direct confrontation with enemy naval task
forces[61].

**DT5 Engagement of land forces. Measures to eliminate or disable regular**
enemy land forces and/or insurgent groups in actions extending to and
including direct engagement of those forces by combined arms (air)
manoeuvre units.

**DT6 Engagement of air forces. The use of naval, land or air assets to**
eliminate or disable regular enemy air forces and/or insurgent groups in
actions extending to and including direct confrontation between larger air
units, including surface air defence.

**DT7 Surveillance of maritime territory. The systematic monitoring of a**
maritime area or objects within it in order to gather information and share
it with other units[62]. In the most extreme case, this involves action against
suspect units.

61 This also includes enforcement of a maritime blockade.

62 This also includes the monitoring of a maritime embargo.


-----

**DT8 Surveillance of land territory. The systematic monitoring of a land**
area or objects within it in order to gather information and share it with
other units. In the most extreme case, this involves action against suspect
units.

**DT9 Surveillance of the airspace. The systematic monitoring of an airspace**
sector in order to gather information and share it with other units. This
also includes air traffi c control and battle command. In the most extreme
case, suspect aircraft will be intercepted.

**DT10 Protection at sea. Measures taken at sea and in the air to ensure**
security and freedom of movement at sea, to prevent damage or destruction
caused by attack/mines at sea, including those directed at non-military
vessels or installations.

**DT11 Protection on land. Measures taken to ensure security and freedom**
of movement on land and to prevent damage or destruction caused by
attack/mines on land or from the air.

**DT12 Protection in the air. Measures to ensure security and freedom of**
movement in the air and to prevent damage or destruction caused by air
attacks.

**DT13 Command and control warfare. Military operations of which the**
core is formed by directing military units (co)supplied by third parties.

**DT14 Evacuation. The relocation of civilians to a place of safety.**

**DT15 Extraction. Military action designed to pick up military units from**
hostile territory under combat conditions.

**DT16 Military assistance. Assistance provided by the armed forces at the**
request and under the authority of the civil authorities in support of public
order or to uphold law and order under criminal law or to perform tasks
on behalf of the Ministry of Justice. This also includes counter-terrorism
measures.

**DT17 Personal protection. The protection of individuals by implementing**
measures around them, including the possibility of the use of force.

**DT18 Preventive, forward deployment. The deployment of units in or near**
a crisis area with the aim of emphasising the political will to take military
action and, if necessary, to quickly deploy troops accordingly.


-----

**DT19 Separation of the parties. Local separation or keeping apart of**
warring parties, with or without coercive military means.

**DT20 Stabilisation. Support in the form of a military presence, usually**
longer term, to help to create the conditions for the development of lasting
law and order by local parties.

**DT21 Special operations. Local reconnaissance, capture or elimination of**
a target by means of usually covert, autonomous actions by smaller groups
in diffi cult conditions.

**DT22 Strategic targeting. The capacity to destroy key targets at extremely**
long range. This also includes the nuclear task of the F-16, however
specifi c it may be.

**DT23 Strategic transport. The transportation of personnel and/or goods**
over great distances, including other continents.

The common factor in Defence tasks 1-23 is that they are carried out in
combat conditions or under the threat thereof. This is not necessarily the
case in tasks 24-35, although local and/or temporary protection will be
provided in isolated cases (for example, DT26 host nation support, object
security).

**DT24 Ceremonial duties. The military display to accompany ceremonies of**
the armed forces and the government. In a wider sense, this also includes
the support of Dutch diplomatic and economic initiatives abroad, such as
state visits and trade missions.

**DT25 Explosive ordnance disposal. The detection and disarming of**
explosive ordnance, booby-trapped or otherwise, outside military (combat)
situations.

**DT26 Host nation support. The support of units from friendly states**
deployed in or passing through the Kingdom’s territory.

**DT27 Coastguard. Monitoring compliance with relevant legislation on**
and above the water and conducting search actions within the territorial
waters of the Kingdom, and beyond if necessary, in support of maritime
security and the maintenance of law and order by the civil authorities.

**DT28 Marechaussee tasks. The tasks assigned to the Royal Netherlands**
Marechaussee under the Police Act.


-----

**DT29 Hydrography and geography. The production of internationally**
required maps (including obstacles) of the area for which the Netherlands
is responsible and the reconnaissance and charting of detailed, current
information about areas of operation for which no current maps are
available.

**DT30 Military support. Help provided by the armed forces, other than**
military assistance, in the public interest at the request of the civil
authorities.

**DT31 Emergency relief. The rapid, on-site preparation and provision**
of relief in the event of a disaster, including temporary provisions for
refugees.

**DT32 Education and training of foreign units. The use of military**
personnel to teach and train those from other countries.

**DT33 Disaster relief. The use of military means in the event of (impending)**
disasters, other than military operational activities.

**DT34 Strategic military intelligence collection. The collection and analysis**
of military intelligence in support of decisions at the administrative and
senior military level[63].

**DT35 Verifi cation. The process of establishing whether (arms control)**
agreements are being observed.

63 Tactical intelligence collection is regarded as part of a capability and not as a task in itself.


-----

-----

-----

### Annex B:

 Defence and National Security


-----

-----

###### Annex B: Defence and National Security

**The armed forces’ own tasks in the Netherlands**

**Royal Netherlands Marechaussee. As an independent part of the Ministry**
of Defence, the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee performs both national
and international tasks under civil authority. Nationally, the Marechaussee
is responsible for the tasks established in the 1993 Police Act. This range of
tasks is divided into fi ve areas, namely: 1) protection (royal family, special
security tasks, civil aviation and security transports for the Central Bank
of the Netherlands); 2) enforcement of the Aliens Act (border control,
mobile monitoring of aliens, support of asylum procedures); 3) police
tasks for the Defence organisation (upholding public order at military
sites, maintaining law and order under criminal law and providing
emergency services); 4) police tasks for civil aviation premises (upholding
law and order under criminal law and providing assistance); 5) provision
of assistance, cooperation and support (in various forms).

**Netherlands Antillean and Aruban Coastguard. The Coastguard, a**
cooperative of the three countries of the Kingdom, is a civil organisation
under the control of the Minister of Defence. The Flag Offi cer for the
Caribbean is also the Commander of the Coastguard. Under his sole
leadership and within the policy frameworks of the relevant departments,
the Coastguard performs search, monitoring and service tasks.

**Netherlands Coastguard. The Netherlands Coastguard is a cooperative**
undertaking between six ministries and a Coastguard Centre in Den
Helder. The services of the Ministries involved provide the resources
for the execution of the thirteen service and law and order tasks in the
North Sea. The Defence organisation is responsible for coordinating the
execution of those tasks and supplies part of the capacity. The Ministry of
Transport, Public Works and Water Management is responsible for the
interdepartmental coordination of policy aspects.

**Explosive ordnance disposal. The Defence organisation also performs a**
structural and important service to the community in respect of explosive
ordnance disposal. This task consists of the disposal of ordnance left over
from the Second World War, as well as improvised explosives. The surge
in terrorist activities and the new asymmetric forms of threat mean that
the national importance of such capabilities has increased.


-----

**Special assistance. Under article 60 of the 1993 Police Act, the Ministry**
of Defence will supply assistance units to perform special elements of
the police task, for instance in the context of antiterrorist measures.
The primary means at the Ministry’s disposal to meet this requirement
are special units such as the Marine Corps’ Special Assistance Unit
and the Armed Forces Special Assistance Unit. The Royal Netherlands
Marechaussee’s Special Security Missions Brigade is also involved in antiterrorist activities.

**Airspace surveillance. Nowadays, the use of aircraft by terrorists as**
weapons or explosives is a reality. Similarly, attacks with chemical or
biological weapons delivered by aircraft cannot be ruled out. For the
surveillance of national airspace, the Netherlands uses NATO’s command
and control structure, of which the Nieuw Milligen Air Operations Control
Station forms part. Here, the Control & Reporting Centre is responsible
for monitoring the integrity of Dutch airspace. If the need arises, QRA
fi ghter planes can be scrambled within an extremely short response time
under the authority of the Minister of Justice.

**Military Intelligence and Security Service (MIVD). The individual**
intelligence departments of the Services have been merged to form a
single military intelligence service. The service is embedded in various
international military intelligence chains and is inextricably linked to the
operational actions of the Dutch armed forces abroad. The new threat
and the shift towards a more expeditionary military force means that
operational intelligence at strategic, operational and tactical level has
gained in importance. This has been underlined by the experiences in
respect of the attacks on Dutch military personnel in Iraq. The fact that
internal and external security have become ever more entwined means
that close cooperation is required between the _MIVD and the General_
Intelligence and Security Service (AIVD).

**Disaster Management Hospital. The Disaster Management Hospital in**
Utrecht originally served as an emergency military hospital. Over the
years, that function has changed to that of a disaster management hospital
which can provide short-term emergency treatment in the event of
disasters or accidents. This cooperation between the Ministries of Defence
and of Health, Welfare and Sport has been further intensifi ed because of
the increased risk of (bio)terrorism (SARS threat) and contagious diseases
(smallpox virus). It has been agreed that the hospital should be equipped
to receive casualties and infected patients.


-----

**Military support and assistance**

**Civil-Military Administrative Agreement (CMBA). In the CMBA project,**
the Ministries of Interior Affairs and Kingdom Relations, Justice and
Defence investigated the possibilities for improving civil-military
cooperation and making it more structural in nature. In conjunction with
the civil emergency services -police, fi re service and the service for Medical
Treatment in Accidents and Disasters (GHOR)- scenario analyses were
conducted to get a better idea of the need for support from the armed
forces. The Defence organisation weighed this up against the capabilities
and the result was an agreement between the Ministries of Defence,
Justice and Interior Affairs and Kingdom Relations.

**Preparation. An effective response to disasters and threats stands or falls**
on the preparation. Success can even be achieved in the preparatory phase.
An investment in close contact between civil authorities, disaster relief
organisations and the Defence organisation will ensure a coordinated
and effective joint response. If defence capabilities and systems are to
be deployed in complex scenarios, often under pressure of time, defence
specialists must be involved at an early stage in the civil planning, decision
making and command. Regular multidisciplinary training exercises are
also essential for effective cooperation in crisis conditions.

**Protection against CBRN weapons. In the fi ght against terrorism,**
protection against CBRN weapons is an important area of attention. In
order to be able to protect deployed units against these types of weapon,
the CBRN Defence company has been put on operational standby. There
is now an interservice CBRN centre of expertise and school, in which
the existing knowledge about CBRN weapons has been pooled. This
centre of expertise and the school represent an easily identifi able point
of contact for military and civil organisations. The civil relief agencies are
also involved in buying equipment and gathering knowledge in relation to
CBRN. Close dialogue and a complementarity of resources are therefore
required. This should ultimately result in clear arrangements regarding
the national deployment of the Defence organisation’s CBRN assets in
attacks, disasters and accidents.

**Non-proliferation. Over the past few decades, the proliferation of**
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their means of delivery, as
well as the associated materials and technology, have undergone a major
transformation. A growing number of countries now appear to have access
to WMD expertise and technology, which means that they are also able to
produce them themselves. As well as providing the expertise of the CBRN
Defence company and the centre of expertise, the Defence organisation


-----

also provides support to other parties in respect of non-proliferation, such
as the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI). The PSI is a new initiative in
the battle against the proliferation of WMD and against terrorist activities
which might involve the use of WMD. The aim of the PSI is to take action
against the illegal transportation of weapons of mass destruction, for
which Defence may deploy seaborne or airborne assets as the need arises.
The initiative focuses on a better use of existing international and national
instruments (treaties, legislation, export control) and on improving
international cooperation in detection.

**ICT support. Under the Modernising Government Programme, a**
government-wide consolidation of ICT (network) infrastructure is taking
place. With regard to security, a clustering of network provisions, computing
centre facilities and the necessary security for them is taking shape in the
police force, the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Defence.

**Deployment of reservists. The Defence organisation makes a distinction**
between two types of task for reserve personnel. Firstly, Military Duties
Reservists perform tasks in national territory as part of the support and
military assistance tasks, as well as ceremonial duties. Civilian Expertise
Reservists perform tasks in international crisis management operations
and occasionally in support of the civil and military authorities in the
Netherlands, whereby use is made of their civil expertise and experience.


-----

###### Bibliography

_2000 Defence White Paper, Ministry of Defence (The Hague, 29 November_
1999).

_A more secure world: our shared responsibility. Report of the High-level Panel_
on Threats, Challenges and Change, UN General Assembly (New York, 29
November 2004).

Allied Joint Doctrine, AJP-01(B) (Brussels, 2002).

Annink, A.H.C., ‘De krijgsmacht en nationale taken’ [The armed forces and
_national tasks], Militaire Spectator, no. 7/8 (2002), pp. 349-353._

_Army Doctrine Publications, Part I: Military Doctrine (The Hague, 1996);_
Part II-A: Combat Operations (Fundamentals) (The Hague, 1998); Part IV:
_National Operations (The Hague, 2001)._

_British Defence Doctrine, JWP 0-01 (Shrivenham, 2001), <http://www.mod._
uk/jdcc/publications.htm>.

CDS Guideline 1: ´Operationeel Concept Vredesoperaties´ _[Operational_
_concept for peace operations] (The Hague, September 2002)._

CDS Guideline 2: ´Planningsproces CDS voor (vredes)operaties´

_[CDS planning process for (peace) operations (The Hague, August 2002)._

CDS Strategic Vision: ´De Nederlandse Defensie in de toekomst´

_[The Dutch Defence organisation in the future] (The Hague, 2002)._

_Delivering Security in a Changing World: Defence White Paper (London, 2003)._

_Het Europees Veiligheids en Defensie Beleid [European Security & Defence_
_Policy], Ministry of Defence (The Hague, August 2004)._

Jackson, M., ‘The UK Medium Weight Capability: A Response to the
Changing Strategic Context’, _RUSI Defence Systems, autumn 2004, pp._
42-44.

_Joint Doctrine Capstone and Keystone Primer (Washington DC, 2001),_
<http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine>.

_Joint Doctrine Publication 01, Joint Operations (Shrivenham, 2004)._


-----

Kamp, H.G.J., ‘De toekomst van onze krijgsmacht’ [The future of our armed
_forces], Militaire Spectator, no. 4 (2004), pp. 193-202._

Land Operations, AJP-3.2, early draft (Brussels, September 2004).

List of Defence tasks and capabilities, Defence Staff (The Hague, October
2004).

MC 400/2 Guidance for the Military Implementation of Alliance Strategy.
(Brussels, 16 May 2000).

_NATO Handbook (Brussels, 2001)._

Policy Agenda 2005, in: 2005 Defence Budget, House of Representatives
of the States-General, Parliamentary Year 2004-2005 (The Hague, 21
September 2004).

Posen, B.R. The sources of military doctrine – France, Britain and Germany
_between the world wars (New York, 1984)._

Recommendation by the Advisory Commission on the Future Role of
the Chief of Defence Staff: ´From an uneasy balance to a strengthened
Defence organisation´ (The Hague, 19 April 2002).

_RNLAF Air Power Doctrine (The Hague, 2002)._

_Russian Military Doctrine_ (2000), <http://www.freerepublic.com/forum/
a394aa0466bfe.htm>.

_Strategic Vision: The Military Challenge, By NATO’s Strategic Commanders_
(Norfolk [USA] & Mons [Belgium], August 2004).

Teitler, G., Bosch, J.M.J., Klinkert, W. e.a., _Militaire strategie [military_
_strategy] (Amsterdam, 2002)._

The Defence organisation and national security. Letter from the Minister
of Defence to the House of Representatives of the States-General (The
Hague, 22 April 2005).

The top structure of the Defence organisation. Letter from the Minister
of Defence to the House of Representatives of the States-General (The
Hague, 28 May 2003).


-----

“Towards a new equilibrium: the armed forces in the coming years” in:
2004 Defence Budget, House of Representatives of the States-General,
Parliamentary Year 2003-2004 (The Hague, 16 September 2003).

Wiggen, O.P. van, Eijl, C.A.M. van, Nieuwenhuis, P., ‘Het transformatieproces van de KL in perspectief’ [The transformation process of the RNLA in
_perspective], Militaire Spectator, no. 10 (2004), pp. 481-492._


-----

###### Accountability

The NDD was written by authority of the Defence Staff by a working group
of representatives from the Services. The members of the working group
were as follows:

Lieutenant Colonel (RNLAF) Dr. M. de Haas, Chairman and Editor,
Defence Staff / Future Concepts Division
Commander R.P. Bauer RNLN
Lieutenant Colonel A.E. de Rooij, M.A. RNLA
Lieutenant Colonel J.M. à Campo RNLAF


-----

###### Index

Advisory committee on the introduction i, 7, 10
of a joint high commander
(Franssen Committee)
Air Power Doctrine RNLAF (APD) 6, 9,16, 110
Allied Joint Doctrine 5, 54, 109
Allied Joint Publication 5-7, 50, 54, 109-110
Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 6, 9, 16, 109
Article 5 operations 32, 41, 69-70, 76, 80-81
Basic principles of military operations 47, 50, 53-54
British Defence Doctrine i, 7, 53-54, 89, 109
CBRN 21-22, 107
CDS Guidelines 42, 51, 109
Chief of the Defence Staff (CDS) ii, 7-9, 16-17, 19, 41-43, 87, 109
CIMIC 36, 73-74
Civil authorities 5, 18, 37, 39-40, 58, 70, 73,
75-80, 98-100, 105, 107
Coercion 49
Cold War 5, 19, 31, 36, 49, 69
Combat power 14, 50, 52, 56-58
Combined operations 14, 37, 59
Command and control (C2) 7-8, 22, 55, 61-62, 85, 88-89
Command and control structure 23, 85, 106
Command and control warfare 61-62, 88, 98
Complexity of operations 18, 22, 36, 56, 59, 75, 107
Confl ict prevention 59, 70-71, 73, 80
Constitution 29, 31-32
Conventional 21-22, 31, 38
Defence Budget and Policy Letter 2003 31, 36-37, 39, 58-59, 77, 111
Defence doctrine i, 7-8, 15-16
Defence policy i, 35
Defence Staff 7, 42, 112
Defence tasks 39-40, 77, 97, 110
Defence White Paper 2000 37, 76, 109
Deterrence 49-50
Disaster relief 5, 70, 74-76, 100, 107
Effects-based operations (EBO) 63
Enforcement of sanctions or embargoes 70, 73, 75, 97
ESDP 37
Essential operational capabilities (EOCs) 51-52
EU ii, 5, 31, 36-38, 41, 69, 71
Evacuation of non-combatants 70, 75, 81, 98


-----

Expeditionary operations 30, 58-59, 78, 106
Extraction 70, 75, 98
Failing states 21, 30, 37
Frame of Reference for Decision- 41-42
making 2001
Grand strategy 15, 17, 19, 41, 63
Humanitarian activities (operations) 41, 70-71, 74
Humanitarian relief 18, 20, 32, 37, 70-71, 74-76
Information operations 61-63, 88
Initial entry forces 58-59
Integrated operations 60-62
Interdepartmental cooperation 30, 36, 79-80, 105
International law 19, 22, 31, 34, 70, 75
International legal order 32, 35, 38
International regulations 32-35
International security situation 8, 29
Interoperability 14-15, 37, 62-64
Interstate 21, 30-31, 72-73
Intrastate 21, 38, 72-73
Irregular operations 18, 22-24, 48
Joint actions 59-60, 87
Joint operations i, 6-7, 16, 58-60
Joint/combined operations 14, 59
Law of armed confl ict (LOAC) 34-35
Legislation 31, 80, 99, 108
List of Defence tasks and capabilities 40, 110
Main tasks of the armed forces i, 37-39, 76-77, 79-80
Manoeuvrist approach 52-53, 63, 88
Military assistance 39-40, 60, 75, 77-80, 98, 108
Military capability 14, 20, 48, 50-54, 58, 64
Military support and assistance 79-80, 107
Military-strategic level ii, 14, 16-19
Mission command 89-91
MIVD 5, 41, 106
Multinational operation 6, 61, 70, 77
NA5CRO 69-70, 76
National operations 60, 77-79
National security 79-80, 105, 110
NATO i, ii, 5-7, 17, 31, 36-38, 41, 69-71,
76, 80-81, 90, 106, 109-110
Netherlands Defence Doctrine (NDD) i, ii, 8-9, 16, 112
Netherlands Maritime Doctrine (NMD) 6, 9
Network-enabled capabilities (NEC) 63-64, 88
Non-conventional 21-22


-----

OODA loop 53, 87-88
Operational level 13, 16, 18-19, 53, 60-61
OSCE 41, 69, 71
Peace enforcement activities (operations) 70-71, 73
Peace support activities (operations, PSO) 18, 70-72, 74-75
Peace-building activities (operations) 61, 70-74
Peacekeeping activities (operations) 70-71, 73, 75
Peacemaking 70-72
Policy Agenda 2005 29, 37, 110
Politico-strategic environment 29, 36
Preventive diplomacy 72
Proliferation of weapons of mass 30, 37, 39, 107-108
destruction
Provision of support 75, 77-78
Quick Reaction Alert (QRA) 43, 58, 78, 106
Regular operations 18, 22
Rogue states 30-31
Rule of law 32, 35, 37, 40, 76
Rules of Engagement (ROE) 34, 63, 76, 81
Search and Rescue 6, 58, 60, 70, 74-75, 99, 105
Security policy 8, 15, 35-36
Self-defence 32-34
Service doctrine i, 6-7, 16
Special Assistance Unit 43, 77-79, 106
Tactical level 18-20, 23, 54-55, 60-61, 106
Technical level 17, 19-20
Terrorism 22, 30, 37-39, 77, 79, 98, 106-107
Transnational 21, 72
UN ii, 17, 38, 41, 69, 71-73, 81, 109
UN Charter 32-33, 38, 73, 76
UN Security Council (UNSC) 33, 73, 75
Use of force 14, 22-24, 32-35, 47, 49, 70, 72,
81, 98


-----

