**International Security Strategy**

# A Secure Netherlands in a Secure World


The international arena is changing at an unprecedented rate, raising new issues
and broadening the international security agenda. This International Security
Strategy identifies the implications of this changing playing field for the
Netherlands, and for its security and other interests.

The government has distinguished three strategic interests in international security
policy:

 Defence of our own and our allies’ territory

 An effective international legal order

 Economic security

In this connection the government has introduced the following focuses:

 More responsibility for Europe

 Unstable regions near Europe

 Prevention

 Disarmament and arms control

 Integrated approach

 Cooperation with the private sector


-----

**I. Introduction**

Nothing can be taken for granted in the international security environment. The world has become less
transparent and less predictable as new geopolitical and economic powers have emerged and the
international balance of power has shifted. Besides new players, new issues have also come to the
fore, and now increasingly dictate the international security agenda. Internal and external security can
no longer be easily distinguished from each other.

Events in the world around us have a direct impact on our own security and welfare. With its open
economy and international outlook, the Netherlands is highly dependent on other countries. Seventy
per cent of our national income comes from beyond our borders. Insecurity and instability in the world
affect our security and our welfare.

At the beginning of this century the world was shocked by the events of 9/11, which marked a
watershed in our thinking on security. Since then, we have seen international interventions in
Afghanistan and Iraq; the rapid emergence of the BRIC economies; the financial, economic and euro
crises; the Arab Spring; alarming developments in North Korea, Iran, Syria and the Sahel; the threat
of irreversible effects from climate change; a tsunami followed by a nuclear disaster in Fukushima,
Japan; and the rapid rise of digital networks and attendant concerns about our cyber security.

Technological advances, digitisation and globalisation mean that we are increasingly closely linked,
both economically and socioculturally, through a range of virtual networks and social media. Countries,
organisations and individuals can now have an impact worldwide. This brings both new opportunities
and new threats.

This international security strategy sets out policy focuses for this government’s term in office based
on an analysis of the key developments in the international security environment. What do these
developments imply for our strategic security interests: the defence of our own and our allies’ territory,
an effective international legal order and economic security? What opportunities and threats do they
entail for our country? What does all this mean for our foreign and security policy?

While the existing National Security Strategy (2010) examines domestic measures designed to protect
Dutch security interests, this strategy focuses on what the Netherlands aims to do in and alongside
other countries to safeguard its interests.[1]

Security cannot be taken for granted. It is something that we continually need to work at, together
with other countries, international organisations, civic institutions, the private sector and members of
the public. As a relatively small country with limited international influence, we depend on collaboration
with others and robust international agreements.

**_Note to the reader_**

Foreign relations are a matter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands: the Netherlands in Europe, the
Caribbean countries Aruba, Curaçao and St Maarten, and the Dutch public bodies in the Caribbean
(Bonaire, St Eustatius and Saba). References in this security strategy to ‘the Netherlands’ or ‘Dutch’
therefore mean: ‘(of) the Kingdom of the Netherlands’, except as regards matters specific to the
Netherlands in Europe, such as development cooperation and membership of the EU, NATO and the
OSCE.

1 The National Security Strategy considers five security interests: besides territorial and economic security,
it also examines ecological security, physical security and social and political stability.


-----

**II Contextual analysis[2]**

The international security environment has become more complex. This has implications for the
international security agenda. Besides familiar issues like arms control, crisis management and
preventing proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD), other issues like cyber security,
piracy, cross-border crime and the threat of terrorism (including use of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons by terrorists) have also become very timely. New issues like water and resource scarcity,
pandemics, loss of biodiversity and climate change also have disturbing implications.

But there is good news too: the number of conflicts in the world has halved over the past two decades,
democracy has taken hold in various countries, and the global population is twice as prosperous as it
was 20 years ago. However, the number of conflicts and unstable regions on Europe’s doorstep has in
fact increased.

**Shifting power blocs**

Less than 30 years ago, the world was a fairly clear-cut place. The United States and the Soviet Union
had divided it into two camps. After the end of the Cold War, a more or less unipolar system
developed, with the US as the world’s leading superpower.

With the rise of the BRIC countries – Brazil, Russia, India and China – and the growing influence of
other countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America, like the ‘Next Eleven’, a multipolar system is now
emerging. New economic and geopolitical powers are demanding a role on the world’s stage. This has
prompted the US to focus increasingly on Asia.

A shift in the global balance can also be seen where military spending is concerned. The NATO
countries still account for a large majority of global defence spending. However, Western countries
have shrinking defence budgets, while defence spending in emerging economies like China and Russia
is on the increase.

History teaches us that the rise of global powers is often associated with conflict. The current challenge
is for new and old powers alike to avoid such a scenario.

The new actors on the international stage are ready to engage with the world. They are advancing
their own interests, ensuring that they acquire and retain access to raw materials, energy, advanced
technology and knowledge. They are also investing more and more in strategic infrastructure – like
ports – beyond their borders and in other continents, including Europe. At the same time, however,
they do not always shoulder their responsibility for global governance (which comes with power), or
they do not always do so in a way the Netherlands considers appropriate.

**Multilateral system**

The current multilateral system is not adapting easily to the major and radical changes going on in the
world. That system, and particularly the UN, faces a crisis of effectiveness and legitimacy. The
membership of the UN Security Council, for example, does not yet reflect the new global balance of
power. Reforms are made more difficult by a difference of opinion between countries – particularly in
the West – that emphasise people’s individual rights and emerging powers that set more store by
collective rights and the principle of non-intervention. The increased influence of multinationals, NGOs
and the media (including social media) has also yet to be reflected in the system.

Nevertheless, within the multilateral system steps have gradually been taken on security and the legal
order, mediation, arms control, human rights, gender, humanitarian aid, protection of civilians in
armed conflicts, good governance and security sector reform. Intervention by one country in the affairs

2
Since the defence policy review ‘A New Foundation for the Netherlands’ Armed Forces’ was published in 2010 the
Ministries of Defence, Foreign Affairs and Security & Justice have produced a joint international security analysis
each year. This ‘Strategic Monitor’ is based, among other things, on reports by the Netherlands Institute of
International Relations ‘Clingendael’ and The Hague Centre for Strategic Studies. The contextual analysis with which
this strategy begins was partly inspired by these reports.


-----

of another to protect human rights – once unthinkable for many countries – is slowly gaining
acceptance, even if, for some emerging powers, this is still at odds with their preferred noninterventionist stance. The ‘Responsibility to Protect’ principle was endorsed by heads of state and
government at the UN in 2005.

Important steps have also been taken on criminal liability – the prosecution of serious international
crimes – including the Yugoslavia tribunal and the International Criminal Court (ICC). The tribunals and
the ICC also have a preventive effect.

**Changes in the global economy**

The global economy’s centre of gravity is shifting from the OECD countries to emerging markets.
Besides the BRIC countries, Africa is also experiencing spectacular economic development. The rise of
new powers will further reduce the share of the US, Japan and the EU in the global economy in the
years ahead. OECD countries used to account for 60 to 70% of Gross World Product. This proportion is
expected to fall to below 50% in the next 15 years. In the past 20 years, China and India’s share of
the global economy has tripled. In a few years’ time Asia will be the world’s biggest producer and
consumer of goods and services.

Economic growth in Asia, South America and Africa is creating new commercial opportunities for Dutch
businesses. In recent years, global poverty has declined dramatically. More and more people are
joining the ranks of the middle classes. Asia is already the most populous continent and will soon also
have the largest middle class in the world. These people are buying more and more goods and
services. The lives of millions of people have improved. A sense of perspective is important, however,
given the major differences in the progress made by different countries. Those in conflict, in particular,
lag behind the rest.

The recent financial crisis has again highlighted the importance of financial and economic stability for
prosperity and security. International institutions like the IMF, the G20 and the ECB have played an
essential role in stabilising the situation. Preventing this kind of costly crisis in the future remains high
on the international agenda.

The EU is still suffering economically. There is disagreement between and within the eurozone
countries about how fast and to what extent member states need to put their economies and budgets
in order. There is also debate about how far the richer eurozone countries should go in supporting
weaker member states, as well as about the transfer of sovereignty to Brussels. Some eurozone
countries have high or very high unemployment, especially among the young, which is making further
spending cuts and reforms more difficult. More and more countries are experiencing a decline in
prosperity, leading to public protests, socioeconomic unrest and political instability.

**Digitisation and cyber security**

The digital revolution has made global communications faster and easier. We receive round-the-clock
information about events on the other side of the world. More and more data are being stored, linked
and shared online. This brings economic opportunities. Part of the growth in productivity that has
occurred in Europe is thanks to ICT. In addition, the internet facilitates freedom of expression, political
participation and the democratic process. Social and cultural networks have no geographical
boundaries.

But there is a downside. What if all our screens were suddenly to turn black? Our society would
instantly be disrupted. Digital infrastructure is becoming increasingly vulnerable. In a growing number
of countries, the government has banned or restricted access to the internet. Some governments track
the digital footprints of human rights activists in order to find and persecute them. The threat of
cybercrime, cyber espionage and digital warfare is growing. Consider the recent examples of
distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks and economic espionage. Cyber-attacks are also becoming
more sophisticated, increasing their potential impact. Cyber security is therefore an increasingly
important security issue.


-----

**New weapons/technologisation**

Space systems, robotisation, sensors and artificial intelligence are advancing rapidly. Robotisation has
made drones cheaper and more accessible, including for private parties. More and more states are
adding unmanned aircraft – both armed and unarmed – to their military arsenals. Non-state actors like
Central American drug cartels are also deploying armed unmanned aircraft. The use of armed drones in
itself is not banned. There is no ban under international law on the use of drones, as there is on the
use of cluster munitions and anti-personnel landmines. However, attacks by drones must comply with
international law. The legal implications of the use of drones are currently being studied at both
national and international level.

Developments in the world of nano-, bio-, gene and neurotechnology, and the convergence between
them, will also have major implications and present new challenges, including in terms of biosecurity.
An innocent microorganism can be manipulated into a biological weapon. At the same time, these
modern technologies are a vital tool in health care and in efforts to combat infectious diseases. The
Netherlands, for example, is conducting research into the bird flu virus. This research is essential to
the search for a vaccine that will ultimately save human lives. However, it is important that the
knowledge acquired is made available only to bona fide scientists, and that it does not fall into the
wrong hands. We must prevent criminals or terrorists from making use of this knowledge to develop a
biological weapon.

The military and technological gap between Europe and the US is growing. With the current austerity
measures, the modernisation of the armed forces will probably proceed more slowly in Europe than in
the US, and research spending in Europe will decline further. At the moment, the European defence
market is highly fragmented. China and Russia, however, are keeping pace with US technological
progress, investing in aircraft carriers, missile technology, space travel, cyber warfare and other
innovations.

**Weapons of mass destruction and missile technology**

The proliferation of WMD and missile technology is a growing cause for concern. In recent years
tensions surrounding Iran’s nuclear programme have increased. There is also a threat from Iranian
ballistic missiles whose reach extends well beyond the region. Within the Middle East, there is great
concern about Syria’s stocks of chemical weapons. Government troops or rebels might use them, or
chemical weapons belonging to the regime might fall into the hands of terrorists.

North Korea continues to work on the development of nuclear weapons and long-range missiles, and
has stepped up its war rhetoric. In Pakistan, the stability of central government is increasingly at risk.
There is a danger that the authorities will lose control of parts of the nuclear arsenal. The evolving
nuclear arms race in South Asia also warrants attention.

**Natural resources**

Competition for natural resources (water, food, fertile land, energy and raw materials) is a factor of
growing importance in international relations. This is the result of economic growth and the rise in
global population, and the huge growth in consumption to which they have given rise. The issue is how
to ensure everyone gains and retains access to these resources. Conflicts over water, food, energy and
raw materials, and the exploitation of new regions like the Arctic could lead to instability, threats to
secure transport routes, protectionism (e.g. with regard to rare earth metals) and market
manipulation. The increase in land degradation, at a time of growing demand for more arable land for
food production both now and in the future, is another potential source of conflict. Recently, the UN
Secretary-General informed the Security Council of growing evidence that large-scale professional
poaching in Africa and other regions is funding terrorist groups and the drugs trade, sparking or
prolonging conflicts. At the same time, there are opportunities here for the Netherlands, given our
expertise in agriculture and water management. Knowledge and products that help raise food
production and food security in regions like Asia and Africa could also help prevent instability.

The discovery of shale gas in North America is prompting new developments in the energy market,
with major implications for the international balance of power. Energy independence in the future will


-----

give the US more room for manoeuvre in its international relations. The US will undoubtedly remain
involved in developments in the Middle East and North Africa, given the impact that oil prices have on
the world economy, the importance of stability on Europe’s doorstep, and domestic political
considerations. In the long term, however, the US will probably be less prepared to spend large
amounts of money on maintaining a military presence and intervening in the region.

Shale gas finds and the discovery of new oil and gas reserves may in time lead to a lasting drop in
energy prices. This would reduce the income of countries like Russia, Saudi Arabia and Venezuela, and
this could have implications for their internal stability.

Fossil fuel consumption is accelerating the process of climate change. This could lead to major security
problems within the foreseeable future. Experts warn that severe drought, extreme weather events
and major flooding will become more frequent as weather patterns change and the ice caps melt.

This could result in damage to public and private property, disruptions to essential infrastructure and,
indirectly, to more fluctuation in food prices, water shortages and the spread of infectious diseases.
These effects will impact on humankind’s most basic means of subsistence. Climate change and land
degradation are therefore expected to lead to an increase in migration, conflicts over water and food
and, as a consequence, political tensions. Faster melting of the Arctic ice cap will also bring new
opportunities, however, as new gas and oil reserves become accessible and new shipping routes open
up in the Arctic region. Nevertheless, this could in turn give rise to new tensions between the countries
that lay claim to parts of this region.

**Fragile states and regions**

There is a clear relationship between scarcity (of land, water, food and raw materials) and conflict.
Overdependence on raw materials and internal conflict over access to such resources can make
countries vulnerable to political instability. Political instability can also arise from economic inequality,
lack of economic opportunity and organised crime, which can undermine state authority. Growing
youth unemployment is another potential source of instability. In many fragile states a growing group
of young people are underemployed or have little prospect of finding work.

Conflict zones and weak states are a breeding ground for terrorism, extremism and cross-border
organised crime: trafficking in arms, drugs and persons, for example. Violent conflicts often have
disastrous consequences for the countries involved. Most conflicts occur within rather than between
states. Many also last a long time: some have already dragged on more than a decade. In over 40% of
post-conflict situations, hostilities resume within 10 years.

Although the number of conflicts in the world has reduced sharply over the past 20 years, the number
of fragile regions close to Europe has in fact increased. The main current or potential centres of conflict
near Europe are in the arc that extends from North Africa, through the Sahel, the Horn of Africa and
the Middle East to the Caucasus. Until peaceful solutions have been found to the ‘frozen conflicts’ in
Eastern Europe (Transdniestria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Nagorno-Karabakh), sources of tension
will continue to exist close to the EU’s eastern border, too.

No longstanding conflict has such a regional – even global – impact as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Despite persistent international efforts, the deadlock in the Middle East peace process has yet to be
broken. The failure to reach a comprehensive peace agreement has an impact on domestic political
relations in many countries.

After more than two years of popular uprisings, the Arab region is considerably more unstable than it
was prior to 2011. The overthrow of powerful centralised regimes has created scope for
democratisation and greater freedom. However, it is by no means clear how this will be achieved in
practice. The forces that maintain public order have weakened. The new powers that be are still having
great difficulty bringing their territory under full state control. In Libya, the government still does not
have a full monopoly on the use of force, which has led to illegal weapons smuggling to Mali and Gaza.
In Syria, what began as a peaceful protest against the Assad regime has escalated into a civil war with
disastrous humanitarian consequences. There is also a real possibility that the conflict might spill over
into other countries in this already fragile region.


-----

Terrorist networks have been able to flourish in places where state power has completely or partly
disappeared. New and existing conflicts fuel radicalisation (both in the Muslim world and in the West),
drawing new jihadists – some from the Netherlands – to the cause. Growing numbers are now
travelling to jihadist conflict zones.

There are two sides to Africa. The continent is a source of growing economic opportunity, but at the
same time, major security risks persist there. Since the 1990s, the number of violent conflicts has
halved in Africa, too, and the number of casualties has fallen. However, the threat of new outbreaks of
violence is ever-present. Some sources of conflict are complex and deeply-rooted.

This can be seen clearly in West Africa, where strong economic growth – in Nigeria and Ghana, for
example – is accompanied by terrorism, organised crime, trafficking in persons, drugs and arms, piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea and rising fundamentalism. The Western Sahel, in particular, is an increasingly
unstable zone, with the threat of spillover into North Africa, as illustrated by the situation in Mali.

The Horn of Africa has a long history of local, national and cross-border conflict, including in the
Sudans. The new Somali government and the successful suppression of al Shabaab give reason for
optimism for the first time in two decades. International efforts to combat piracy in the waters off
Somalia are also beginning to bear fruit. However, with two million displaced persons and refugees,
Somalia remains a fragile state. It takes many years to tackle the underlying causes of extremism and
piracy, and creating economic opportunities is essential for success in the long term.

Encouragingly, regional organisations like the African Union (AU) and ECOWAS are increasingly taking
the lead in tackling regional conflicts, with the support of the EU and others. As a result, African
countries are now better able to ensure their own peace and security.

Latin America and the Caribbean have seen increasing democratisation, but drugs and arms trafficking
continue to threaten security. The Kingdom’s relationships with Venezuela and Colombia are
particularly important given those countries’ geographical location. Venezuela and the Caribbean parts
of the Kingdom have close historical, cultural, economic and kinship ties. The Kingdom works with
Venezuela in many areas, including counternarcotics, energy and regional security. Despite the efforts
of the Colombian government, the country is still plagued by drug-related crime, often in combination
with terrorism. The current peace talks between the government and FARC are a positive development.
However, post-conflict situations in the region tend to involve a change in the character of the violence
involved, rather than a lasting cessation of violence altogether.


-----

**III Strategic interests**

The changing international context has a direct impact on the Netherlands’ security. This section
considers the implications of the developments outlined above for the security of the Netherlands, in
terms of three strategic interests:

-  The defence of our own and our allies’ territory

-  An effective international legal order

-  Economic security


These strategic interests tie in closely with the vital interests set out in the National Security Strategy:
territorial security, economic security, ecological security, physical security, and social and political
stability.

**1) Defence of our own and our allies’ territory**

Even though a conventional attack on Dutch soil is not a likely scenario at the moment, the defence of
the territorial security of the Kingdom and of our allies remains essential, not least because of new
threats that have emerged. The Netherlands is dependent on its allies for its protection. We likewise
have an obligation to come to the aid of our allies should they request it.

Good defence has a deterrent effect and therefore also a preventive effect on countries, organisations
and individuals intent on doing harm. Potential threats to the territory of our allies – such as the
missile programmes in Iran and North Korea – must be dealt with. NATO has considered these new
threats in its new Strategic Concept.

_Missile stocks have risen exponentially in recent years. Countries like Iran and North Korea_

_have missiles that can reach our allies’ territory. To counter this threat, NATO is installing a_
_missile shield. The Netherlands is contributing innovative Smart-L radar technology on_

_frigates and Patriot weapons systems on land._

Terrorist attacks have serious consequences, in terms not only of casualties and material damage but
also of the damage an actual or threatened attack could inflict on the legal order and democracy. If
politicians, journalists, companies or members of the public no longer feel free to make their own
choices or express their views for fear of reprisals by extremists, the very fabric of our democracy and
legal order is damaged.

The terrorist threat in the Netherlands and against Dutch interests abroad emanates mainly from
jihadists in North Africa and the Middle East. There are international jihadist groups that regard the
Netherlands as a legitimate target because of our support for international interventions (e.g. in
Afghanistan), or because of views expressed in the Netherlands that they interpret as insulting to
Islam. Groups of young people have been travelling to Syria to take part in the jihad there. If they
return to the Netherlands trained and radicalised, they may pose a threat to our society.

Finally, the growing influence of international organised crime threatens the security of the Netherlands
and the Caribbean parts of the Kingdom. Cheap weapons from current and former conflict zones or
weak states can end up on the international black market and eventually find their way to the
Netherlands. Drug cartels use weak states as a base for smuggling drugs into the EU. Bribery of public
officials (e.g. police and customs officers, judges, prosecutors and public administrators) by criminal
gangs poses a threat to integrity in government.


-----

**2) An effective international legal order**

For the Netherlands, with its open economy and limited direct international power, the best guarantees
of security, stability and prosperity are a stable and effective international legal order and close
international and European cooperation. The Netherlands attaches great importance to an international
legal order in which states can hold each other to account on the basis of mutual agreements and
settle their disputes in a peaceful manner. We are one of only a few countries that has undertaken in
its constitution to strive to promote the international legal order. This is in keeping with our long
tradition as a democracy based on the rule of law – with The Hague as the legal capital of the world –
and trading nation. Against this background, the Netherlands also works to promote broader
recognition of the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice (ICJ), and for more countries to
accede to the ICC.

_Every year some 20,000 to 30,000 vessels sail along the coast of Somalia, a large proportion_

_of them en route to Rotterdam. The Netherlands’ priority in Somalia is therefore to combat_
_piracy and help stabilize the country. The Netherlands is helping bring pirates to justice by_
_supplying experts and funding to build capacity in the criminal justice and prison system in_

_Somalia and neighboring countries. It is also important that these countries build their own_
_maritime capacity, so that they can effectively police their own territorial waters and_
_exclusive economic zones._

Peace and security are very important for the international legal order and human rights, the
prevention of international crises, the protection of civilian populations and efforts to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals. In a large number of weak states and countries in conflict, the state is
unwilling or unable to guarantee security and some form of international intervention or support is
needed to restore security and stability. In many cases, restoring peace, security and the rule of law is
not only a basic need for the people in the country concerned, it is also in the economic or security
interests of the Netherlands.

The Netherlands stands to benefit if other countries respect the core values of the rule of law, such as
protection from arbitrary action by the state, transparency, accountability and participation, because
our interests are inextricably linked with those of other countries. Dutch foreign policy therefore
focuses on bringing as many countries as possible into the international system. The world will be a
safer place if more countries consider themselves part of the international order and act as responsible
stakeholders. An effective international legal order is also an important prerequisite for economic
growth and development. Countries that experience rapid economic growth without sufficient legal
certainty risk encountering (or returning to) instability. Businesses will invest there only if there are
sound laws and rules which are also enforced.

Besides providing an international legal framework, multilateral agreements also protect individuals.
Only international cooperation and sound agreements will allow us to take full advantage of
globalisation’s positive effects and minimise its negative ones. In the development of standards and
regulations for cyber security, too, the Netherlands is pressing for solid international agreements,
including shared terms of reference and confidence-building measures. We are also pressing for an
internet governance model that takes account of the interests of the various actors (government
authorities, the private sector and civil society organisations), citing the global need for a free, open
and secure internet.


-----

**3) Economic security**

The key to a strong Dutch economy lies to a great extent in our relations with other countries. Our
infrastructure is part of a European and global network, and our prosperity is built largely on raw
materials and energy that come from elsewhere. Access to those raw materials, a level playing field for
Dutch companies, unrestricted international trade based on transparent common rules and free trading
routes are all essential. Safeguarding our trade, trading routes and access to raw materials are a
strategic security interest. The rules of the global economic system must be strengthened, observed
and enforced. Global economic chains must be protected from piracy, cyber-attacks, espionage, fraud,
corruption and all forms of organised crime.

Conflicts in other countries can damage our economy. Blockades can result in more expensive
alternative transport routes, or high costs for security and insurance. The territorial conflicts in the East
China and the South China Seas could, for example, block Dutch shipping routes, while territorial
disputes disrupt the activities of European energy companies. According to the World Bank, piracy
costs the world €18 billion a year. Threats to strategic supply routes affect the Netherlands’ role as a
transit hub for the rest of Europe, particularly via the port of Rotterdam.

Foreign investment is crucial to the Dutch economy, and should be subject to as few restrictions as
possible. Of course steps are always taken to safeguard security within the relevant framework, and
the government will respond appropriately if the existing instruments prove inadequate.

The Dutch economy will be vulnerable if the security of our supply of energy and raw materials is
threatened. This could jeopardise our role as a distribution hub, our industrial production capacity and
our energy supply. Higher raw material prices have a negative impact on our economic growth. Our
dependence on fossil fuels also increases our vulnerability.

_Phosphate is a non-renewable resource that is essential for all life on Earth. Without_

_phosphate there would be no food, and therefore no life. It is used primarily in the_
_production of artificial fertiliser, but refined phosphate is also added to foods and used in the_
_chemicals industry. The raw product, phosphorite, is found in only a few places on the_

_planet. The biggest reserves are in Morocco (33%), followed by China (25%); there are_
_much smaller reserves in Iraq, Algeria, Syria, South Africa, the US and Russia. The_
_geographical concentration of phosphorite reserves constitutes a major risk. The US and_
_China have imposed restrictions on exports and, since the upheavals in the Arab world,_

_exports from the North African countries have stagnated, with the exception of Morocco. A_
_large proportion of Morocco’s reserves, however, are in the unstable Western Sahara region._
_Europe is almost entirely dependent on imports._

The Netherlands is an international internet hub and has one of the densest digital networks in the
world. We aim to become the ‘digital gateway’ to Europe. This will require a secure, reliable and open
digital infrastructure. Our growing dependence on cyber infrastructure also makes us vulnerable,
however. Cyber criminals and cyber terrorists can completely disrupt our online financial transactions.
Cyber-attacks can also cause major disruption to society. With our knowledge-based economy, open
society and international orientation, the Netherlands is also vulnerable to cyber espionage. Countries,
organisations and individuals are increasingly attempting to steal sensitive political, military, scientific
and economic information from the Netherlands via digital channels. The private sector and public
authorities, including the intelligence and security services, must invest in managing and securing our
digital infrastructure.


-----

**IV. Policy implications**

The Netherlands has interests all over the world, but our influence is limited and is affected by major
spending cuts on defence and development cooperation, as well as by the rise of new global powers in
Asia, South America and Africa. The cutbacks require that we become smarter in the way we use our
limited resources. We therefore have to set priorities and consider where our presence has the most
added value.

The changes in the world around us mean we need to introduce new focus areas in our foreign security
policy over the coming years. Some things will however remain constant, of course.

The Netherlands will for example continue to invest in strong transatlantic ties. NATO remains a crucial
pillar of Dutch security policy. For decades, the transatlantic axis has brought freedom, security and
prosperity to Europe and North America. The collective self-defence clause in the NATO treaty (article
5) and its deterrent effect are vital for our security. The unique qualities of the alliance make it
reasonable to assume that NATO will continue playing an essential role in conflict prevention,
intervention, control and stabilisation in regions where its security interests are at stake. The
Netherlands will also have to play its part, including in regard to hard power. Security comes at a price,
even in times of financial austerity. The Dutch armed forces must therefore retain the capability to
contribute to all forms of intervention in the future. As a good and reliable partner, the Netherlands
must also come to the aid of others if they call upon us. In 2017, for example, the Netherlands will
again play a role in NATO patrols over the Baltic states (Baltic Air Policing). In addition, Dutch Patriot
systems are currently being deployed in Turkey to defend Turkey’s territory and population against the
threat of missile attacks from Syria.

Another constant in our policy is multilateralism. As a relatively small country with limited international
influence we often achieve most via multilateral channels. The Netherlands therefore supports the UN
agencies that work to build, enforce and promote peace and to preserve and ensure sustainable use of
natural resources. We also work actively to promote the development of ‘Responsibility to Protect’, the
protection of civilian populations and UN Security Council resolution 1325 on women in conflict
situations. We will continue to fight impunity and campaign for broader recognition of the jurisdiction
of the ICJ and the ICC. Cooperation with other countries and with multilateral and regional security
organisations is very important to the Netherlands. For example, security-related issues are
increasingly being discussed with the African Union and the Asian regional forums (ASEAN, ASEM,
ARF), organisations whose importance is growing. Solidarity also remains a key focus in our efforts to
promote peace, security and the rule of law, in full awareness of the fact that we all need to live
together in a single global community. Our prosperity and well-being increase when that of others is
improved.

Alongside these constant features of our policy, the government is introducing the following focuses:

**Policy focus 1: More responsibility for Europe**

In the current multipolar world the relative weight of individual EU member states has declined. To
continue to exert influence, we need to deepen our collaboration with our European partners. Europe
will have to take on more responsibility, if only to remain relevant for the US and the rest of the world.
‘Europe’ refers here to the EU and its member states, and the European members of NATO. A strong,
decisive Europe that takes responsibility, including for security and defence, is important for a stable
international system and a strong NATO. The Netherlands will meet its responsibilities in this area first
and foremost by contributing to NATO and the EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) at a
level commensurate with its economic weight.

The CSDP has become a more robust instrument thanks to the Lisbon Treaty and the advent of the
European External Action Service (EEAS). With several years’ experience of contributing to stabilisation
and crisis management efforts via civilian missions and military operations, the EU is now presenting
itself more and more explicitly as a ‘security provider’. The situation in the Western Balkans illustrates
the development of the CSDP. The Balkan war in the early 1990s made it clear that the Union lacked
the instruments to deal with crises in its own region. This prompted the development of a European


-----

security and defence policy. Several major steps have been taken since then. In recent years, the EU
has played a leading role in international efforts to bring peace, security and stability to the Balkan
region through its missions and operations there.

The Netherlands would like to see the EU become an even stronger force in the area of security. With
its special representatives, its missions and operations, and its development cooperation programmes
in the field of security, police services and criminal justice, the EU makes an important contribution to
stability and security in other countries. It is increasingly taking a leading role in such efforts. The
Netherlands intends to contribute by supporting missions and by pressing for greater coherence in the
activities of the different EU institutions.

The EU’s growing diplomatic weight is also evidenced by the fact that it is an essential partner in
discussions of regional security issues like Iran and the Middle East peace process. Nevertheless, the
Union’s readiness and capacity for external action need to be increased further.

Europe’s role is not limited to implementing security policy, however. Increasingly, the Netherlands
also uses Europe as a platform for policymaking, for example on cyber issues and raw materials. We
work best together if we start by coming up with ideas together.

The Netherlands also plans to work on strengthening Europe’s transatlantic ties, which extend further
than NATO. No two continents share more values and interests than Europe and North America. In a
changing world, where nothing can be taken for granted, these ties are essential. Transatlantic
cooperation is close, and encompasses many areas. The role of the EEAS is becoming more and more
important in this context. The Netherlands will therefore lobby within the EU for security to play a more
prominent role in the transatlantic dialogue. This will require diplomatic coordination in Brussels and
the leading European capitals.

The Netherlands would like to see Europe speak more with one voice on security issues, and ultimately
at the highest level: in the UN Security Council. We will also enter into dialogue with the new major
players on the world stage, both independently and through the EU, to highlight the importance of a
rules-based international legal order and the responsibilities that permanent membership of the
Council entails. Speaking more with a single voice is also the goal with respect to other regional
organisations, including the OSCE.

The need for the EU and the countries of Europe to take greater responsibility for security to guarantee
their own interests is evident from the various developments that have taken place in the security
arena. Europe faces a number of challenges, owing partly to the diversity of views on, and the
fragmented nature of, defence efforts. That said, the EU has a broad range of instruments for crisis
management, with military, diplomatic and economic deployment capabilities.

The Netherlands will also press for more defence cooperation. This is becoming more and more
important in order to maintain sufficient strike capability in a changing world. This is partly the result
of cuts in defence spending, a reality affecting not only the Netherlands, but virtually every other
European country too. The Netherlands would like to see more cooperation on defence so as to
increase our capacity for military action. This can give us and our partners useful resources that we
can’t afford as individual players. Naval cooperation with Belgium and army cooperation with Germany
are being stepped up. The Netherlands is also exploring the possibility of other international
partnerships, particularly with countries we already have ties with.

When it comes to making choices, international coordination by NATO and the EU is essential. The
Netherlands will continue to encourage this. There must be closer political cooperation, too. Shared
views on security matters are, after all, the basis for military intervention (as well as for decisions not
to intervene). The Netherlands could expedite and influence this process by holding more intensive
consultations with important countries in Europe, and contributing where possible (politically and
militarily), in order to have more say when specific Dutch interests are at stake. A good example of
successful international military cooperation is the air transport provided by the European Air Transport
Command (EATC) in Eindhoven for the French military intervention in Mali. Another example is the
establishment of the Heavy Airlift Wing, with its fleet of C-17 Globemaster transport aircraft in
Hungary.


-----

**Policy focus 2: Unstable regions close to Europe**

Now that the US is focusing more on Asia, Europe will have to take more responsibility and invest more
in stability in its own region, particularly when it comes to conflict regions in the arc to the south and
east of the Union: North Africa, the Sahel, the Horn of Africa, the Middle East and the Caucasus. This is
not a matter of dividing spheres of influence between the EU and the rest of the world. In practice,
cooperation with the US and other countries will remain the guiding principle. We cannot manage
bigger interventions without the US and NATO. Nor does it mean that we should focus exclusively on
countries in the neighbourhood of Europe: just as the EU will still need to be able to call upon NATO to
help safeguard our security interests in our backyard, so the US and other NATO partners will still need
to be able to call upon the Netherlands and the other countries of Europe to help in conflicts further
afield. Furthermore, transnational threats and efforts to tackle them cannot always be delineated in
geographical terms.

Nevertheless, events on the edge of the European Union have a direct impact on our own security and
prosperity. The Netherlands has decided to step up its involvement in the Arab region in the knowledge
that a number of countries there are in a crucial transitional phase which will determine the stability of
Europe’s external borders over the next few decades. Contributing to democratisation and, therefore,
stabilisation in the neighbouring region to the south will enable us to contain the risk of illegal
migration and reduce the threat of terrorism. A prosperous Arab region will create economic
opportunities, including for Europe. Our energy interests in the region will also benefit from stable
governance. The Netherlands supports the European Neighbourhood Policy agenda for economic
reform, reconstruction and higher employment. The removal of trade barriers is part of this.

NATO and EU partners can play an important role here. The Netherlands supports NATO’s longstanding
agenda of closer cooperation with Arab countries. The Alliance has forged ties with a number of Arab
countries on NATO missions and efforts to combat common threats like terrorism, failing states and the
proliferation of WMD. This led in 1994 to the establishment of the Mediterranean Dialogue and in 2004
to the Istanbul Cooperation Initiative. A number of countries (Jordan, Qatar and the United Arab
Emirates) contributed to NATO’s Operation Unified Protector in Libya under this arrangement.

The current crisis in the Sahel, a region close to the EU, poses physical and economic security risks to
Europe, and therefore also to the Netherlands. Instability and piracy in the Horn of Africa, the threat
they pose to Dutch merchant shipping and the need to tackle the causes on land are factors that justify
active efforts on the part of the Netherlands. Our approach will be as integrated as possible, involving
contributions in terms of both personnel and funding. We will use multilateral channels where possible
and bilateral programmes where necessary, with a focus on both short-term needs (humanitarian, for
example) and long-term needs (sustainable development). Local capacity-building and national
ownership will also remain key principles in Dutch efforts, to ensure that players in Africa take on more
responsibility themselves.

**Policy focus 3: Prevention**

Prevention is not only better than cure, it is also cheaper. Besides tackling insecurity and fragility,
Dutch policy will also centre on pre-conflict management, making resources available via bilateral, civil
society and multilateral channels. The Netherlands has a number of innovative, flexible instruments for
this purpose, such as the International Security Budget and the Stability Fund, which has been
supporting stability and peacebuilding efforts for years. Prevention above all requires early alignment
of interests and goals on the basis of a joint assessment of the situation in the country or region. The
Netherlands therefore sets great store by timely integrated analysis (‘early warning’) and strategy
development (‘early action’) in current or emerging conflict zones, where possible in close collaboration
with other countries and organisations.

In the interests of ensuring a representative and effective multilateral system which is able to perform
its preventive role at global level to best effect, the Netherlands is calling for reform of the UN Security
Council. We believe it is important that the Security Council adequately reflect changing geopolitical
relations. To aid efforts to reform and strengthen the international community, the Netherlands has put
itself forward as a candidate for the Security Council for the 2017-2018 period. Through our candidacy,


-----

we hope to ensure coherence with the legal institutions in The Hague and promote Dutch priorities in
areas such as the rule of law and human rights. The Netherlands’ candidacy for a non-permanent seat
does not conflict with its goal of reforming the Security Council in the longer term, including the
introduction of a permanent seat for the EU.

Prevention is the most effective strategy in the fight against organised crime, too. Dutch priorities in
this area include oversight of the integrity of public authorities in the countries concerned, a strong
international anti-money laundering regime and good border controls. Weak states must be
encouraged to strengthen the rule of law within their borders and enhance their resilience to
corruption. Our coastguard is active in the Caribbean in the fight against drug trafficking, illegal arms
dealing and certain forms of illegal migration. The Kingdom also contributes to counter-illicit-trafficking
sorties under the bilateral Forward Operating Locations agreement (FOL) with the US. In addition, the
Kingdom promotes closer cooperation on regional security matters in the Caribbean. In December
2012 the government of the Kingdom concluded a memorandum of understanding (MoU) on
multidimensional security with the Organization of American States (OAS). This provides a basis for
more exchange of information and coordination of activities to combat organised crime, trafficking in
drugs, arms and persons, and terrorism in the region.

Preventive action is also important in the face of new challenges resulting from climate change,
fluctuating food prices and the exhaustion of natural resources, including water shortages. These
potential sources of conflict (whether armed or not) must be tackled at the earliest possible stage,
multilaterally and otherwise. UNEP and other UN agencies should play an active role in early warning
and early action, and could promote international agreements on natural resources. International
agreements on the preservation and sustainable use of natural resources are an important element of
peace talks. There are clear opportunities in this connection for the Netherlands and the Dutch private
sector. Companies can, for example, help develop innovative solutions to enhance food security,
access to energy and green growth. The government’s top sector policy offers scope for such efforts.

The Netherlands is also investing more and more in measures to prevent cyber-crime, cyber espionage
and cyber warfare. We are pressing for further ratification and globalisation of the Budapest
Convention on Cybercrime. NATO’s cyber defence policy considers, in part at the Netherlands’
insistence, the need for closer information exchange, the development of joint threat analysis and the
importance of EU-NATO cooperation. The Netherlands also believes that NATO will eventually have to
develop a cyber-security doctrine. Together with a group of European pioneer countries, the
Netherlands has contributed significantly to the EU’s cyber strategy, which proposes an integrated
approach (i.e. one involving public-private and civil-military cooperation). With this group and other
countries like the US and Australia, we are working actively on standards of conduct and are also
pressing the UN and OSCE to take adequate precautions.

An effective counterterrorism policy, finally, should focus not only on preventing attacks but also on
removing factors that fuel terrorism. Tackling causes of insecurity and focusing more on conflict
prevention elsewhere in the world are therefore important ways of curbing security threats in the
Netherlands itself. The government believes that counterterrorism activities must always respect the
rule of law and people’s fundamental freedoms.

The key to preventing radicalisation and terrorism lies to a large extent in other countries. Capacity
building abroad, in terms of legislation, investigation and prosecution, is essential. The Netherlands will
therefore continue to contribute to the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) (e.g. by seconding
experts) in order to build counterterrorism resources and knowledge in high-risk countries. We also
plan to promote initiatives aimed at preventing violent radicalisation by offering a counterbalance to
radical influences. Various means of communication (education, TV and radio programmes) will be
used to encourage young people to broaden their views and not use violence and extremism to express
their dissatisfaction with the government or with people who think differently. The Netherlands’ focus
in this respect will be on North Africa and the Sahel, the Horn of Africa and the Middle East.

Prevention is also the most effective means of countering nuclear terrorism. Although the likelihood of
a nuclear terrorist attack is extremely small, the impact would be catastrophic. The Netherlands and
many other countries are therefore working hard to ensure that fissile material that could be used to
make a nuclear weapon does not fall into the wrong hands. This means that any surplus material must


-----

be destroyed as far as possible, that nuclear material must be kept secure and that international
monitoring must be tightened up. The Nuclear Security Summit is held every two years to draw
attention to this issue and expedite progress in this area. The US hosted the first summit in 2010, and
South Korea the second in 2012; the Netherlands will host the third summit in 2014.

**Policy focus 4: Disarmament and arms control**

The Netherlands is working towards the complete abolition of nuclear weapons. Nuclear disarmament
is an important priority in this. We support a mutual disarmament approach, with negotiations
encompassing all categories of nuclear weapons. NATO has also stated that it is in favour of creating
the conditions for a world without nuclear weapons, in accordance with the objectives of the NonProliferation Treaty (NPT). NATO’s doctrine is based partly on nuclear deterrence, and indicates that it
will remain a nuclear alliance as long as nuclear weapons exist.

NATO supports the mutual efforts of the US and the Russian Federation to achieve strategic stability,
greater transparency and a further reduction in their nuclear arsenals. Both within the NATO alliance
and at UN level, the Netherlands will work to help create the necessary conditions for disarmament and
to promote discussion of the issue. We intend to take specific, pragmatic steps towards this goal.
These include measures geared to greater transparency on nuclear arsenals, which we are lobbying for
in NATO and in the framework of the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI). We also
hope to help foster trust (primarily through NATO) between the negotiating parties – in practice, the
US and Russia.

The Netherlands will also try to stimulate debate in the context of the NPT, NPDI and NATO on the role
of nuclear weapons in military doctrines and the scope for reducing their role. We are keen to see a
reduction in the number of tactical nuclear weapons throughout Europe, as part of efforts towards
disarmament and greater transparency and stability. Thanks partly to the Netherlands’ efforts, this
subject is now firmly on the international agenda, and the NATO nuclear doctrine agreed in 2012
provides a number of potential openings.

One key element is strengthening the international legal order. Besides the universalisation of the main
existing treaties and agreements on disarmament and non-proliferation, starting negotiations on a
treaty curbing the production of fissile material for use in explosives (Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty) is
another priority for the Netherlands. We will also work to ensure that the International Atomic Energy
Agency’s system for safeguarding nuclear material is made more effective. The combination of a
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement with an Additional Protocol is the leading standard for the IAEA
in its monitoring activities. The Netherlands is also pressing for the entry into force of the amended
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. This has a bearing not only on nonproliferation but also on the prevention of nuclear terrorism, and is therefore also important in the
context of the Netherlands’ hosting the Nuclear Security Summit in 2014.

In the area of non-proliferation, Dutch efforts are aimed not only at strengthening the legal system
itself, but also at enhancing enforcement and compliance. This means strengthening the organisations
concerned with non-proliferation and taking rigorous action when the rules are violated (mainly by Iran
and North Korea where the NPT is concerned). This is vital for the credibility of the NPT in general. The
Netherlands is promoting stricter monitoring of compliance and stricter conditions for nuclear
cooperation. The support the Netherlands has expressed for the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)
and the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention forms part of our efforts to achieve improved
enforcement of and compliance with the international system of non-proliferation of WMD. We are
home to the OPCW, the organisation that oversees the correct application and enforcement of the
provisions of the CWC.

Export control regimes are a key factor in preventing proliferation. The Netherlands is keen to see
these regimes continually strengthened. Dutch intelligence and security services actively investigate
proliferation-related activities and gather intelligence on programmes to develop WMD (and their
delivery systems) in countries of concern. They also focus on curbing activities in or via the
Netherlands aimed at acquiring such weapons or systems.


-----

Although the Dutch position on European trade policy is generally geared to the greatest possible
degree of free trade in accordance with common rules and the removal of tariff and non-tariff trade
barriers, systematic trade controls on the export of strategic (military and dual-use) goods are
unavoidable. It is in the interests both of the international legal order and of Dutch national security to
ensure that such goods and technologies do not contribute to regional or internal conflicts, human
rights violations or the development and production of WMD. When it comes to conventional weapons,
too, the Netherlands believes that the interests of free trade must be balanced against the possible
misuse of these weapons. We would therefore like to see the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) recently agreed
at the UN signed and ratified as soon as possible.

**Policy focus 5: Integrated approach**

In many cases, restoring peace, security and the rule of law is not only a basic need for people in
fragile states and countries in conflict, but is also in the interests of the Netherlands’ own economy or
security. There can be no development without security, or security without development. In a large
number of fragile states and conflict countries the state is unwilling or unable to guarantee security,
and some form of international support or intervention is needed to restore security and stability.
Bringing a crisis under control with the aid of the international community is a complex business. The
deployment of military resources alone is not enough.

Recent experiences in Afghanistan, Bosnia, Iraq, Kosovo and Libya have shown that intervention is
effective only if the instruments of defence, diplomacy, development cooperation, the police, the
justice system and trade are deployed in a coordinated fashion. Consequently, the number of players
involved has also increased. What is more, experience has taught us that effective crisis management
does not happen overnight. In other words, such efforts go beyond the conflict phase itself. Specific
attention must be paid to prevention, reconstruction and an effective transition from acute stabilisation
activities by military means to long-term stabilisation using civilian resources. Only then can we reduce
the risk of a conflict flaring up again, a risk that often proves high.

One good example involves anti-piracy activities in the Gulf of Aden, which cannot be seen in isolation
from the Netherlands’ efforts to combat the causes of instability. The Netherlands supports economic
self-sufficiency and the development of the rule of law in Somalia and the surrounding region. After all,
the solution to the problem of piracy lies not at sea but on land.

These insights have led to stronger calls for cooperation and coherence in recent years. The idea that
an operation will be effective only if all the individual parts of the whole are properly utilised is now
widely acknowledged both nationally and internationally. The ‘integrated approach’, ‘comprehensive
approach’ and ‘3D approach’ are frequently used terms. But they are only meaningful in practice if they
are applied in specific instances. The Netherlands has gained considerable knowledge and experience
of taking an integrated approach to crisis management, not least in Afghanistan (Uruzgan and Kunduz)
and in our active efforts in development cooperation.

For an effective approach, it is important that the Netherlands establish the best mix of diplomatic,
military and development instruments on a case-by-case basis. The government has various
instruments at its disposal: diplomacy and political activities, use of the armed forces and the
intelligence and security services, contributions to development cooperation activities, and efforts in
other areas of governance, such as the judiciary and police.

The Netherlands’ network of over 100 diplomatic missions abroad has major added value, functioning
as the eyes and ears of the Dutch government. The armed forces can contribute significantly to
security sector reform in certain conflict regions. Similarly, Dutch police officers are increasingly
providing training to help strengthen local police forces, which are often weak. In addition, the
Netherlands seconds civilian experts to improve security, the rule of law and governance before, during
and after crises. Robust and independent intelligence is also vital for our international security
interests, whether in preventing terrorism and espionage, providing protection from cyber-attacks,
assessing the intentions of certain countries or gauging the development of capacity of ‘opposing
forces’ and the risk of proliferation of WMD. Through development cooperation, the Netherlands helps
promote security and the rule of law in developing countries. This includes strengthening capable,
legitimate government authorities and promoting employment and basic services. Dutch contributions


-----

through development cooperation channels give the Netherlands a place at the table in international
organisations, allowing us to represent broader Dutch interests in those forums.

An integrated approach also allows better coordination of the activities of Dutch military personnel,
police officers, lawyers, businesses, civil society organisations, civilian experts and diplomats in conflict
zones. This applies not only to those in the field; collaboration begins in The Hague. Government
ministries coordinate their activities among themselves and with external actors such as civil society
organisations. An integrated approach to planning is also needed. Joint analysis involving all relevant
ministries and organisations is an important first step in the process. Once the decision has been taken
to provide a contribution, it is vital to establish the baseline situation. Any plan for transferring
responsibility to the local (and, where necessary, the international) community must be based on
analysis and measurement. Finally, a thorough joint evaluation allows lessons to be learned and put
into practice, as happened after the missions in Uruzgan and Kunduz.

The Netherlands will not necessarily deploy all the instruments at its disposal at once. Those selected
will differ from one situation to another, and might concern just a single policy area. We will make
human and financial resources available only where a Dutch contribution is likely to have added value.
Our civilian and military instruments must be an integral part of a broader policy focused on good
governance, security and development in the longer term. This approach has also been endorsed at
international level. In most cases, therefore, responsibility for the integrated approach will lie with an
international organisation (UN, EU, NATO) and coordination or cooperation between them will be
crucial. Apart from our contribution in terms of personnel or funding, the Netherlands will also seek to
exert influence over the design and implementation of international interventions, where necessary and
possible providing a financial stimulus, and drawing attention (via bilateral and multilateral diplomatic
channels) to the need for a coherent approach to crisis management.

The importance of the integrated approach to international crisis management operations and peace
missions is also reflected in the new International Security Budget. This will be used to foster the
effective and coherent deployment of military, diplomatic and development activities to help prevent
conflict (or the escalation of existing conflicts) in and between countries, and to contribute to security,
stability and capacity-building in those countries.

**Policy focus 6: Cooperation with the private sector**

Economic diplomacy, cooperation with the private sector and exchange of knowledge and skills
between companies and knowledge institutions are now more important than ever in protecting the
Netherlands’ economic security interests.

The knowledge and technology that the private sector has at its disposal are needed to protect our
digital security, for example. Cooperation between public authorities and private companies lies at the
core of Dutch cyber policy. Most of our ICT infrastructure, products and services are supplied by
private companies. But a safe and reliable internet is not only important to them, it is equally vital to
society at large. The Netherlands therefore protects its vital infrastructure using a strategic approach
based on the National Cyber Security Strategy and the recommendations of the public-private Cyber
Security Council. We are also fostering operational collaboration to enhance international detection, for
example, and the sharing of best practices, instruments and data with governments and private
parties, including measures to bolster the operational Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT)
network.

Cooperation between the public and private sectors is also important in preventing resource scarcity. It
is primarily up to the private sector itself to safeguard access to raw materials. However, the
government can provide support when acute problems occur. Economic diplomacy also plays an
important role in this respect, not just through trade policies but also through our political and
economic relations with important countries like Russia and Norway and regions like the Gulf.

If raw materials become a political issue, the Netherlands will take measures, where possible and
appropriate via the EU. We will work with the EU to improve governance, stability and the investment
climate in countries with large stocks of raw materials. We will also promote international
transparency, including in financial matters.


-----

When it comes to energy, the Netherlands has opted to focus first and foremost on the sustainable and
responsible extraction of gas, in accordance with OECD and IEA standards, to ensure that resources
are extracted in a socially and environmentally responsible manner. By working worldwide to promote
the use of gas in the transition from polluting to clean energy, the Netherlands will help curb climate
change. The government will also work with the private sector to stimulate the development of
sustainable new technologies.

Finally, combating piracy is also a matter that concerns both the government and the private sector.
Through its deployment of Vessel Protection Detachments to accompany Dutch merchant vessels, the
Netherlands will continue to provide military protection in the fight against piracy, but the maritime
sector must continue to live up to its responsibilities, too. Private security firms will also take on some
of the work of protecting merchant vessels.


-----

**Summary/conclusions**

Security cannot be taken for granted. It requires continuous effort to make a secure world possible,
and thus ensure the security of the Netherlands. Economic developments and the emergence of new
powers have given Asia, Latin America and Africa more influence on the world stage. Rapid
technological progress, digitisation and globalisation have strengthened the ties between us. This has
brought new opportunities, but also new threats. Besides traditional issues like territorial security,
arms control and conflict management, the international security agenda is now also dominated by
issues like cyber security, piracy, nuclear and other forms of terrorism, and security issues associated
with water, raw materials and energy.

Events in the world around us have a direct impact on our own security and welfare. To safeguard our
strategic interests in the face of the changes in the international context and the austerity measures
the government has been forced to take, we must focus on certain issues and use our limited
resources more efficiently.

This government plans to focus on the following:

-  **More responsibility for Europe: the fact that individual European countries are losing influence**
means that we must deepen our collaboration with our European partners, in order, among other
things, to remain relevant for the US and the rest of the world. A strong EU that adds responsibility
for security and defence to its remit is important for a stable international system and a strong
NATO. This means there will need to be more defence cooperation with other European countries
to enhance our capacity for military action and retain sufficient strike capability.

-  **Greater focus on unstable regions close to Europe: events on the external borders of the**
European Union have a direct impact on our own security and economic interests. Though the
number of conflicts has fallen worldwide over the past two decades, the number of unstable
regions surrounding Europe has in fact increased. The situations in Syria and Mali – and, more
broadly, growing instability and radicalisation in the Middle East and North Africa – give cause for
concern. Europe will have to take more responsibility and invest more in stability in its own
neighbourhood.

-  **Prevention: prevention is better than cure, and often considerably cheaper, and security is no**
exception. This is obvious when it comes to matters like terrorism and arms control, but it is also
essential in crisis management, conflict prevention and stewardship of natural resources. A focus
on human security and respect for human rights as essential prerequisites for peace and stability is
vital for the Netherlands.

-  **Disarmament and arms control: the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and missile**
technology is a growing cause for concern. The Netherlands will therefore have to become even
more active in its efforts to strengthen the international legal framework for non-proliferation and
disarmament. Our ultimate aim is to rid the world of weapons of mass destruction, including
nuclear weapons.

-  **Integrated approach: crises often have several causes. Long-term security cannot therefore be**
achieved at the touch of a button. The best chance of lasting success lies in the integrated
deployment of the instruments at our disposal – diplomacy, development cooperation, defence, the
police, the criminal justice system and trade. This idea is gaining ground in other countries and
organisations, thanks partly to the Netherlands’ efforts.

-  **Cooperation with the private sector: economic security is an integral part of our security policy.**
The Dutch private sector has eyes and ears – and also interests – throughout the world.
Arrangements we make with the private sector can enhance our security. Companies’ knowledge
and technology are needed in order to bring a secure digital world one step closer. Cyber security
is a matter for both the government and the private sector. The same applies to the security of our
energy supply.


-----

As well as these focus areas, our policy also includes a number of constants. Transatlantic cooperation
remains vital for the broader security of the Netherlands. As a relatively small country with limited
international influence, we will continue to work for multilateral collaboration in many other contexts
and organisations. A successful security policy can be achieved only by working with other countries,
international and civil society organisations and the private sector. It is clearly in our own interest to
make active efforts to achieve global stability, solidarity and security, since the threats we face today
have little regard for national borders or physical barriers.


-----

