## National Security Strategy

### 2019


-----

# Table of Contents

**Summary**

**Introduction**

**The National Security Strategy Cycle**

**The term 'national security'**

**Trends and developments that influence national security**

**Predominant national security risks**

**Priority assessment of threats and risks: which issues require extra focus?**

1. Threats from state-sponsored actors will be addressed

2. Combating polarisation via a broad approach based on coexistence

3. Intensified approach to protect critical infrastructure

4. Terrorism and extremism: evaluate, intensify and continually develop countermeasures

5. Minimise military threats via close collaboration and optimal military effectiveness

6. Highly programmatic approach to combat criminal subversion

7. Intensified approach against cyber threats

**Continual focus on resilience**

**Generic national security instruments**

**Development and expansion of the national security approach**

**Annex 1**

**Annex 2**


**12**

**16**

**21**

**26**

**26**

**27**

**27**

**28**

**28**

**29**

**30**

**33**

**37**

**40**

**42**

**44**


-----

-----

# Summary

**National security is a dynamic and multifaceted issue that requires a solid yet**

**flexible approach. This National Security Strategy (NSS) specifies all national**

**security interests that must be protected, as well as how these interests are**

**currently under threat and how we can minimise these risks and threats.**


**Strategic agenda that undergoes periodic assessment**
This NSS marks the beginning of a strategic cycle that is periodically repeated to ensure continual assessment of whether the
measures to protect national security interests remain sufficiently
adequate to tackle all developments, threats and risks that could
affect national security. This cycle is repeated every three years,
although interim adjustments are made in the event of any new
developments, threats or risks concerning national security. In this
way, the NSS fulfils the function of a strategic agenda that
inventories all of the threats and risks that jeopardise national
security and examines the extent to which a comprehensive
approach has been established to minimise these threats and
increase resilience. As such, the focus of the strategy can change
over time and is therefore flexible in nature.

**Intensified approach to risks**
Current developments concerning threats and risks show that the
following security issues require an intensified approach.

-  **Threats from state-sponsored actors will be addressed. This**
approach consists of generic measures to boost resilience against
various types of threats from state-sponsored actors.

-  **Polarisation can undermine our open society. To tackle polari-**
sation, we will implement a broad and overarching approach
focusing on the promotion of coexistence. Municipalities, civic
organisation and the security chain will make an important contribution to this process.


The strategic cycle of the National Security Strategy – which repeats
every three years – enables the Netherlands to continually protect
itself against the development of threats and risks and intensifies
the national security approach in a future-proof manner.

**Preventing social disruption and protecting the**
**democratic rule of law**
For this purpose, our national security interests are classified into
six categories:

1. _territorial security;_
2. physical security;
3. economic security;
4. ecological security;
5. social and political stability;
6. the international rule of law.

National security is jeopardised when one or more national
security interests are threatened to such an extent that this results
in or could result in social disruption. With regard to national
security, the Netherlands is more dependent than ever on the
smooth functioning of the international system of rules, standards
and agreements. For this reason, we have added 'the functioning of
the international rule of law' to the list of national security
interests. This national security interest is not an isolated interest,
as it is closely interwoven with the other five national security
interests and with other interests and values of Dutch society. As all
national security interests can also be threatened via cyberspace,
cybersecurity is interwoven into all interests as well. The availability, confidentiality and integrity of essential information services
has been added to this NSS as a criterion for territorial security and
is therefore covered by the national security process.


-----

-  Many threats and risks can result in disruption of critical
**infrastructure. To protect against these threats and risks, the**
government is implementing an intensified approach that
will pool knowledge, skills and expertise in order to adequately address national security risks concerning the critical
infrastructure.

-  The combating of terrorism and extremism continues to
demand our attention. Reinforcing and intensifying our focus
based on actual threat levels whenever and wherever necessary
is vital. In addition, efforts will focus on applying the comprehensive approach against all forms of extremism – regardless of
their ideological basis – in order to tackle 'new' threats as well.

-  The Netherlands can only combat military threats by means of
effective collaboration and active international policy, e.g. via
the EU, NATO, the OSCE and the UN. To maintain our status as a
credible ally and partner, we will reinforce and further improve
the combat power, sustainability and deployability of our armed
forces.

-  The approach against subversive crime will focus on a broad
package of measures as part of a coalition between the government, the business sector and society as a whole. In addition,
an ambitious legislative agenda has been established that fully
takes into account the practical wishes and preferences of frontline operators as well as constitutional principles. This will
substantially boost the approach against subversive crime in
collaboration with all of our partners in the field.

-  Threats and risks relating to cybersecurity and cyber threats
will be comprehensively addressed by the government by means
of the National Cybersecurity Agenda (NCA), brought into effect
in April 2018.[1] This has been formulated in a flexible manner to
enable mitigation of the increasing levels of threats.

An intensified focus means the nature of the threat is such that
extra and comprehensive attention – in an integrated fashion,
albeit within the framework of the existing tasks and responsibilities – is paid to continually minimising all identified threats and
risks. The aforementioned intensified focus still requires further
specification under the supervision of the line ministries involved.

**Continual focus on resilience**
The development of the applicable threats and risks means that we
must maintain our strong focus on the security issues in the list
below. This will roughly involve the following action points:

-  The Netherlands will focus on maintaining and boosting mul**tilateral international systems via agreements and regulations**
based on universal values. This focus has been further elaborated
in the Integrated International Security Strategy (IISS).[2]

1 Parliamentary Papers 2017/2018, 26643, No. 536.

P li P / 8 6 N



-  For the purposes of combating and preventing natural
**disasters, we will concentrate on the issues of climate change,**
drought, rising sea levels, wildfires, earthquakes, soil subsidence and solar storms. Measures will be taken with regard to
carbon reduction, climate-proof groundwater and surface water
systems, spatial planning and use of land, among others. The
Netherlands will continue its efforts to fulfil the objectives in
the Paris Agreement. The water system, which currently focuses
primarily on draining away excess water as quickly as possible,
must be better equipped to enable retention and infiltration
of water. In relation to natural disasters such as forest fires and
earthquakes, the usual crisis preparation at the local, regional
and national levels is sufficient. Numerous measures will be
taken to minimise the risk of earthquakes in relation to gas
production in Groningen and the consequences thereof. In the
event of an earthquake, a crisis system is already in place.

-  Given the potential consequences of a CBRN (Chemical,
Biological, Radiological and Nuclear) conflict or incident for
Dutch national security interests, this threat is given undiminished attention. Another important element in the approach to
this issue involves boosting social resilience against any CBRN
incidents.

-  In the Netherlands, the risk of infectious diseases is relatively
limited. However, the rise of antibiotic resistance is a cause for
concern and a comprehensive and coordinated approach has
therefore been formulated for this issue. In recent years, no
significant developments that could affect national security
concerning infectious animal diseases or zoonotic diseases have
been observed.

**Development of generic instruments**
In addition to the approach to minimise the aforementioned
threats and risks, the Netherlands will also focus on increasing the
number of generic instruments for the protection of national
security – such as the generic risk and crisis management system
– in order to enable adequate and straightforward measures to be
taken against potential and actual incidents and crises.
Furthermore, newly developed knowledge and scientific research
**into threats and risks will be integrated and new technologies**
**and their possible applications will be monitored for risks to**
national security. Finally, the NSS cycle will be periodically
repeated and further developed. The next NSS is scheduled to be
published in 2022, although the current NSS will be adjusted in the
period leading up to 2022 in the event that threats and risks give
cause to do so.


-----

**Prevention**
of danger **Defence**
whenever possible

of the Netherlands
through an
effective and
modern
approach

**Reinforcement**
of the foundations
of our security


Figure 1 The three pillars of the security approach as defined in the IISS


-----

# Introduction

**The Netherlands is constantly changing. Technology is developing at a lightning**

**pace and people, products, organisations and data are becoming increasingly**

**interconnected. As a result, national and international developments are more**

**interwoven than ever before.**


Climate change due to global warming is creating new challenges.
In addition to opportunities for economic growth and social
advancement, these developments also add new dimensions to
existing national security issues. Furthermore, new threats (digital
or otherwise) can escalate rapidly and significantly affect safety and
security within society.

In order to protect national security, the Netherlands must therefore ensure a dynamic approach to security that is


flexible enough to respond to new developments, threats and
risks[3] and to adjust its levels of resilience. The National Security
Strategy (NSS) provides an overview of all threats and risks and
specifies their urgency – based on the degree of resilience and their
coherence within the national security approach – in order to help
protect social continuity and the democratic rule of law.[4]


**Closely connected with the IISS, the Policy Document on the Armed Forces and other strategies**

The National Security Strategy (NSS) connects all local, national The security approach in the IISS is based on three pillars:
and international efforts to protect national security. Where Prevention, Protection and Intensification. Within these categoexpedient, the NSS refers to underlying substrategies that specify ries, specific objectives have been formulated in order to counter
the strategic focus concerning specific threats and risks, such as any urgent threats that may develop in the years to come. These
the Counterterrorism Strategy, the National Cybersecurity Agenda measures constitute an anticipatory and preventive approach to
(NCSA), the Delta Programme and the Letter to Parliament on security with a long-term perspective. The strategy focuses on
Combating Threats from state-sponsored actors, among others. In preventing danger to the greatest extent possible and protecting
close cohesion with the Integrated International Security Strategy the Netherlands against danger whenever necessary based on a
(IISS) and the Policy Document on the Armed Forces, the NSS gives modern and effective approach. This also means establishing and
a clear picture of all strategic measures at the national level. The maintaining credible deterrence via alliances, as well as paying
NSS also pays specific attention to the overlap between Dutch attention to the root causes of terrorism, irregular migration,
efforts on the national and international stages; after all, events poverty and climate change, as specified in the coalition agreeoutside the Netherlands can also substantially affect Dutch ment. Finally, reinforcement of the foundations of security – i.e.
national security and the manner in which it is organised. This promotion of the international rule of law and an effective
places greater emphasis on the international nature of national multilateral system – is a vital factor in guaranteeing the security of
security, as was also mentioned in the report 'Security in an the Kingdom. The Policy Document on the Armed Forces is based
Interconnected World' (‘Veiligheid in een wereld van on three core principles:
Verbindingen’) of the Scientific Council for Government Policy. The - **maintaining security – within both the Kingdom and Europe;**
increased interconnectivity of internal and external security and - **establishing security – both at and beyond Europe's borders;**
the need for a more integrated approach to national security will - **secure connection – between the Netherlands as a hub country and**
be implemented in the NSS. its supply/distribution channels.

In this document, the terms 'threat' and 'risk' are used alongside each other and are considered mutually supplementary. A 'risk' is defined as 'the
interplay between the likelihood of an incident occurring and the potential impact of that incident.' The term 'threat' relates to the presence, concreteness
and acuteness of danger (sometimes as a blip on the horizon that needs to be identified via an early-warning mechanism). The term 'threat' therefore
involves present and demonstrable danger, while the term 'risk' involves potential danger.

I l di h f ll i d fi i i h f d i f D h i d i i i l d d i f d


-----

-----

# The National Security Strategy Cycle

**The NSS functions as a strategic agenda, focusing on preventing social**

**disruption and protecting the democratic rule of law. This agenda shows which**

**issues should be focused on in order to protect national security, given the**

**current development of threats and risks. This means the focus of the strategy**

**can change over time and is therefore flexible in nature.**


This NSS marks the beginning of a new strategic cycle that is
periodically repeated to ensure continual assessment of whether
the measures to protect national security interests remain sufficiently adequate to tackle all developments with regard to threats
and risks that could affect national security. The NSS specifies all
national security interests that must be protected, as well as how
these interests are currently under threat and how we can minimise
these threats or risks.

**Identifying national security interests**
The strategic cycle begins by identifying all national security
interests that could result in social disruption – damage to the

Figure 2 The National Security Strategy Cycle


democratic rule of law included – in the event that these interests
are seriously compromised. These interests have been methodically crystallised into impact criteria that clearly display the extent
to which these interests could be compromised. The interests and
the manner in which they are formulated are part of the methodology of the National Security Analysts Network (ANV). The ANV is a
multidisciplinary network of knowledge institutes with the objective of boosting the continuity, the safeguarding of knowledge and
the multidisciplinary approach concerning analyses of national
security.


**National**
**Security**

**Interests**

**Comprehensive** **Implementation**
**analysis** **of measures**
(3 years) **and instruments**

**Threats or risks** **Resilience**

**Interim** **Periodic scan**
**adjustments** **of threat**
(if applicable) **developments**


-----

**Identifying developments with regard to threats**
**and risks**
Once the national security interests have been defined, an independent analysis is conducted to examine which security developments, threats or risks can affect these interests. This analysis
integrates existing analyses and partial analyses such as the Cyber
Security Assessment Netherlands, the Terrorist Threat Assessment
Netherlands, the strategic monitor, the National Security Profile
and reports by the intelligence and security services. In this way,
this comprehensive analysis paints a complete picture of all of the
main threats and risks to national safety and security and interconnects the internal and external security dimensions. In order
to tackle any interim developments in the threat level, mid-term
scans are conducted to evaluate whether the NSS needs to be
adjusted or supplemented.

**Strategic focus on resilience**
The NSS focuses on safeguarding the Netherlands' resilience, i.e.
its ability to adequately combat threats or risks. This involves all
parties who have any degree of responsibility for the processes
of prevention, anticipation, preparation, response and aftercare
(comprehensiveness). Based on the threat and risk analysis, the NSS
provides framework answers to the following questions:

1. _Does the Netherlands have a comprehensive approach to minimise this_
_threat or risk?_

2. Given the manner in which this threat or risk has developed, does this
_approach make the Netherlands more resilient?_

Whenever additional attention to a particular threat or risk is
required, this will be visibly highlighted in the assessment of this
question and included in the NSS. However, if a particular threat or
risk does not require any additional attention, this does not mean
that the threat or risk to national security has reduced. If the current approach is deemed sufficient, then this means that the same
level of attention to this threat or risk must be maintained.


-----

-----

# The term 'national security'

_National security is jeopardised if one or more critical interests of the Dutch state and/or society are_
_threatened to such an extent that this results or could result in social disruption._

The Netherlands uses the above definition of national security. Two essential elements determine the scope of the term:

1. _The Netherlands' critical interests or national security interests must be jeopardised;_
2. and the threat to these interests must be sufficiently serious that it has resulted or could result in social disruption.

**Six national security interests**
Our national security interests are classified into the following categories:

1. Territorial security The unimpeded functioning of the Netherlands and its EU and NATO allies as independent states in a
broad sense, or territorial security in a narrow sense..

2. Physical security The ability of people to go about their lives in an unimpeded manner within the Netherlands and their
own physical environment.

3. Economic security The unimpeded functioning of the Dutch economy in an effective and efficient manner.

4. Ecological security The unimpeded continued existence of the natural living environment in and around the Netherlands.

5. Social and political stability The continued and unimpeded existence of a social climate in which individuals are free to go about
their lives and groups are able to coexist within and in accordance with the Netherlands' democratic
and lawful state and its shared values.

6. International rule of law The functioning of the international system of rules, standards and agreements established for the
purposes of international peace and security.


As national security can also be affected via cyberspace,5 cybersecu
rity has been interwoven into all of the other national security
interests. In addition, the integrity of cyberspace has been added as
an aspect of territorial security, which includes the availability,
confidentiality and integrity of essential information services. If
these services are seriously affected or threatened, this could result
in social disruption. Examples of such threats include cyberattacks
for the purpose of sabotage or spying, as well as outages caused by
intentional acts or natural causes.


The ways in which these interests can be compromised have been
formulated as impact criteria (see Annex 2). These criteria give an
overview of the possible consequences for national security
interests based on their severity and likelihood. However,
assigning a weighting to each specific element involves more than
just simple arithmetic. We have observed that some threats or risks
can have a more subversive effect than others. Furthermore, even if
some types of threats or risks are not serious on their own, the
simultaneous existence of a wide range of these non-urgent threats


All ICT resources and services with which all entities could be digitally connected – including permanent, temporary and localised connections – and data
that is stored within this domain (e.g. facts and figures, program code, information, etc.), all of which is unconfined by geographical limitations.


-----

**Social disruption**
The second dimension of the definition of national security relates
to social disruption. This means that any particular development
only threatens national security in the event that its severity results
in or could result in social disruption and/or actually/potentially
jeopardises social continuity. This could be in the form of social or
political instability, serious damage to the ecological living
environment or loss of fundamental trust in the functioning of
society, for example.

Social disruption, therefore, includes a physical aspect that could
manifest itself in numbers of victims, destruction or disruption of
vital services. In addition, it also involves a sociopsychological
aspect, such as disruption of everyday life, lack of clear perspective
for action during and after the manifestation of threats or risks and
lower expectation patterns in relation to culpability, legitimacy of
policy (fairness) and confidence that the authorities can restore the
situation.[6] Social disruption can also occur in the event that the
continuity or availability of critical processes is affected. These
processes constitute the Netherlands' critical infrastructure. The
transport and distribution of electricity, access to the internet and
provision of drinking water are examples of critical processes.
Finally, social disruption can also occur in a more subversive
manner, such as criminal subversion or disruption to the democratic rule of law that could result in a loss of faith in institutions.

**Different dimensions of national security**


and risks could jeopardise the democratic rule of law and therefore
potentially result in social disruption. We must also continue to
take into account the fact that society is constantly changing,
which means resilience levels are also constantly changing. For
example, something that is of little concern today could eventually
develop into an issue that could cause social unrest. At the same
time, the government should exercise restraint identifying social
developments as a threat to national security, especially when the
developments in question are playing out within an open and
democratic society. After all, the nature of national security implies
that the gravity of this general interest justifies the government
taking action to prevent social disruption if and whenever
necessary and using all of the instruments at its disposal. This
requires careful decision-making based on transparent criteria that
have been embedded into the definition of national security.

**The international rule of law, with national security**
**in mind**
Traditionally, the Netherlands has always been an extremely
international nation with a wide variety of physical and digital
hubs, such as the Port of Rotterdam, Amsterdam Airport Schiphol,
the access point to the transatlantic telegraph cable and one of the
biggest internet exchanges in Europe. As a result of these myriad
connections and the potential impact of the development of
international threats, the Netherlands is more dependent than ever
on the smooth functioning of the international system of
regulations, standards and agreements For this reason, we have
added 'the functioning of the international rule of law' to the list of
national security interests. This national security interest is not a
separate interest in itself, as it is closely interwoven with the other
five national security interests and with other interests and values
within Dutch society.

The international body of rules, standards and agreements is a
highly robust entity, so any individual developments that may
damage this system will not necessarily be detrimental to national
security in the Netherlands. For this reason, national security will
only be directly impacted in the event that the functioning of the
international rule of law is seriously or extremely seriously
compromised (or breaks down entirely), which may result in social
disruption. These impact criteria have been formulated by the
National Security Analysts Network (ANV) and included in the risk
analysis system.


In its report entitled 'Security in an Interconnected World')
('Veiligheid in een wereld van Verbindingen'), the Scientific Council for
Government Policy distinguishes between the dimensions of
national security, human security and flow security. Establishing
the prism of national security interests as the core aspect of the
approach to national security ensures that these dimensions are
comprehensively covered by the NSS.

**Comparison with international policy**
An exploratory investigation into the national security approaches of similar countries7 demonstrated that many of these

governments had identified the same threats and risks that could
potentially result in social disruption, with terrorism, cybersecurity and climate change all constituting shared and recurring
threats. Other countries have a greater focus on the potential
consequences of international issues on national security, such as
the impact of failed states, failing governance and instability in
and around their sphere of influence. The consequences that
international issues like these could have for Dutch national
security have been formulated as part of the Integrated
International Security Policy.


Source: Maatschappelijke ontwrichting en overstromingen ('Social Disruption and Flooding') (2014), PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency.

G S d th U it d Ki d th U it d St t A t li C d F d B l i


-----

**Core principles: security as a shared responsibility**
Within our democratic state, it is vital that people and civic
organisations are able to develop and operate within a free and
safe environment. Ensuring this free and safe environment is one
of the government's core responsibilities, as it is a vital precondition for the protection of the values of our democratic society and
our constitutional freedoms. At the same time, this security
cannot be guaranteed by the government alone. The business
sector, civic organisations and citizens also play a vital role in
ensuring local, regional and national security and boosting
resilience. The government plays a coordinating role in this
process and must act in a distinctive, transparent and by-the-book
manner when combating threats or risks, based on the following
core principles:

-  **The government must protect and promote national security**
to ensure that people and civic organisations can optimally
develop within a free, safe, democratic and lawful society. Of
course, the government will act constitutionally while fulfilling
its obligation to protect national security.

-  **For this purpose, the Netherlands will operate a cross-societal**
**approach, within which government bodies, security companies,**
the business sector and civic organisations collaboratively
safeguard national security.[8] All of these parties are involved in
the implementation and development of the NSS system.
Moreover, efforts will be made to boost awareness and formulate
a perspective for action for the predominant risks. Independent
and empowered citizens will also play a substantial role. Within
this approach, the government represents public interests,
encourages all parties to take their individual responsibilities and
sets a good example.

-  **The Netherlands focuses on early detection and identification**
**of risks and threats to national security. This means that**
information exchange among public parties and between public
and private parties must be promoted to the greatest extent
possible. This knowledge sharing must be done within the
applicable legal frameworks and safeguards.

-  **There is no such thing as 100% safe. No matter how substantial**
or committed the efforts made by all parties may be, it is not
always possible to foresee or prevent shocking events. The
Netherlands seeks to prevent threats and risks to the greatest
extent possible and to respond rapidly and adequately whenever
they occur. We also learn from incidents by evaluating them and
adjusting policy and planning processes whenever necessary. This
ensures continual optimisation of the Dutch security approach.



-  **The national security approach is comprehensive and flexible**
to ensure it is compatible with developments in the threat, risk
and resilience levels.[9] In this regard, it is inevitable that
**decisions will have to be made; if society is unwilling to accept**
even the slightest risk, then the security measures required will
quickly become draconian and prohibitively expensive.

-  **National security in the Netherlands does not stop at the**
**borders, as the influence of international developments on**
national security is continually increasing. Internal and external
security are becoming increasingly interwoven and require
greater integration of the national security approach, both in
physical space and in cyberspace. For this reason, the Netherlands
always seeks collaboration within a European or broader
international context when it comes to reinforcing the
Netherlands' own national security and protecting the
Netherlands' national security interests. This international focus
is embedded in the IISS.


For example, we emphatically sought collaboration and connection with the business sector for the purposes of the cybersecurity approach, and worked
closely with local government bodies and civic organisations when formulating the approach to combat radicalisation.

The term 'resilience' also includes developments in threat perception, as described in the Research and Documentation Centre's report entitled 'The road
to a resilient open society' ('Op weg naar een weerbare open samenleving') Parliamentary Papers 2018/19 30821 No 52


-----

-----

# Trends and developments that influence national security

**The Netherlands is an open society in which people can reap the benefits of**

**social and economic developments. Digitalisation, technological development**

**and the Netherlands' international orientation create a wealth of opportunities**

**for citizens and businesses.**


However, the openness and international interconnection of the
Netherlands also means that internal and external developments
can affect our national security. This section describes trends,
including megatrends, and developments that can affect the development of new or existing threats or risks to national security and
our efforts to protect it.

International developments (political or otherwise)10

**Multipolar world order: a shift in the international**
**balance of power**
There is tension between major global powers, particularly
between the USA and the European Union on one side and China
and Russia on the other. The increasing assertiveness of China and
Russia on the international stage has become particularly
conspicuous and, at the same time, it is becoming clear that our
transatlantic relationship can no longer be taken entirely for
granted.

The shift in the international balance of power to a more multipolar world order means that the power of multilateralism as a
means of securing cooperation is waning. This may affect factors
such as the financial and economic order and climate agreements.
It could also present an obstacle to strategies against cyber threats,
hybrid threats and the risk of extremism and terrorism. The world
order established after the Second World War, which is based on

A l d ib d i h I d I i l S i S


the democratic rule of law, liberal market economics and the core
values of our society (such as human rights, fundamental freedoms and equality), is being increasingly called into question. This
multipolar world order is resulting in new types of global friction
and polarisation between East and West.

**Political instability in the EU**
A strong Europe lays vital foundations for our national security
and the EU Global Strategy lays the foundations for stability and
security policy within the EU. However, the whole 'EU project' is
being questioned by a number of parties. The departure of the
United Kingdom from the EU is the most extreme example of this,
although the popularity of anti-EU parties in most Member States
(including France, Hungary, Italy, Austria, the Netherlands, Poland
and Sweden) also reflects this development. The diverse range of
opinions within the EU on subjects such as migration (Eastern vs
Western Europe) and the economy (Northern vs Southern Europe)
fuel the forces of populism and create risks for public confidence
in the EU and its institutions. Finally, in a number of EU countries,
there has been a disturbing erosion of the rule of law.

On the other hand, the Eurobarometer has shown that support
for the EU has been increasing in recent years. Brexit is indeed a
setback, but the EU has been strongly unified in its response.


-----

Developments in information technology

**Cognitive and autonomous information systems**
Traditional information systems programmed to conduct specific
tasks in accordance with fixed protocols are increasingly making
way for self-learning systems that teach themselves new tasks
and behaviour with no human intervention and systems that can
improvise and independently make decisions based on specific
knowledge. The use of such Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems and
Machine Learning systems could have consequences for national
security.

AI systems are trained using massive volumes of data. When this is
done using a biased (ill-considered, incomplete or manipulated)
data set, a self-learning system can develop and act in a prejudiced
manner, and as time goes by, it becomes impossible to determine
the root cause of specific behaviour displayed by the system. If the
decisions made by the system affect people or organisations, then
the consequences of such behaviour could be extremely serious.

When multiple autonomously operating systems interact, insufficient coordination can result in unexpected disruption of social
processes, such as traffic accidents due to a breakdown in communication of autonomously operating traffic systems. The more
areas of society into which autonomous systems are integrated and
the more dominant they become in specific areas, the greater the
risk they present to national security. As they often require interaction – mainly via the Internet – and are unable to operate in isolation, autonomous systems are potentially vulnerable to unwanted
infiltration by external actors.

**Interconnection of systems and networks**
More and more devices – from home, garden and kitchen appliances to bridges and sluice gates – are connected to the Internet
nowadays. Hardware and software vulnerabilities enable malicious
actors to gain access to the devices themselves, the network to
which the devices are connected and the data that the devices collect and process on their users and how they use the device.

The users and providers of these devices often do not pay enough
(if any) attention to the potential consequences of such vulnerabilities, as they themselves are not directly affected in the event of a
data breach. Digital information systems are a crucial factor in the
continuity of businesses and other organisations. If these systems
malfunction or are taken down, this can have serious commercial
and economic consequences.


The EU is also highly capable of identifying and addressing external
threats, e.g. those posed by the aforementioned assertive world
powers. In other words, there is reason for concern and alertness,
but no need to panic.

**Political instability in areas surrounding the EU**
The continual instability of countries and regions close to the EU's
borders also presents possible risks. Some countries provide a
sanctuary for criminal, extremist and/or terrorist groups and there
is a risk of nearby countries being sucked into a downward spiral
of violence and failing governance. Irregular migration pressure in
Europe might also increase, which could destabilise European collaboration, solidarity and tolerance, as well as causing polarisation
and hostility towards regular migration and the asylum system. In
many cases, irregular migration also involves types of cross-border
crime, such as human smuggling and human trafficking, the
proceeds of which can be used to fund terrorist activities. Finally,
it can allow terrorists to 'hitch a ride' with the irregular migrant
flow into Europe. It is expected that irregular migration pressure
from unstable countries and regions in the vicinity of Europe will
remain high in the years to come.

**Development of root causes and terrorist threats**
Jihadist varieties of political Islam will continue to exist, even after
ISIS loses all of its territory in Iraq and Syria. The root causes of the
growth of these and other groups have not been removed, and they
will always remain potential catalysts of violence, especially in
Africa and the Middle East. Although ISIS has been largely defeated
and greatly weakened from a territorial perspective, it is highly
likely that it will pose different kinds of risk in the years to come.
It is becoming increasingly transnational in nature and makes
use of modern technology (digital communication, social media,
etc.). The loss of ISIS territory means that the problem of returnee
combatants is becoming particularly urgent, with specific groups
posing a threat due to their combat experience and unabated
jihadist ideology.

Other types of terrorism also continue to develop. Right-wing
terrorism is on the rise again and there are signs that left-wing
extremist groups are becoming more active in the EU in response.
This issue is also discussed in the section entitled 'Demographic
and social developments'.


-----

**Dependence on information technology**
Our society has become hugely dependent on information technology. The growing dependence on large foreign tech firms is
making the governance of cyberspace increasingly difficult. It is
therefore vital to constantly examine how this dependence affects
the protection of national interests and how this protection is
organised at both the national and international levels.

The EU is striving to achieve strategic autonomy with regard to
defence and security. At the moment, information technology in
these areas is also heavily dependent on foreign firms, however.
For example, the necessary hardware and software is made by
non-European companies. The Netherlands and other European
countries therefore effectively depend on these market players for
vital components of their critical digital infrastructure.

Global financial and economic developments

**Restructuring of the global financial and economic order**
A shift in the international financial and economic order is
currently ongoing and the economic and security-related consequences of this shift have not yet entirely become clear. China's
substantial economic vitality is supporting the global economy,
which means China holds a substantial interest in the financial
and economic status quo. At the same time, China is increasingly
questioning the rules on which the liberal market order is based
and attempting to mould them in its favour. China is also investing
in setting up parallel institutions and new networks that will affect
the institutional order. In the long term, the shift in the economic
balance of power from the West to China will have political implications that may affect national security.

**Technological developments in the financial and**
**economic sectors**
Cryptocurrencies – which are independent of any central bank –
can be privately issued via new technologies such as blockchain.
The main risks stemming from cryptocurrencies is that they are
a particularly effective way to launder the proceeds of crime and
to fund terrorist activities. For this reason, the EU has decided to
extend the scope of the Money Laundering Directive to include
cryptocurrencies, and work is being conducted on international
anti-money laundering standards for cryptocurrencies. In addition, as of the start of 2020, the Money Laundering and Terrorist
Financing (Prevention) Act (Wet ter voorkoming van witwassen
en financieren van terrorisme) will oblige cryptoservice providers
operating in the Netherlands to apply for a licence. At the end of
2017, at the height of the cryptocurrency bubble, nobody knew
what impact cryptocurrencies would have on the stability of the
financial system. Since then, national and international studies
have been conducted that show that the risks to financial stability
are currently limited. However, institutions at both the national
and international level will continue to monitor all developments
relating to cryptocurrencies and their possible consequences for
financial stability


**Economic instability of the EU**
The financial crisis (2007-2011) resulted in greater economic
instability within the EU, the consequences of which are still
tangible and visible today. Eastern and Southern European banks
are still struggling with a high volume of problematic loans, which
could directly affect the economies of other EU Member States,
including the Netherlands, due to negative spillover effects from
their banking systems. In addition, the budgets of Greece, Italy and
Portugal are still weighed down by high levels of government debt
and structural deficits. Increasing Euroscepticism within the EU,
combined with the fact that a new credit crisis is not considered
impossible, could result in problems for the Eurozone and confidence therein.

Demographic and social developments

**Increasing gaps between social groups**
Gaps between social groups are increasingly opening up along
sociocultural and socioeconomic boundaries, a fact reflected in the
clear hardening of the social debate (online and otherwise). The
fragmentation or 'parallelisation' of society could be reinforced
by the use of social media and the 'media bubble', within which
users' opinions are constantly affirmed and they rarely encounter
alternative opinions. Feelings of economic subordination or the
effects of technological development on employment participation could also result in parallelisation. Fragmentation has always
been a factor in Dutch society, although it has intensified in recent
years. Certain groups are rejecting fundamental aspects of democratic society and could therefore be or become a threat to the
democratic rule of law. In general, society's resilience against such
ideologies is still high.

**Fluctuating trust in institutions**
All of the above developments are concurrent with a decline in
trust in politicians and the government. Confidence in authoritative bodies is still high in the Netherlands and is expected to
remain so in the future. However, trust in the actions of the people
within these institutions is fluctuating, with levels of trust varying
greatly between the various subgroups within society. Trust in
traditional media, for example, has declined substantially among
some groups of young people and they are increasingly seeking
their information from alternative sources.


-----

#### Ecological developments

**Climate change**
The climate is being affected by ongoing global warming. Extreme
weather events could create a risk to national security, particularly
events such as extreme hailstorms, excessive rainfall that cannot
be sufficiently drained away or the simultaneous occurrence of two
extreme weather events. A second development is the rise in invasive species: plants and animals native to more southerly regions
are migrating further northwards, which could result in new infectious diseases affecting people, plants and animals.

**Reduction of biodiversity and biomass**
Biodiversity relates to the variety of life on earth: diversity of genes,
species and ecosystems. Further loss of biodiversity and biomass
could cause significant damage to the natural environment and
agriculture, which could have long-term consequences for ecological security in the Netherlands.

**Environmental pressure**
The negative effects of human activities on soil, water and air are
referred to as environmental pressure. Human activity focusing on
the short term, such as groundwater management for the purposes
of agriculture, could result in damage to the environment (salinisation) in the long term, causing significant changes to the soil, water
and air and reducing their quality.


-----

-----

# Predominant national security risks

**Trends and developments at the macro level could result in threats and risks to**

**national security. What kinds of threats and risks these are and how they**

**jeopardise national security has been detailed within an integrated risk analysis**

**by the National Security Analysts Network (ANV).**


operations, among other methods. Hybrid attacks are nothing new,
although the scale and frequency of these attacks by increasingly assertive states is unprecedented. As part of the constant international competition between various countries, covert hybrid operations to undermine other societies are employed increasingly often. Vulnerabilities
in society and the political system are being exploited; given the right
circumstances and the right combination of influencing activities, this
can have major consequences (e.g. for critical national infrastructure).
Furthermore, developments in digital and information technology can
facilitate these influencing and undermining activities.

**Threats against multilateral institutions and**
**economic resilience**
The international order is changing significantly and a diverse range of
ever-changing coalitions are operating in a wide range of areas. In combination with polarisation between different population groups, which
is putting pressure on our democracies and the consensus regarding
international collaboration, this factor creates uncertainty and damages
international security levels. Furthermore, the interests of individual
countries – and the standards and values on which their society is based
– are increasingly being prioritised, which puts pressure on multilateral
institutional cooperation. The increasing power and influence of China
in Western economies could have major long-term consequences both
for the financial and economic systems in the EU and for the operation
of multilateral institutions.


_For the sake of readability, the risk categories from the risk analysis have been grouped_
_in accordance with the security issues referred to in this section (see Annex 1 for this_
_classification)._

The risk analysis illustrates the following aspects of each specific threat/
risk:

-  the impact that the threat/risk would have on one or more
national security interests;

-  the likelihood of the threat/risk actually occurring, as determined
by its development in the medium term.

In accordance with these aspects, the eleven predominant national
security risks and threats listed below were identified. These constitute
threats and risks that seriously or very seriously jeopardise one or more
of the six national security interests.

**Unwanted interference and influence by state-**
**sponsored actors**
Overt and covert interference and influencing activities by foreign
governments jeopardise national security. These activities include
covert attempts by foreign governments to control their diaspora communities, often using tactics such as intimidation and blackmail. This
impacts the national security interest of 'Social and political stability'.
This category also includes undesirable influencing activities and disruptive operations with the goal of directly compromising, weakening,
undermining and destabilising the Netherlands itself, its democratic
rule of law and its open society. This could affect the national security
interests 'International rule of law', 'Social and political stability' and, in
the event physical violence is used, 'Physical security'. Activities by statesponsored actors to undermine Dutch society via unwanted influencing
activitiesanddisruptiveoperationsareconductedbymeansofhybrid


-----

**Terrorism and extremism**
Extremism is the active pursuit of drastically disruptive changes to
society that could jeopardise the democratic rule of law, possibly
using undemocratic methods that could seriously impact the
smooth functioning of our democratic legal order. Undemocratic
methods such as these can be violent or non-violent, and the most
extreme of the violent undemocratic methods is terrorism.

In the Netherlands, it appears that the traditional divide between
left-wing and right-wing extremism may become less applicable in
the years to come and that new phenomena such as 'identitarian
extremism' or 'anti-government extremism' may supersede the
classic left-right spectrum. A number of groups are on the rise that
ideologically strive to 'keep the white race pure' and oppose 'race
mixing' and 'forced transformation' of the population's racial
demographic. In addition, increasing numbers of disgruntled
citizens and groups are turning against the government for a
variety of reasons. Despite the rise of such sentiments, most of
which are expressed online, there is uncertainty regarding whether
extremists in the Netherlands will become more willing to use
violence in the future.

Currently, almost all of the terrorist threats in the Netherlands are
related to jihadism, with ISIS supporters continuing to pose a risk.
However, the threat posed by Al-Qaeda – and especially its hard
core – must not be underestimated either. One potential threat
that could arise in the near future is the release from prison of
detained jihadists who still maintain their jihadist ideology. In this
regard, both attacks by lone actors and large-scale attacks are
deemed conceivable or highly conceivable. There are indications
that such attacks or other similar types of attack could be carried
out and the possibility of other types of politically or ethnically
inspired forms of terrorism becoming a threat also cannot be ruled
out.

**Military threats**
The increasing tension between major powers and instability on
Europe's outer borders have increased the likelihood of armed
conflict. Military developments are also fuelling this risk: in the
last year on record (2017), global investment in defence materials
was at its highest level since the end of the Cold War. The biggest
increases in defence spending were observed in China, Russia and
Saudi Arabia, although the combined total spent by the European
NATO countries also substantially increased. Other indicators also
reflect the increasing military threat level: the increasingly
aggressive rhetoric, larger-scale military exercises and multiple
violations of territorial waters and airspace all testify to the
increasing tension between states. This tension could also create
risks for Dutch supply lines, which could potentially impact the
financial and economic systems. All forms of military threats
constitute a risk to national security.


As described in the previous chapter, Europe – and hence also the
Netherlands – is being confronted by a 'ring' of increasing
instability and conflict, which means there is a constant threat of
new conflicts breaking out. Within this climate of uncertainty and
increasing threats and risks, it is even more important for the
Netherlands that the two organisations via which the Netherlands
wishes to safeguard its national security interests – the EU and
NATO – function smoothly.

However, both the EU and NATO are being threatened by a number
of external and internal factors. In the past, cooperation was the
key priority and shared interests were the decisive factor in the
event of transatlantic tensions, whereas these shared interests are
nowadays beginning to be interpreted differently. In some cases, it
can be difficult to reach a consensus among EU Member States,
which means the EU cannot always put its full weight into the
balance of power. This risk could affect the national security
interests of 'Territorial security', 'Social and political stability' and
'International rule of law'.

**Disruption of critical national infrastructure**
The Netherlands' critical national infrastructure comprises all of
the processes that are so vital to the smooth functioning of our
society that any disruption thereof will have substantial consequences for the Netherlands. As these critical processes are
mutually dependent, the failure of just one of them could have a
variety of knock-on effects for critical national infrastructure as a
whole. In many cases, the dependence between critical processes is
not immediately and obviously clear.

Due to the importance of these critical processes for social
continuity, any serious disruption thereof could result in national
security being jeopardised. The failure of critical processes could
particularly impact the national security interests of 'Physical
security', 'Social and political stability' and 'Economic security',
although it could potentially affect practically all national security
interests and all of the underlying impact criteria. As a result, the
failure of critical national infrastructure could amplify other
predominant risks to national security. The opposite also applies,
as practically all of the threats or risks could affect critical national
infrastructure.

Recent analyses particularly emphasise cyber threats from
state-sponsored actors with the goal of disrupting – or even
sabotaging – critical systems. There is a clearly increasing trend in
the use of autonomous systems in all kinds of sectors, such as the
electricity sector, the financial sector and the industrial sector.
These systems often require communication and interaction
between various entities (mostly via the Internet) and are unable to
work in isolation. As a result, the systems are vulnerable to
undesired outside interference.


-----

Given the interconnection between internal and external security,
this predominant risk clearly shows that there is a definite link
between cyber threats and hybrid conflicts – for example, a
military threat that results in a military conflict involving the
Netherlands. This could occur as a result of Article 5 of the NATO
treaty, in the event that a conflict arises between a NATO Member
State and another state. In such cases, other hybrid instruments
will also be used alongside military action, including cybertechnology. Scenarios also exist in which Article 5 has not yet been
invoked, but where increasing international escalation means it
could be likely to happen in the near future. In such situations, it is
conceivable that the Netherlands, which could potentially be used
as a transit country by other NATO members, could already become
an important target for attacks (including cyberattacks). If this kind
of predominant risk occurs, then it will impact the national
security interests of 'Territorial security' and 'International rule of
law'.

**Criminal subversion**
In a number of cities and municipalities, certain individuals or
groups are rejecting, working against, disrupting and/or undermining the authority of local government, such as criminal gangs
who hope to establish 'no-go areas'. In the Netherlands, we are not
yet observing this to the same degree as in other European
countries, although this could nevertheless eventually jeopardise
the authority of the government. Criminal influence on public
administration, either directly or via interference in the business
sector, could result in a lack of trust in the civil servants or other
parties involved. The analysis shows that, if this risk becomes
reality, then it will particularly impact the national security interest
of 'Social and political stability', causing serious damage to the
democratic rule of law and substantially impacting society. As
criminal subversion is already having a significant impact on a
number of cities and municipalities, it has been deemed a
predominant risk to national security.

**Polarisation and threats to social cohesion**
The increasing levels of polarisation are undermining our open
society. Polarisation could create a breeding ground for both
violent and non-violent extremism and, in the most extreme cases,
terrorism. State-sponsored actors could take advantage of this
situation via hybrid and other operations. Developments that
cause polarisation are an international phenomenon and do not
stop at the Dutch borders. This dominant risk impacts the national
security interest of 'Social and political stability'.

In addition to spreading undemocratic or anti-democratic
messages in order to increase polarisation, extremist groups also
try to establish parallel societies (enclaves). For example, they do
this by actively rejecting our open society, by obstructing public
officials and politicians from performing their duties, by undermining democratic institutions and/or by restricting the basic
rights of citizens.


Polarisation can also be intentionally stoked by state-sponsored
actors via digital and other methods. As part of the international
power struggle, resources are being deployed that undermine the
sovereignty and dominance of states, facilitating long-distance
activities or hybrid operations designed to intensify polarisation
between different population groups.

**Cyber threats**
The greatest cyber threats to national security – i.e. those with the
biggest impact and highest probability – are posed by digital
attacks by state-sponsored actors for the purposes of espionage,
influence, disruption and sabotage. The activities of cybercriminals could also have a major impact. The likelihood of cyber threats
is relatively high.

Technological developments are increasing the levels of dependence, interconnection, complexity and uncontrollability of systems
and processes. Furthermore, strategic dependence on foreign
suppliers, manufacturers and service providers increases our
vulnerability to espionage, disruption and sabotage. The increasing levels of digitalisation mean that the potential damage of
digital attacks and the benefits to any malicious actors are also
greater. Furthermore, analyses have shown that, due to rapid
development and innovation (among other factors), our resilience
to cyberattacks is at risk of falling behind. Moreover, cyber threats
are not a separate phenomenon and they are often interwoven with
other risks. For example, disruption of the electricity supply could
result in failure of information systems and vice versa. As a result, it
is not always possible to make a clear distinction between cyber
threats and other threats affecting cyberspace.

**Natural disasters**
This predominant risk occurs as a result of the power of nature,
usually in the form of a catastrophe caused by natural phenomena.
Flooding (from the sea or from a river), wildfires or earthquakes
could have severe consequences for society. The same applies to
extreme weather, such as heavy storms, blizzards or black ice.
Another risk relating to extreme weather is concurrence: the
simultaneous occurrence of two separate phenomena, such as
peak discharge of the major rivers in combination with a westerly
gale. In such cases, water would surge inland from the sea or from
Lake IJssel and the rivers would be unable to drain it away into the
sea, resulting in a high risk of flooding. Climate change and the
accelerated rise in the sea level therefore constitute an important
national security development, as climate change is likely to result
in more extreme weather events and increase the likelihood of
natural disasters in the long term.


-----

**Chemical, Biological, Nuclear and Radiological threats**
As a result of recent technological developments, there are
concerns about the possible use of biological weapons.
Furthermore, nuclear arsenals are being modernised and expanded
throughout the world and nuclear control treaties are either
crumbling (Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces treaty), expiring
(New START) or being ignored (the Non-Proliferation Treaty). In
addition, the doctrines for the use of nuclear weapons in a conflict
situation are changing. There are also concerns that nuclear and
radioactive material could fall into the hands of non-state-sponsored actors, such as groups with violent extremist or terrorist
intentions.

The risk of an unstable arms-control regime and potential/actual
use of Chemical, Biological, Nuclear or Radiological (CBRN)
materials by state-sponsored actors impacts a variety of criteria
within the national security interest of 'International rule of law'.
The use of weapons of mass destruction (including CBRN weapons)
is detrimental to state sovereignty, peaceful coexistence and
peaceful settlement of disputes. The national security interest of
'International rule of law' could be jeopardised without this
affecting any of the other national security interests in the short
term. However, as it tramples all over the fundamental principles
of state sovereignty, peaceful coexistence and peaceful settlement
of disputes, it would severely weaken the foundations of the
international rule of law. This could result in states acting with
impunity and set a dangerous precedent, in addition to creating
great uncertainty and instability within international relations.
Moreover, CBRN proliferation would also constitute damage to
multilateral institutions, as the arms-control regime contains a
vital system of international treaties and agreements. Finally, the
use of nuclear weapons would constitute an extremely serious
breach of human rights.

**Infectious diseases**
This risk relates to acute threats to public health in the event of a
crisis caused by a large-scale outbreak of an infectious disease,
such as a flu pandemic (although other infectious diseases are
possible), a zoonotic disease or an animal disease. If this risk
occurs, then it will impact the national security interests of
'Physical security', 'Social and political stability' and
'Economic security'.

Based on the number of flu pandemics in the last
100 years and the frequency at which they occur, it is likely that a flu
epidemic will break out in the near future. It is not possible to
predict in advance whether it will be a serious or a mild pandemic.
The social consequences will be particularly serious if a large
percentage of the population falls ill. The outbreak of an animal
disease (such as foot-and-mouth disease or African swine fever)
remains likely in the Netherlands, despite all of the preventive and
preparatory measures taken. Among other factors, this is due to
the large number of agricultural animals and pets and the global
transport of animals.


We must also remain alert to the issues of vaccination levels in the
Netherlands and antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Further decline in
vaccination levels could mean a higher risk of outbreaks of
infectious diseases in the long term and the Netherlands must
continue to protect itself against the increasing threat of AMR from
other countries.


-----

-----

# Priority assessment of threats and risks: which issues require extra focus?

**Security is one of the government's core responsibilities. Whenever any threats**

**or risks present themselves, the government strives to boost the Netherlands'**

**resilience by means of preventive, proactive, preparative and responsive**

**measures, as well as providing any necessary aftercare. We are already making**

**significant progress. Security services, government organisations, businesses**

**and citizens are working together tirelessly to keep the Netherlands safe and to**

**boost resilience.**


At the same time, the world around us is continually changing and
a solid and flexible strategy to address threats and risks is essential.
For the purposes of the NSS 2019 and in accordance with the
National Security Strategy Cycle, the development of threats and
risks was weighed up against the current strategic efforts made by
the government and all of its social partners in order to address
these threats and risks. In this context, we provided answers to the
following questions in compliance with the core principles:

1. _Does the Netherlands have a comprehensive approach to minimise this_
_threat or risk?_

2. Given the manner in which this threat or risk has developed, does this
_approach make the Netherlands more resilient?_

This chapter describes the themes that will result in intensified
strategic focus. An intensified focus means the nature of the threat
is such that extra and comprehensive attention – in an integrated
fashion, albeit within the framework of the existing tasks and
responsibilities – is paid to continually minimising all identified
threats and risks and boosting resilience. The aforementioned
intensified focus still requires further specification under the
supervision of the line ministries involved. We need an intensified
focus on the approach to state-sponsored threats reduction of


polarisation, protection of critical national infrastructure,
counterterrorism, the approach to military threats, the approach
to subversion and cybersecurity.

1. Threats from state-sponsored actors will be
addressed

An open society and an open economy are the essential foundations
on which Dutch society and prosperity are built. Our open society is
characterised by freedom, democracy, the rule of law and an
international orientation. Our openness allows the Netherlands and
its inhabitants to enjoy all of the benefits and opportunities offered
by digitalisation and globalisation, among other things.

However, the freedoms that this openness guarantees also create
opportunities for malicious state-sponsored actors to conduct
activities that undermine national security and thus encroach upon
our freedoms. In pursuit of their own interests and their geopolitical
objectives, these state-sponsored actors are increasingly deploying a
wide range of means that could potentially undermine our democratic state and endanger the stability and openness of Dutch society.


-----

2. Combating polarisation via a broad approach
based on coexistence

People have concerns about the society they live in and feelings of
unease – and even powerlessness – are increasing. There are also
concerns about immigration or integration. Others do not feel they
are an equal part of Dutch society and feel that they are constantly
treated like second-class citizens. This social unease can provide a
breeding ground for polarisation and amplification of social divides.
Over time, polarisation can weaken social stability in the
Netherlands. The survey of citizens' views (COB) conducted by the
Netherlands Institute for Social Research (SCP) in the first quarter of
2019 shows that citizens are concerned about increasing differences
and polarisation within the community. For this reason, the
government will conduct more intensive collaborations to address
the issue of polarisation via an overarching strategy to promote
coexistence.

As the issue of polarisation is driven by the amplification of differences between social groups, it is vital that the government address
all forms of social unease in its policy and communication.
Communication will be a vital policy instrument in these efforts.
Municipalities and institutions are currently working hard to address
polarisation and its effects, and the security chain can also make a
significant contribution, e.g. via community police officers who offer
a primary point of contact at the neighbourhood level.

3. Intensified approach to protect critical
infrastructure

The integrity of critical national infrastructure is an essential factor
in the issue of national security. Around 80% of critical processes are
run by private parties. Processes are deemed critical based on their
expected impact on Dutch national security interests in the event
that they are disrupted. The complexity of threats and risks shows
that the integrity of information, access to operating and other
systems and control over critical national infrastructure or subsections thereof have become important factors in safeguarding
national security interests. These factors have come under pressure
due to the increasing threat posed by state-sponsored actors and
cybercriminals, the increasing online and offline interconnection of
systems and organisations and the chain dependences that this
creates.

In addition, the issues of which processes and providers (companies,
organisations) we need to protect and how we should protect them
are constantly subject to change. As a result, we need to adopt a
different approach to the system that takes into account how these
protective measures are applied not only to the critical providers and
processes, but also to chain-dependent factors, businesses,


Digital resources are being used by states for the purposes of
manipulation (e.g. manipulation of data), sabotage (e.g. by disrupting our critical processes), disinformation (e.g. by distributing false
information about elections via social media and other means) and
cyberespionage (e.g. seeking to obtain sensitive or confidential
information).

Acquisition of and investment in critical national infrastructure or
firms that develop high-quality technology could result in an
unwanted level of dependence, which could create risks for the
democratic rule of law in the Netherlands. The continuity of critical
processes could be jeopardised and/or confidential or sensitive
information could be leaked. A similar risk could be created via the
purchasing of critical services and products. Economic espionage
(digital or otherwise) is another significant tool used by a number of
states.

Subversion by state-sponsored actors is usually conducted by means
of insidious processes that can damage the democratic rule of law
and our open society in the long term. Factors that could be
compromised include the integrity of political and management
decision-making, the independence of the legal system, free and fair
elections and fundamental freedoms such as freedom of the press,
academic freedom and freedom of speech. Undesirable foreign
interference may also spark tension within and between
population groups in the Netherlands and isolate them from Dutch
society.[11] By means of unwanted interference, state-sponsored actors
can also make use of a variety of influencing techniques and
manipulate groups such as diaspora communities, students, the
media or politicians. Covert funding is sometimes provided for such
activities. Another tactic used is the distribution of disinformation.[12]

The strategic approach against threats from state-sponsored actors
was submitted to the Dutch Lower House of Parliament on 18 April
2019.[13] This approach consists of generic measures to boost resilience
against a variety of threats from state-sponsored actors. In view of
the threats posed, the interests at stake and recent case history, the
approach will also pay specific attention to the following factors:

1. _unwanted foreign interference focusing on diaspora communities;_
2. protection of democratic processes and institutions;
3. approach to economic security.

Dutch export control policy also helps to boost resilience against
threats from state-sponsored actors by ensuring that exports of
strategic 'dual-use' goods, services or technologies do not have
unwanted consequences.


11 National Security Profile 2016 (National Security Analysts Network, 2016), and Parliamentary Papers 2017/2018, 22233, No. 63.

12 Parliamentary Papers, 2018/2019, 30 821, No. 51.

P li P 8/ 8 N


-----

organisations or networks. Responsibility for and knowledge of
critical processes is widely distributed across the ministries and the
businesses involved and also involves regional and local aspects.

It is very important to the government that consistent and technically
up-to-date criteria be used when evaluating national security risks
affecting critical national infrastructure, and that clear insight be
available into how critical national infrastructure in the Netherlands
has been technically and organisationally designed and developed,
as this will facilitate timely anticipation of relevant developments.
For this reason, the government, in collaboration with all of the
parties involved, will develop an intensified strategy for the
protection of this critical national infrastructure. A vital part of this
intensified strategy is a structure that will pool knowledge, skills and
expertise in order to adequately address national security risks
relating to critical national infrastructure both now and in the
future.

4. Terrorism and extremism: evaluate, intensify and
continually develop countermeasures

The battle against terrorism and extremism continues to demand our
attention. Malicious actors are still involved in planning attacks in
the Netherlands, as was demonstrated by recent events in Utrecht.
The threat posed by terrorism and extremism continues to develop.

The recapture of formerly ISIS-occupied territory, the changing
strategy of ISIS, the return of travelling combatants into Dutch
society, the rise and development of other terrorist groups and
possible geopolitical developments (both anticipated and unforeseen) are just some of the myriad factors that complicate this already
intensely complex issue. In the near future, the Netherlands will also
have to deal with the issue of ex-convicts returning to society after
serving their sentence, despite possibly not having renounced their
ideology and possibly having made new extremist connections
during their detention.

In recent years, work has been conducted to intensify the comprehensive approach in line with the NCTV's National Counterterrorism
Strategy 2016-2020. In view of the current threat level, the following
aspects of this approach have been reinforced:

-  early identification of threats by security services through
intensifying investigation into radicalisation and Salafism within
the scope of counterterrorism;

-  embedding of the strategy against funding of extremism and
terrorism;

-  boosting digital resilience and strategy against online extremism;

-  investment in deradicalisation, rehabilitation and judicial
strategy;

-  reinforcement of international efforts.

14 Parliamentary Papers 2018/2019, 34919, No. 1.

D f P bli A l R (Mili I lli d S i S i 8)


Various types of extremism are on the rise, such as right-wing
extremism and identitarian extremism. For this reason, efforts will
focus on applying the comprehensive approach against all forms of
extremism – regardless of their ideological basis – in order to address
'new' threats as well.

Given the knowledge that the threat is dynamic and uncertain, it
remains vital that periodic reflection of the strategy's results be
conducted to examine whether the measures are still appropriate to
the threat posed at that point in time. In this context, components of
the CT strategy 2016-2020 are continually evaluated and the new CT
strategy will be formulated based on these findings.

5. Minimise military threats via close collaboration
and optimal military effectiveness

The Netherlands' national security is interlinked with world security.
In recent years, the primary responsibility of the armed forces – to
protect the territory of the Netherlands and its allies – has become
increasingly important,[14] although this does not detract from the
importance of its other responsibilities. The diversity and complexity
of the threats Europe is facing means that the Netherlands and
Europe must review their course in order to continually protect our
security both now and in the future.

Other countries are substantially boosting their military capacity, as
a result of which the military dominance of the Netherlands and its
allies is no longer guaranteed. Russia is posing an increasing and
comprehensive threat to the interests of the Netherlands, Europe and
our other allies. In addition to hybrid, espionage and cyber aspects,
this threat also involves a nuclear dimension.[15] Using modern
weapons systems, Russia is capable of temporarily or permanently
blocking access to disputed areas on land, at sea and in the air or
hindering freedom of movement in these areas.

The Netherlands can only combat these threats by means of effective
collaboration and active international policy, e.g. via the EU, NATO,
the OSCE and the UN. To maintain our status as a credible ally and
partner, we will reinforce and further improve the combat power,
sustainability and deployability of our armed forces.

In addition to deepening the NATO alliance and European defence
cooperation, our armed forces are also equipping themselves for the
future in a variety of other ways. Collaboration with civil authorities,
the business sector, NGOs, etc. must be facilitated and solidified. We
must also anticipate and rapidly respond to new technological
developments, acknowledge the increasingly dominant role that
information will play in both conflict prevention and warfare and
prepare ourselves for conflicts that will simultaneously unfold in a
variety of areas of life, including cyberspace.


-----

This will require close civil-military collaboration as part of the
approach to digital threats and threats from state-sponsored actors.

The objective of the new Policy Document on the Armed Forces,
which is scheduled for 2020, is to present a vision and a strategy that
defines the role that our armed forces will play in the future given the
ever-changing threat level, and what steps must be taken in order to
enable it.

6. Highly programmatic approach to combat criminal
subversion16

Subversive crime includes a wide range of criminal activities
conducted with the purpose of undermining society. The terms
'undermine' and 'subvert' predominantly relate to the effects of
organised crime: the interweaving of the criminal underworld into
legitimate society and its implantation into residential areas and
legal sectors. The roots of organised crime are always established in
the local community. Perpetrators of organised crime make use of
the same legal structures and facilities as regular citizens: transport
facilities, financial and legal services, recreational areas, the property
market, etc. This interweaving into mainstream society has
far-reaching consequences. The combination of substantial criminal
assets and access to heavy weapons enables criminal networks to
gain influence within social sectors and exercise unwanted social
pressure on society. Organised criminals also pose a threat to the
integrity of public administration and civil servants, which is
detrimental to society's sense of justice, the rule of law and social
institutions.[17]

The issue of subversive crime is largely an international problem,
although, at the same time, it has strong ties with local communities.
In other words, it involves criminal structures that extend around the
world, but invest in local roots. As a result, an approach is required
that focuses on all levels: local, regional, national and international.
The international approach is conducted in collaboration with
source countries, transit countries, other EU Member States and
neighbouring countries.

Addressing subversive crime is a high priority to the current
government and it has therefore adopted a highly programmatic
approach to this issue. This approach consists of a wide range of
preventive and repressive measures and involves collaboration with a
coalition of parties from the government, the business sector and
society based on a long-term intensification programme. This
approach will be primarily funded by the extra funding specified in
the coalition agreement, which will enable the regional parties and
national organisations to give a powerful extra boost to the
approach. Of the €100 million made available, €85 million will be


allocated to regional parties, with the remaining €15 million
earmarked to fund national organisations and activities.

The government has elected to develop solid plans 'from the bottom
up', involving the parties responsible for executing the strategy in
practice: the professionals on the front line who possess the
knowledge and expertise about how the strategy can be most
effectively intensified.

In addition, an ambitious legislative agenda has been established
that fully takes into account the practical needs and wishes of
front-line operators as well as constitutional principles. A Strategic
Council against Subversive Crime has been appointed to advise the
Minister of Justice and Security on how to spend the extra funding
and what opportunities to further improve the approach are
available. In addition, a task force has been set up that will go out into
the field together with front-line professionals and identify concrete
opportunities to improve and accelerate the approach. This task force
will work closely together with the Regional Information and
Expertise Centres and the National Information and Expertise
Centre. The establishment of an interim evaluation will boost the
learning capacity of the organisations involved and make best
practices rapidly available to be shared and – whenever applicable
– rolled out at the national level. The lines of accountability to the
Lower House of Parliament already run via the Anti-Subversion
Programme.

This deployment of the extra resources represents an important step
in further improving insight into the problem of subversion,
reinforcing the government's executive capacity and boosting
government-wide collaboration. These extra resources also enable
the approach to be designed in a more thematic manner and
encourage innovation of the approach by means of pilots and
projects based on the very latest technology.

Subversive and other crime also generates criminal funds. If these
criminal gains are not seized, then this will present an incentive for
people to commit criminal acts, which in turn will cause significant
disruption to our society. It will also erode the sense of justice felt by
individual citizens and their confidence that the government is
providing effective protection against such crime. The government,
together with all partners involved, therefore advocates extra
measures and efforts in this regard. In the fight against organised
crime and other financially motivated crime, greater focus will be
concentrated on exposing criminal cash flows, which will enable
more effective interventions to be devised and executed. In addition,
we will focus on the four action lines as specified in the Letter to the
Lower House of Parliament dated 13 March 2019[18]: prioritising the
financial/economic dimension of criminal investigations; continual
learning, development and comprehensive connection;


16 The lines of accountability to the Lower House of Parliament already run via the Anti-Subversion Programme.

17 For a more detailed explanation, see: Sluipend gif (Insidious Poison) (Police Academy of the Netherlands, 2018), National Threat Assessment for
Organised Crime (Police, 2017) and Ondermijning ondermijnd (Subverting Subversion) (Dutch School for Public Administration, 2016).

8 P li P II 8/ d N


-----

internationalisation; and monitoring/adjustment. In the 2018 Budget
Memorandum, the previous government made a non-recurrent fund
of €30 million available to reinforce the approach for seizing
criminal assets.

Based on proposals from ten regional partners and from national
partners, a series of concrete reinforcement projects has been
devised and initiated. These projects include a focus on boosting
comprehensive collaboration and seizure in order to embed the
financial and economic perspective into the fight against crime in
the Netherlands. In addition, the statutory instrumentation will be
optimised. For this purpose, examination will be conducted – based
on input from the field and motions passed – of possible areas of
improvement in the law to facilitate seizure of criminal assets,
particularly within the scope of efforts to combat subversive crime.

Furthermore, it is of vital importance that all legal financial and
economic channels used by criminals to launder their money be
protected against misuse. The obligations to prevent such misuse
have been established in the Money Laundering and Terrorist
Financing (Prevention) Act and they are derived from the international standards established by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
and the European Anti-Money Laundering Directive. This ensures
that uniform rules and regulations are complied with when working
at the European and international levels. The amendments to the
Fourth European Anti-Money Laundering Directive are currently
being implemented in the Netherlands. Furthermore, a policy cycle
has been established to identify risks of money laundering and to
evaluate the approach to money laundering. The reports that have
been published on this matter in the recent past have already been
submitted to the Lower House of Parliament.[19] The Minister of
Finance and the Minister of Justice and Security will submit an action
plan for combating money laundering to the Lower House before the
summer. Among other issues, this action plan will address the
findings of these reports and examine opportunities to facilitate
more effective sharing of information between banks.

7. Intensified approach against cyber threats

Our society has become completely dependent on digital devices and
cybersecurity has become interwoven into all national security
interests. Practically all of our critical processes and services are
completely dependent on ICT. As analogue alternatives have almost
entirely disappeared and no fallback options are available, our
dependence on digitised processes and systems has become so
substantial that any damage thereto could result in serious social
disruption. Our critical processes are largely dependent on the
provision of electricity and data communication services.

19 Parliamentary Papers, 2018/2019, 3147 7, No. 28.


Any disruption to these services can impact a number of critical
processes within as little as a few hours. The range of digital risks to
national security are determined by the scale of the cyber threats we
face in combination with our current level of resilience.

Risks to digital security have been comprehensively addressed by the
Government via the National Cybersecurity Agenda, published in
April 2018. This agenda has been formulated in a flexible manner to
enable adequate countermeasures to be added against new or
intensified threats.

The continual threats, the pressure on resilience levels and our
extensive digital dependence demand intensification and acceleration of the strategy against cyber threats. For this reason, extra
efforts will be made to boost structural and adaptive risk management within all critical sectors. This will fulfil ambition 7 of the
National Cybersecurity Agenda: to boost control of the governmentwide approach. In concrete terms, this means that work will be
conducted to raise awareness of the risks and the necessary level of
digital resilience, to boost and monitor digital resilience, and to
increase the government's supervisory capacities in order to ensure
all parties involved fulfil their responsibilities and conduct interventions if and when necessary.

Due to the increasing cyber threat level, mutual dependencies and
the development of new technologies, it is vital to have a risk-driven
strategy concerning exactly what must be protected. Together with
the relevant ministries, the national Coordinator for Security and
Counterterrorism (NCTV) is going to reassess which interests have
the greatest impact on national security and investigate whether
critical organisations are sufficiently aware of these vulnerabilities.

Cybersecurity is such a vital issue that support must be provided to all
parties involved and monitoring must be conducted to ensure all
parties are fulfilling their responsibilities. Together with the
ministries and supervisory bodies involved, work is being conducted
to reinforce monitoring of digital resilience. For this purpose, basic
levels and security objectives are formulated for each sector, enabling
the parties involved to fulfil their individual duties of care as derived
from the Network and Information Systems Security Act (Wbni). To
ensure that the organisations in question fulfil their responsibilities
and implement appropriate measures, effective monitoring of digital
security is essential.

To make sure that a sufficient level of digital resilience is structurally
maintained, collaborative drills and testing are necessary. This
government is therefore formulating a broad public-private testing
and drill programme. This programme will ensure that the organisations and people involved are capable of responding rapidly and
adequately in the event of a crisis.


-----

In addition, a certification framework will be established for
products, services and processes, derived from the EU Cybersecurity
Act.

New technologies such as 5G and AI will result in new and potentially
fundamental security issues (both digital and analogue) that will
require attention. Within the EU, the Netherlands is becoming
increasingly active in the field of cybersecurity via the 'Cyber
Diplomacy Toolbox' and the introduction of cyber sanctions, among
other methods.


-----

-----

# Continual focus on resilience

**While some security issues emphatically require extra focus, there are also**

**predominant risks that have already been integrated into the strategy and for**

**which adequate countermeasures are already in place. Given the developments**

**concerning these risks, continual focus is required in order to protect national**

**security. Any reduction of the current approach could result in new risks and**

**threats or cause old ones to rear their head once more.**


1. Reinforcement of multilateral institutions

The open society and economy in the Netherlands are facilitated
and boosted by the multilateral system of rules and agreements
governing trade, security and dispute resolution based on universal values. The IISS shows that the multilateral system as established following the Second World War is coming under increasing
pressure. Nation states are now more frequently and explicitly
focusing on achieving economic benefits that are relatively
national in nature based on a zero-sum attitude to international
relations. A similar trend is also apparent on the political and geopolitical stages. This can have consequences for the international
rule of law, the fundamental principles of democracy and the
universality of human rights, and therefore for the Netherlands'
national security interests.

The Netherlands will focus on maintaining and boosting multilateral international systems via agreements and regulations based
on universal values. In this regard, the Netherlands will strive – at
the EU level – to close the gaps in the World Trade Association's
rules to enable a variety of economic systems to operate on a level
playing field. For the purposes of combating threats from statesponsored actors, the Netherlands will strive to boost collaboration within the EU and NATO and will prioritise reinforcement of
the multilateral institutions that contribute to national security.


2. Prevention and control of natural disasters

**Climate change**
Climate change has become an observable fact of life resulting in
more frequent bouts of extreme weather, from heavy rain to high
temperatures. In summer 2018, the Netherlands experienced 60
hot days in a row and 2 heatwaves. In addition to being extremely
hot, it was also extremely sunny and very dry. In total, the Royal
Netherlands Meteorological Institute's weather stations measured
2,090 hours of sun, a figure way above the average of 1,639. With an
average temperature of 11.3°C, 2018 was the fifth very hot year in a
row and, with the exception of 2014, the hottest year since records
began. These scenarios are consistent with the upward trend in
global temperatures. Among other methods, the Netherlands is
striving to achieve climate adaptation and mitigation by implementing measures to reduce carbon emissions and establish
climate-proof groundwater and surface water systems, spatial
planning and land use (see also the section 'Drought').

**Drought**
In response to the persistent aridity in 2018, efforts will be made to
implement additional structural measures to establish a climateproof groundwater and surface water system, spatial planning and
land use. The water system, which currently focuses primarily on
draining away excess water as quickly as possible, must be better
equipped to enable retention and infiltration of water. This will
enable the groundwater to be temporarily supplemented in the
event of excessive rain.


-----

**Natural disasters, earthquakes, soil subsidence and**
**solar storms**
Although these types of natural disaster do occur in the
Netherlands and can have a major impact (solar storms can cause
disruption and/or damage to communication systems, satellites
and the power grid, among other things), they are not considered
likely. With the exception of the programmes for earthquakes in
connection with gas extraction, no specific national programmes
exist for these natural disasters other than the regular crisis preparation measures at the local, regional and national levels.

3. Combating CBRN threats

**Proliferation**
In the IISS, it is indicated that the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction remains a cause for concern. Some state-sponsored
actors and non-state-sponsored actors consider themselves less
bound by international agreements, if at all. The risk of accidents,
incidents or conflicts involving weapons of mass destruction
is increasing. It is therefore vital that insight be gained into the
intentions and capacity of state-sponsored actors and non-statesponsored actors who possess or may possess such weapons and
means of delivery. Given the potentially enormous impact that
CBRN conflicts[20] or incidents would have on Dutch national security interests, this threat must be given utmost attention.

Within the Netherlands, the intelligence and security services, the
police, the Ministry of Justice and Security, the Ministry of Defence,
the National Institute for Public Health and the Environment,
the Authority for Nuclear Safety and Radiation Protection, social
institutions and local government bodies work together tirelessly
to ensure timely and adequate identification of CBRN materials
(including precursors). However, timely identification within
the Dutch borders is only possible if external identification and
preventive measures have likewise been effectively organised.
For this reason, we collaborate intensively with foreign partners,
private institutes and multilateral institutions. A major challenge
in this regard is to closely monitor the ability and intent of armed
non-state-sponsored actors to use CBRN materials against the
Netherlands. So far, these groups only appear to have a limited
capacity to convert their technical and logistical capacities into
action, but this will remain an area of concern in the near future,
so continued investment will be made in detection resources,
information exchange and, if necessary, preventive action.

Another important element in the approach to this issue involves
boosting social resilience against any CBRN incidents. For this
purpose, a variety of organisations and aid agencies have worked
together on a multidisciplinary national programme. The
Netherlands is a participant in the 2nd EU CBRN Action Plan, the
core objectives of which are to prevent attacks, to continually train
personnel and to exchange knowledge and expertise between


The Ministry of Infrastructure and Water Management is currently
working on this project together with all of its water partners, who
will be responsible for the following measures:

-  The Fresh Water Delta Programme will flesh out plans to boost
water availability.

-  The Spatial Adaptation Delta Programme will further elaborate
the theme of 'drought' for use in stress tests and risk dialogues.

-  The Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality will take
care of the policy objectives relating to the Climate Adaptation
for Agriculture and Climate Adaptation for Nature action
programmes.

-  Municipalities and water boards will conduct stress tests and
implement operational measures.

Provincial government bodies will be responsible for the spatial
planning of climate-resistant water systems as part of the provincial environment visions and the translation of these visions into
policy for municipalities and water boards.

**Rising sea level**
It is a fact that the sea level will continue to rise throughout this
century and beyond. However, how much it will rise and how
quickly it will rise is uncertain. Among other factors, this depends
on how much greenhouse gas is emitted and how effective international climate policy is. The Netherlands' policy is to achieve
the objectives in the Paris Agreement: to limit the increase in the
global temperature to 2°C. There is a great deal of uncertainty
regarding future emissions and the warming and rise in the sea
level that will accompany them. Due to the potentially major implications for the Netherlands, and the Delta Programme in particular, we therefore evaluated the effects of extreme sea level rise that
could result from an emission scenario involving a 4°C increase in
global temperatures.

The government's objective is to prevent a flood disaster such as
the one that occurred in 1953 or river flooding such as in the 1990s.
These plans have been formulated as part of the Delta Programme,
which has the following objectives:

-  to protect the Netherlands from flooding both now and in the
future;

-  to ensure sufficient supplies of fresh water;

-  to ensure climate-proof land use.

The Delta Programme will ensure that the Netherlands is sufficiently capable of withstanding all developments stemming from
the effects of climate change and the rising sea level.

CBRN d f Ch i l Bi l i l R di l i l d N l


-----

Member States. This helps to reinforce civil-military collaboration
in this area.

**Radiation accidents**
Radiation incidents relate to any activities (including transport and
storage) that involve radioactive materials or devices that can emit
ionising radiation. This can range from major incidents or potential
incidents at nuclear facilities to minor incidents involving radioactive
material at institutions such as hospitals.

The likelihood of a radiation incident at a nuclear facility in the
Netherlands is small, as these facilities are extremely safe and comply
with strict requirements. Other radiation incidents have a higher likelihood, but a lower impact. The transport of radioactive substances,
for example, is subject to extremely strict conditions. In the unlikely
event of an incident occurring, emergency plans will come into effect.

4. Combating infectious diseases

In the Netherlands, the risk of infectious diseases is relatively limited,
although the risk of an outbreak of an infectious disease, such as a flu
pandemic, cannot be ruled out. To ensure the Netherlands is prepared
for such an eventuality, central government formulates and executes
strategic policy.

The measures for the prevention and control of highly contagious
or serious infectious diseases in humans are recorded in the Public
Health Act (Wpg). In line with this Act, the Ministry of Health, Welfare
and Sport is responsible for the National Immunisation Programme,
organised by the National Institute for Public Health and the
Environment. As knowledge of vaccinations and infectious diseases
is growing, the government is continuously monitoring how the
protection provided by the National Immunisation Programme can be
maximised. In response to the slight decline in the immunisation level
in the Netherlands, the State Secretary for Health, Welfare and Sport
has presented a number of improvement measures.[21]

In 2005, the Member States of the WHO (including the Netherlands)
made agreements regarding the identification and control of infectious diseases. These agreements are recorded in the International
Health Regulations. In the Netherlands, they have been incorporated
into the Public Health Act. On the initiative of the Ministry of Health,
Welfare and Sport, the Netherlands registered for a Joint External
Evaluation (JEE) by the WHO. During the JEE, the preparatory measures
that the Netherlands has in place to mitigate public health risks
(including infectious diseases) will be evaluated.

Finally, the EU is working together with the Member States to prevent and control infectious diseases and to improve resilience. The
European Centre for Disease Control plays a vital role in this regard.

21 Parliamentary Papers 2018/2019, 32793, No. 338.

P li P 8/ N 6


The Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport and the National Institute
for Public Health and the Environment closely collaborate with these
parties. One concrete example of this European collaboration is the
European Commission's Joint Procurement Initiative for pandemic
influenza vaccines.[22]

**Antibiotic resistance**
The rise of antibiotic resistance is a cause for concern that demands a
comprehensive and coordinated approach. By means of the antibiotic
resistance (ABR) programme, launched in 2015, the government is
formulating a comprehensive and strategic approach to the problem.
The Lower House of Parliament is regularly kept informed of the
progress of this programme. Compared to other countries, the situation in the Netherlands is relatively good. Via international forums,
the Netherlands works together with international partners to help
improve the situation in other countries. The ABR programme will
conclude in 2019. Before the programme ends, the government will
examine – in collaboration with parties in the field – whether it should
be extended and what adjustments will be required in order to minimise the threat of antibiotic resistance in the future.

**Zoonotic diseases**
In recent years, no new developments that could affect national security have been observed with regard to zoonotic diseases (diseases that
can be transmitted from animals to humans). Measures to prevent,
control and combat zoonotic diseases are recorded in the Public
Health Act and the Animal Health and Welfare Act (GWWD). The Food
and Consumer Product Safety Authority is responsible for monitoring this issue and is authorised to take action. The Centre of Zoonotic
Diseases and Environmental Microbiology (part of the National
Institute for Public Health and the Environment) coordinates the
'Zoonotic Disease Detection Consultation'. This consultation identifies and evaluates new and existing risks posed by pathogenic microorganisms that could be transmitted to people in the Netherlands from
animals, food or the environment. Every year, the National Institute
for Public Health and the Environment publishes the State of Zoonotic
Diseases report, which contains information and developments
concerning zoonotic diseases that are relevant to the Netherlands. The
Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality and the Ministry of
Health, Welfare and Sport possess a shared crisis structure and shared
crisis handbooks for zoonotic diseases. These structures are regularly
subjected to practical testing.


-----

-----

# Generic national security instruments

**In addition to comprehensive strategies for specific risks and threats, the**

**Netherlands also develops generic instruments for the protection of national**

**security. These include risk and crisis management strategies for all potential or**

**actual incidents, disasters or crises, regardless of their nature or location in**

**the Netherlands,**


The expansion of scientific understanding is also a part of this,
such as knowledge sharing and the development of new technologies. These instruments contribute to the intensification of the
National Security Strategy as a whole. Finally, the periodic review
and readjustment of the NSS is also a national security instrument
in and of itself.

**Development of the generic system of risk and crisis**
**management**
In the event of potential or actual incidents, disasters or crises,
government bodies work together with private and semi-private
partners. Depending on the type of crisis, it must be determined
which government policy area is involved, which bodies are designated as competent authorities, which organisations in that policy
area participate in a chain and how they relate to each other within
that chain. Two types of chain can be established. The general
chain deals with general population care (in particular maintaining public order and security) and general disaster response. The
partners in this chain include the police, the security regions and
the municipalities. The functional chain deals with specific issues,
such as power, transport, shipping, food, the environment, etc.
Partners in this chain include the Ministry of Defence, the water
boards and private sectors and businesses which are of vital importance. Government intervention in the functional chain is generally conducted centrally (by ministers), while intervention in the
general chain is conducted at the local level (by mayors). The basic
principle of the generic measures is that, to the greatest possible
extent, 'new/unknown' crises are addressed within the existing

P li P 8/ 8 N


structures. This factor has already been taken into account via the
adjustment of the National Crisis Decision-Making Handbook in
2016, which established a more flexible system.

The Risk and Crisis Management Agenda 2018-2021 represents
this government's efforts to intensify this system,[23] for example,
by ensuring that the function of the Security Regions Act (Wvr)
is evaluated in practice. In addition, based partly on the aforementioned developments such as parallelisation of society and
increased polarisation (perceived or actual), efforts will also be
made to establish future-proof risk and crisis communication to
optimise society's capacity to act. Furthermore, civil-military collaboration will be intensified, crisis management in the Caribbean
Netherlands will be addressed and cross-regional collaboration
as well as collaboration with neighbouring countries will be
reinforced.

The results of the comprehensive risk analysis confirm the need to
recognise that society and risks to society are continually developing – often slowly, sometimes rapidly. These developments
require the Netherlands to continually adapt to and anticipate the
ever-changing spectrum of social challenges and the uncertainty
that these developments bring. The crisis management system and
flexible collaboration within this system must be geared towards
this factor.


-----

**Monitoring new technologies and applications and their**
**consequences for national security**
Technological developments can have significant implications
for national security. New technology and new applications of
technology can create both opportunities and threats to national
security interests. For this reason, the implications of new developments will be periodically investigated and inventoried. In 2019,
on the instructions of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry
of Defence and the Ministry of Justice and Security, the National
Security Analysts Network and a number of other parties will
examine developments in artificial intelligence (AI) and the opportunities and threats for national security that these developments
will create.

**Periodic updating of the National Security Strategy**
The NSS 2019 marks the beginning of a three-year cycle in which
developments affecting national security, threats and risks to
national security and the degree of resilience to these threats
and risks are periodically examined to assess the implications for
the strategic agenda, the definition of national security and the
approach to national security. To ensure interim developments
in the threat level are adequately addressed, a mid-term scan will
be conducted during the course of the cycle to examine whether
adjustments or supplements to the NSS are necessary. The process
of periodically updating the NSS is conducted under the supervision of the Ministry of Justice and Security (via the National
Coordinator for Security and Counterterrorism) and as part of a
broad collaboration between all of the ministries concerned. In
accordance with this cycle, the next NSS is scheduled for 2022,
although it will be formulated earlier if the development of threats
and risks gives cause to do so.


An important point for attention is the observation that the nature
and the scale of possible crises are changing. Attacks or digital
disruption can occur in a vast range of areas in the Netherlands,
causing a variety of chain effects that could have an extremely
diverse range of consequences for society. In addition, it could
become more difficult to determine the source of possible crises
(e.g. in cyberspace) and perpetrators will increasingly be located
in other countries. Strategies to combat these types of issues sink
or swim based on how effectively the government bodies, public
and private security partners (both in the Netherlands and abroad)
and citizens are able to cooperate in order to overcome these
challenges.

In the light of the aforementioned developments, there is a growing need for a shared strategy and proactive and continual collaboration between the public and private security partners at the
national and regional level, as well as within a cross-regional and
cross-border context. For this purpose, the provision of essential
information concerning the issue of risk management must be
improved and an inventory of best practices can be established for
collaboration within this new context. Furthermore, the development of new threats and risks will result in adjustments being
made to national crisis plans, such as plans in the event of ICT
disruptions.

**Comprehensive scientific research agenda into the**
**interconnection of internal and external security**
The free flow of people, goods, capital and information around the
world offers great opportunities for the Netherlands, although it
also creates threats. Due to the international nature of these flows,
developments in international security are now more directly
linked to our own national security. This increasing interconnection between internal and external security demands joint analysis
of threats, perspectives for action and the available knowledge,
intent, capacity and opportunity to act. One example of more
intensive interdepartmental research collaboration is the joint
scientific research agenda established by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Justice and
Security in 2018. Another example is the attention paid to the
theme of security within the mission-oriented top sector policy
and innovation policy, coordinated by the Ministry of Economic
Affairs and Climate Policy. The objective of the knowledge and
innovation agenda is to develop and apply new and innovative
solutions to security issues in collaboration with businesses,
research institutions and government bodies. The initiatives and
the research and other results stemming from this agenda will also
be highly relevant to the process of formulating interdepartmental
strategy and policy.


-----

-----

# In conclusion: Development and expansion of the national security approach

**National security is a dynamic and multifaceted issue that requires a solid yet**

**flexible approach. The strategic cycle of the National Security Strategy enables**

**the Netherlands to continually protect itself against the development of threats**

**and risks and intensifies the national security approach in a future-proof**

**manner.**


The increasing interconnection between risks – as identified by the
risk analysis – is a trend that is expected to continue. In our increasingly interconnected world, the safeguarding of national security is
becoming increasingly dependent on cooperation and integration.
However, this vulnerability also presents a massive opportunity, as
the Netherlands is historically renowned for its substantial capacity
for cooperation in all areas of life.

**Developing the NSS into a comprehensive nation-**
**wide approach**
This NSS lays the foundations for a risk management system that
will develop into a strategy that spans the entire breadth of Dutch
society. National security is an issue that affects everyone, and
accordingly, all government bodies, businesses, social organisations, knowledge institutions and citizens must fulfil their own
responsibilities in order to realise a secure society.


To achieve this nation-wide approach, a broad collaboration
is required in order to implement and develop the NSS, define
national security interests, identify threats and risks and organise
structural resilience. We will do this via both general and specific
measures. In concrete terms, this means we will be engaging
partners from different sections of society (via existing networks
and other channels) to contribute their knowledge and expertise
in order to establish a shared and publicly accessible summary of
threats and resilience. This knowledge and expertise will also be
used to gauge resilience and intensify the strategic focus on awareness and perspective for action. These efforts are fully in line with
our joint responsibility and boost the public and private organisation of national security in order to maximise the effectiveness of
the NSS system.


-----

-----

# Annex 1

**To facilitate effective decision-making concerning the strategic focus on resil-**

**ience, the risk categories[24] from the National Security Analysts Network's**

**comprehensive risk analysis[25 ]have been categorised into a number of security**

**issues. These security issues are arranged as follows and a summary of the risks**

**contained in these groups is provided in the section entitled 'Predominant**

**national security risks'.**


**Threats from state-sponsored actors**

-  Undesirable foreign interference

-  Undesirable foreign influence via hybrid operations

-  Threatening of the NL's hub status/supply channels
(flow security)

**Multilateral institutions and economic resilience**

-  Pressure on security arrangements

-  Disruption of international trade

**Critical national infrastructure**

-  Disruption of critical national infrastructure

**Terrorism and extremism**

-  Terrorism

-  Non-violent extremism

-  Violent extremism

**Military threats**

-  Military threats

-  Hybrid operations via undesirable foreign influence

**Undermining of local authorities and criminal**
**subversion**

-  Subversive crime

-  Criminal interference


**Polarisation and social cohesion**

-  Creation of enclaves (non-violent extremism)

**Cybersecurity and digital threats**

-  Digital sabotage

-  Impairment of internet services

-  Cyberespionage

-  Cybercrime

**Natural disasters**

-  Extreme weather

-  Wildfires

-  Flooding

-  Earthquakes

**CBRN threats**

-  CBRN proliferation

-  Radiation accidents

**Infectious diseases**

-  Human infectious diseases

-  Animal diseases and zoonotic diseases


24 The risk category 'Severe accidents' from the comprehensive risk analysis is not a risk to national security in itself, and was therefore not considered to be
part of the efforts to increase resilience.

Th h i i k l i b h N i l S i A l N k h b b i d h L H f P li


-----

-----

# Annex 2

Table 1

**National security interest** **Impact criteria**

1. Territorial security 1.1 Impairment of the integrity of territory (Dutch or otherwise)
1.2 Impairment of the integrity of the Netherlands' international position
1.3 Impairment of the integrity of cyberspace

2. Physical security 2.1 Deaths
2.2 Serious injuries or chronic illnesses
2.3 Shortages of basic necessities of life

3. Economic security 3.1 Costs
3.2 Impairment of the vitality of the Dutch economy

4. Ecological security 4.1 Long-term damage to the environment and the natural world

5. Social and political stability 5.1 Disruption of everyday life
5.2 Impairment of the democratic rule of law
5.3 Social impact

6. International rule of law 6.1 Impairment of the standards of state sovereignty, peaceful coexistence and peaceful
resolution of disputes

6.2 Impairment of the function or legitimacy of or compliance with international treaties and
standards relating to human rights

6.3 Impairment of a rule-based international financial or economic system
6.4 Impairment of the effectiveness or legitimacy of multilateral institutions


-----

This is a publication of the NCTV on behalf of the Central Government **info@nctv minjenv nl**


-----

