#### The Security Strategy for the Kingdom of the Netherlands


-----

## Foreword

Security is like oxygen or water. It is a basic necessity of life. We cannot live without it and you only really start

thinking about it when it becomes a problem. Without security, everything we value today that is important for

our future would be threatened and disrupted. Hence, security is an essential precondition for a society in which

people can give shape to their lives and their relationships in freedom and certainty.


We are fortunate to live in one of the safest countries in the
world. At the same time, we are faced with a growing number
of threats that are more complex and interconnected, we
cannot afford to be naive about this. We are dealing with a
many-faced monster. For example, the geopolitical balance
of power is changing rapidly. Instability reigns on Europe’s
eastern and southern borders, with Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine as the ultimate game changer. Cyber attacks are
proliferating at an alarming pace, and in today’s digital world,
the reliability of information is increasingly at stake. Crossborder organised crime undermines the stability of societal
relations. During the time of the coronavirus, we have seen
how a pandemic can lead to great societal unrest. And the
effects of climate change also have a significant and growing
impact on our way of life. The uncertainty associated with all
these developments is a breeding ground for societal distrust
and polarisation. This, too, is a security concern.


With this Security Strategy for the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, the government wants to lay the foundation for
a future in which we are resilient and prepared. For the first
time, we are doing it together with all the countries in the
Kingdom. This cooperation is based on a deep sense of
alliance with each other, and also because we are largely
facing the same threats. This strategy premiers in linking
internal and external security from the policy perspective,
to do justice to the existing interconnectedness and to allow
for new interrelationships.

Security is a key task of the government and therefore it is
logical and justified that people look to the government for
strengthening national security. A lot of harm and suffering
can be prevented by making a proper assessment of all
possible threats and determining a clear strategic course.
But what the government cannot offer is a hundred percent
guarantee of security. There is no such thing as absolute
security. Risks can be managed, but not eliminated.
Therefore, this Security Strategy also requires people to be
alert and prepared. We can create a safe and resilient society
only by acting together.

**_Mark Rutte_**
_Prime Minister and Chairman of the Council of Ministers of_
_the Kingdom_


-----

## Contents

Front matter 2

Foreword 2
Introduction: Determining principles 4
The Kingdom of the Netherlands  6
The security strategy in short 7
Overview 9

**Part 1: Threats to national security** 10

National Security as a concept 11

Development of the threats 11

Opportunities for promoting security interests 12

Connections and intersecting themes 13


**Part 2: Strategic course** 20

1. A secure Kingdom in a multipolar world 22

_Line of Action 1: Invest in international partner- ships and _ _22_

_strengthen the armed forces_

_Line of Action 2: Counter hybrid conflict_ 23

_ActieLine of Action 3: Increase the resilience of the economy _ _24_

_and protect science_

_2._ A resilient democratic legal order 25

_Line of Action 4: Increase social stability_ 25

_Line of Action 5: Fight organised subversive crime_ 26

_Line of Action 6: Counter unwanted foreign interference _ _27_

_and espionage_

_Line of Action 7: Strengthen digital resilience_ 27

_Line of Action 8: Prevent and counter terrorism and extremism  28_

3. A ready and resilient society 29

_Line of Action 9: Intensify climate mitigation and adaptation_ 29

_Line of Action 10: Ensure better protection for critical _ 30

_infrastructure_

_Line of Action 11: Increase level of pandemic preparedness_ 31

_Line of Action 12: Strengthen crisis control capabilities and _ _32_

_increase preparedness of society_


**Part 3: Control over national security** 33

A government that exercises integrated control  34

over national security

An approach involving all of society 35

An approach that is evaluated annually and adjusted  35

where necessary

Appendices 36

Rationale and formulation of the strategy 37
Glossary 39
National security interests and impact criteria 41
Endnotes 42


-----

Introduction
### Determining principles for the strategic course

Our security is of critical importance. After all, without security, there is no liberty.1 Our security is neither self
evident nor optional. It can be harmed by various threats. The world is changing, the threats are changing, society

is changing.Therefore we must also change the way we protect the Kingdom of the Netherlands (hereinafter: the

Kingdom). More than ever before, it is important to create a resilient and shockproof Kingdom that is prepared for

a multitude of threats.

Below are the basic principles underlying the strategy that
have helped determine the course to be taken:


**Providing guidance and all-hazards**

The Security Strategy for the Kingdom (hereinafter: the
Strategy) sets the course for our national security for the
next six years (2023-2029).[2] The course to be followed
encompasses both intentional (security) and unintentional
(safety) threats, therefore resulting in an all-hazards strategy.
It gives direction to what we will do in the area of national
security, and where we view the threats in conjunction with
one another. How the course is to be concretely
implemented will be outlined via domain-specific
strategies, policies, andaction plans as well as national
crisis plans. Some of the above has already been done. The
strategy forms the overall framework for this. Elaborating
this strategy is part of the existing policy responsibility of
each ministry, minister and country in the Kingdom.
Moreover, this strategy guides the Kingdom’s European
and international efforts.


**Across borders**

The protection of the Kingdom extends far beyond our
borders. Indeed, threats to our national security do not
stop at the borders of our Kingdom. The external
(European and international) and internal (national)
security dimensions are inseparable from one another.
The Kingdom benefits greatly from a stable and secure
world and a well-functioning international legal order,
which includes the promotion of human rights and an
inclusive and effective multilateral system based on rules.[3]
This requires us to follow an integrated course with regard
to national security that encompasses both internal and
external security dimensions.[4]


**Kingdom-wide but with separate responsibilities**

This strategy sets the course for national security for the
entire Kingdom. The course to be followed has been
integrated as far as possible for all parts of the Kingdom
since the threats facing the Kingdom are all interconnected.
At the same time, the threats, level of resilience, and hence
the necessary approach, differ within the various parts of
our Kingdom. The strategy is mindful of these differences.
The Kingdom-wide nature of this strategy does not affect
the existing division of responsibilities within the Kingdom.
Each country in the Kingdom is, and remains, responsible
for its national security unless it concerns the so-called
Kingdom matters such as the defence of the Kingdom and
its foreign policy.


-----

**Risk control, not risk exclusion**

Absolute security does not exist; threats cannot be entirely
eliminated. However, we are committed to reduce the
likelihood of a threat occurring, toreduce the potential
_impact of the threat and to take opportunities to proactively_
promote our national security interests. Therefore, the
focus is on risk control, not risk exclusion. This requires all of
us to be prepared, even if things go wrong unexpectedly.

**For all of society**

Strengthening national security is primarily the task of the
government. Nevertheless,enabling a safe and resilient
society requires commitment from all: not only from all
branches of government but also citizens, businesses and
civil society organisations. Together, we are responsible
for protecting our security. Everyone contributes to this.
It is, therefore, important that public and private partners,
civil society organisations and citizens remain resilient
to threats to national security. What also contributes to
developing such resilience is proper communication from
the government regarding the risks relating to threats,
what the government is doing about this and the potential
impact it has on our way of life. In addition, targeted advice
and a prospect of action offered by the government to, for
instance, companies can also help increase our resilience
to threats. This is how we counter threats and reduce their
impact, and should things still go wrong unexpectedly,
this is what will ensure so we are prepared and can show
resilience.[5]


**Strategic scope**

This strategy sets the course for how we will protect the
Kingdom from threats that could affect national security.
But of course, this approach does not exist in isolation.
Various socio-economic and demographic factors can
affect the extent to which everyone in society is actually
capable of resisting threats and displaying resilience.
These factors may include poverty-related issues, access to
and quality of education and healthcare, socio-economic
and job security, shortages of technical and other
manpower, discrimination or unequal treatment (including
based on gender), pressure on the asylum chain and global
population growth. The strategy itself focuses only on the
so-called first-order effects that can be directly related to
national security at this point in time. However, the abovementioned social and economic factors, acting as secondorder effects, can influence these first-order effects. To
protect national security, these factors must and will be
taken into account, including in the implementation of this
strategy. On the other hand, efforts aimed at dealing with
these socio-economic and demographic factors must also
take into account our national security and the threats we
might face as a society.


-----

### The Kingdom of  the Netherlands

The Kingdom consists of four countries: Curaçao, Aruba, Sint Maarten

(the Caribbean Countries) and the Netherlands. The Charter for the

Kingdom of the Netherlands governs the constitutional relationship

between the countries.

The countries are autonomous and responsible for their
national security. The exceptions to this are the so-called
Kingdom affairs, i.e. preservation of the independence and
defence of the Kingdom, Dutch citizenship and foreign policy.
The Kingdom as a whole is responsible for this and not the
separate countries themselves.

In 2010, the islands of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba (the
Caribbean Netherlands) were designated as a public body. As
a special municipality, they fall under direct responsibility of
the Netherlands, also with regard to the approach to national
security.

**Terminology**

-  Kingdom: entire Kingdom of the Netherlands

-  The Netherlands: European Netherlands

-  The Caribbean Countries: Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten

-  The Caribbean Netherlands: Bonaire, Sint Eustatius
and Saba

-  Caribbean part of the Kingdom: Caribbean Countries
and the Caribbean Netherlands


**_The Kingdom of the Netherlands consists of four countries_**

The Netherlands Aruba Curaçao Sint Maarten


**_And 3 special municipalities_**

_Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba are special_
_municipalities. They are referred to as the_
**_Caribbean Netherlands. Together with the_**
_countries Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten,_
_they form the Caribbean part of the Kingdom._


Bonaire Sint Eustatius Saba


**_Caribbean part of the Kingdom_**

**Dominican**
**republic** **Puerto Rico**

**4**

**1** Aruba **4** Sint Maarten

**5** **6**

**2** Curaçao **5** Saba **1** **2** **3**
**3** Bonaire **6** Sint Eustatius

**0** **1.000 km** **Colombia** **Venezuela**


-----

### The security strategy in short


The key objective of the Security Strategy for the Kingdom of
the Netherlands is to protect our national security interests
(Part 1). There are several threats to national security. If a
threat severely affects one or more security interests, it can
cause societal disruption and therefore harm national
security.

At the same time, threats are interconnected. One threat
influences and, subsequently, possibly reinforces another.
The Security Strategy focuses on this interconnectedness and
describes the seven intersecting themes showing the
consistency between threats (Part 1).

This threat landscape translates into an integrated strategic
course (Part 2) and integrated control of national security
(Part 3). In this way, the Security Strategy lays the foundation
for a future in which we are resilient and prepared.


The three main objectives of the strategic course for national
security are:

1. A secure Kingdom in a multipolar world
2. A resilient democratic legal order
3. A ready and resilient society

Subsequently, we set out twelve lines of actions for inreasing
our resilience against the threats.

1. Invest in international partnerships and strengthen the
armed forces

2. Counter hybrid conflict
3. Increase the resilience of the economy and protect
science

4. Increase social stability
5. Fight organised subversive crime
6. Counter unwanted foreign interference and espionage
7. Strengthen digital resilience
8. Prevent and counter terrorism and extremism
9. Intensify climate mitigation and adaptation
10. Ensure better protection for critical infrastructure
11. Increase level of pandemic preparedness
12. Strengthen crisis control capabilities and increase
preparedness of society


_See next page_
_Figure 1: The security strategy in short_


-----

Economic Technological Geopolitical International and
threats developments and challenges and military military threats

digitalisation of threats
systems

Threat to critical Increased dependencies and their consequences Economic Territorial Hybrid threats Cyber threats
infrastructure for critical infrastructure security security

and economy

Unwanted foreign

Physical International

Major infuence and

security legal order and

accidents interference

stability

Societal tensions, declining

Climate change Ecological Social and trust, disinformation and

Infectious Extremism and

security political stability a radical undercurrent

diseases terrorism

Climate and Pressure on Polarisation
natural disasters the democratic

legal order

Organised
subversive crime

National security interests


-----

### Overview

The strategy consists of three components.

In the first part of the strategy, we describe the national
security interests (hereinafter: security interests) that we
want to protect from a national security perspective and the
main developments in the threats to national security.

The second part of the strategy sets out the strategic course.
This is done based on three main objectives and 12 lines of
action that will be applicable for the next six years.

Finally, the third part of the strategy describes the integrated
control over and division of responsibility for national
security within the Kingdom. A whole-of-government and
whole-of-society approach is needed. In addition to the
government, public and private partners, civil society
organisations and citizens play a role in this.

The strategy describes the strategic course to be followed for
the entire Kingdom. Wherever the ‘we’ form has been used,
the text refers to the Kingdom. The term ‘national security’
refers to the national security of all countries within the
Kingdom and the security of the Kingdom as a whole. The
national security as a concept is further explained in Part 1.


-----

##### Part 1
# Threats to  national security

Our security cannot be taken for granted and it is vulnerable to a multitude of threats. Problems can become

more urgent when various threats occur simultaneously and reinforce each other. The strategy emphasises the

interconnectedness between threats. This integrated approach allows us to determine what we need to do

together to protect the Kingdom’s national security.

-  National Security as a concept

-  Development of the threats

-  Opportunities for promoting security interests

-  Connections and intersecting themes


-----

Part 1
## Threats to  national security 

Our security cannot be taken for granted and it is vulnerable to a multitude of threats. Problems can become

more urgent when various threats occur simultaneously and reinforce each other. The strategy emphasises the

interconnectedness between threats. This integrated approach allows us to determine what we need to do

together to protect the Kingdom’s national security.[6]


**National Security as a concept**
Central to the strategy is the term ‘national security’. There is
no conclusive or unambiguous definition of national security.[7]
In this strategy, we use the following description:

_With national security is meant the protection of our national_
_security interests against threats that could harm those interests_
_and thereby could cause societal disruption. We ensure this_
_protection by reducing threats and becoming more resilient to them._

National security is about making autonomous decisions in a
free and secure society, independent of unwanted foreign
interference by other countries but within internationally
agreed frameworks. The protection of national security
includes preventing the impairment of the sovereignty of the
Kingdom and guaranteeing our democratic processes, the
authority of democratic institutions in our rule of law,and the
values and norms that bind us. The term ‘national security’
refers to the national security of all the countries within the
Kingdom and the security of the Kingdom as a whole.


In the context of national security, we focus on the security
interests we want to proactively protect and promote (Table
_1). These security interests may be harmed by threats, which_
can lead to societal disruption. To prevent this from occuring,
we are committed to reduce the likelihood of a threat occurring,
toreduce the potential impact of these threats, and to take
opportunities to proactively promote our security interests.
Therefore, the focus is on risk control, not risk exclusion. Security
interests, threats, opportunities and resilience form the basis
for the strategic course.


**Development of the threats**

_Table_ The basis for this strategy is the Nationwide Risk Assessment

(Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse, RbRa)[8] and a complementary
assessment of the impact of the war in Ukraine on the
national security of the Netherlands.[9] Both assessments have
been prepared by the National Network of Safety and
Security Analysts (Analistennetwerk Nationale Veiligheid, ANV).[10]

. Security These assessments provide an overview of threats to the

Kingdom’s national security in relation to the six national
security interests (Table 1).

The ANV has methodically elaborated the security interests
via impact criteria thereby clearly showing the extent to
which the interests could be harmed. Together with domainspecific analyses,[11] these assessments are important input for
the strategy, and therefore help in defining a strategic course
for national security that focuses not only on short-term
threats but also on actual or possible developments in the

threat in the long term.

The assessments show that there is a high level of urgency:
the likelihood of events affecting national security occurring


-----

**Opportunities for promoting security interests**
It is essential to have a national security policy that is not
based solely on threats but also considers the opportunities
for actively promoting our security interests. This can be done
by identifying strategic opportunities for the use of various
policy instruments (including economic, diplomatic and
military policy instruments) that benefit our prosperity, wellbeing and security. For example, this could include improving
the investment and establishment climate for companies in
specific sectors where we are now dependent on third
countries. It is also important to adopt a broad approach
based on early warning and early action: identifying and
interpreting trends and developments that could potentially
lead to conflict and taking action in this regard. Not merely to
prevent potential conflict but to actively promote lasting
stability.


in the coming years is relatively high.[12] Developments such as
the war in Ukraine, the COVID-19 pandemic and Hurricane
Irma show how threats can become reality and directly or
indirectly affect our national security interests. In addition,
we are more online than ever before, and as a result, the
threats posed by this digital presence are growing as well.[13]
This affects our society and influences our daily lives.
Moreover, a threat is never an isolated event. The threats that
can potentially affect national security are increasingly
interconnected, complex, and dynamic in nature, with
digitalisation and technological advances being key catalysts
in this process. This manifests itself in the dynamics of further
escalating geopolitical tensions that include the use of hybrid
methods.

The likely impact of some of the threats varies within the
Kingdom. One example of this is climate and natural
disasters. Hurricanes are a threat to the Caribbean part of the
Kingdom (particularly Sint Maarten, Sint Eustatius and Saba),
but not to the Netherlands, where instead drought and
wildfires (besides the long-known challenges such as floods)
are a major risk.[14] There are also differences in geopolitical
influences or threats, such as the war in Ukraine and side
effects for the Netherlands or migration flows from
Venezuela (the Kingdom’s largest neighbouring country)
toward the Caribbean part of the Kingdom (especially
Curaçao and Aruba).[15] The geopolitical interests of major
powers such as the US, Russia and China also play a role in
this, and this could potentially lead to a geopolitical
showdown with an impact on the Caribbean part of the
Kingdom and resulting consequences for the Kingdom as
a whole.


_Table 1: Six national security interests[16]_


**Security interests** Explanation

_Territorial security_ The unimpeded functioning of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands and its
EU and NATO allies as independent
states in the widest sense, or their
territorial integrity in a narrow sense.

_Physical security_ The unimpeded functioning of
people in the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and their surroundings.

_Economic security_ The unimpeded functioning of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands as an
effective and efficient economy.

_Ecological security_ The unimpeded continued existence
of the natural living environment in
and around the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.

_Social and political stability_ The unimpeded and continued
existence of a social climate in which
individuals can function without
disruption and groups of people
enjoy living together within the
benefits of the democratic constitu-
tional system of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and values shared
therein.

_International legal order_ The proper functioning of the
_and stability_ international system of norms and
agreements aimed at promoting
international peace and security,
including human rights and effective
multilateral institutions and regimes,
as well as the proper functioning of
the states bordering the Kingdom of
the Netherlands[17] and in direct vicinity
to the European Union.


-----

**Connections and intersecting themes**
It is important to consider the connections between the
assessments of threats and opportunities in relation to our
national security so that we can lay out an integrated strategic
course. Based on this consideration, we arrive at seven
intersecting themes, which are explained below.


1. Geopolitical challenges and
military threats

Our foreign policy aims to contribute to the security,
prosperity and well-being of the Kingdom and its citizens.
To ensure its prosperity and security, the Kingdom relies
heavily on a stable and secure world with a functioning
international legal order that promotes human rights and an
inclusive and effective multilateral system. We cannot rule
out the possibility of an attack on the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the territory of our allies.[18]

Our foreign policy aims to contribute to the security,
prosperity and well-being of the Kingdom and its citizens. To
ensure its prosperity and security, the Kingdom relies heavily
on a stable and secure world with a functioning international
legal order that promotes human rights and an inclusive and
effective multilateral system. We cannot rule out the
possibility of an attack on the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the territory of our allies.[19] The changing balance
of power in the world, intensification of strategic
competition, the proximity of military conflict, the threat to
the territory of our allies and the pressure on democratic
societies imply that greater diplomatic, military and
development efforts are needed than in the past to safeguard
the objectives of our foreign policy. The Kingdom has a strong
interest in ensuring a world in which countries cooperate
based on clear agreements and where they can hold each
other accountable if these agreements are violated.

The world order faces great challenges and is subject to
change. The rules-based international order that emerged
after World War II was characterised by geopolitical rivalries
between the two superpowers, the US and the Soviet Union.
This system came to an end with the implosion of the Soviet
Union. The subsequent unipolar system with a key role for
the US is being replaced by a multipolar system, in which a
multitude of influential countries and regions are betting on
fundamental changes in the existing order. Institutions such
as the World Trade Organization the Council of Europe and


the United Nations are losing influence, and alternative
alliances are emerging. Central to the new geopolitical rivalry
is the relationship between the US and China. This rivalry
expresses itself primarily in the military and economic field
and results in the creation of new high-risk strategic
dependencies, for example, in the area of energy, food and
raw materials. This is a particularly pressing issue for the
Netherlands, which relies on the US and the ground rules of
the international legal order and stability for its security and
prosperity.

For the first time since 1945, Europe is facing a major
interstate conflict. Relations between Russia, the EU and
NATO are severely disrupted as a result of this. The future
development of the war is difficult to predict. However, there
is likely to be a protracted conflict in Europe with
characteristics of a hybrid conflict. The longer the current
situation drags on, the effects of this war will weigh more
heavily and have a more lasting effect on our national
security. This applies both in case of an escalation or
de-escalation of the war. The Russian invasion of Ukraine has
led to a hardening of diplomatic relations, a seriously
deteriorated economic situation, new developments in the
cyber and espionage domain and a large influx of refugees
into Europe. In this way, the developments in the military
domain become a catalyst for developments in other
domains, such as migration, economic security and societal
tensions, where the time factor plays an important role.[20]

In addition, the security interest of the international legal
order and stability is also, obviously, greatly affected by the
war in Ukraine.[21] Developments since the Russian invasion of
Ukraine highlight the larger shifts taking place in the world
order. For a long time now, some countries have been
questioning the functioning of the international legal order.
These countries regard the current international legal order
as a Western construct, designed to further Western
interests. Russia and China, in particular, are challenging the
existing international order. Russia is undermining the
international legal order and often seems to act as a disruptor
in multilateral contexts China believes in international


-----

**Impact of the Ukraine war on the security of**
**the Netherlands 28**

The Russian invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022 has major
and long-lasting consequences not only for Ukraine and its
people, but also for the Kingdom and our allies. The war is
already affecting various national security interests, including
the international legal order, economic security and social and
political stability. The longer the war in Ukraine continues, the
greater the impact will be.

In this way, the geopolitical consequences of the war are
attacking the foundations of the rules-based security policy
order that the West thought it had established after the end
of the Cold War. Trust in multilateral organisations is under
pressure, as are the principles of non-intervention and state
sovereignty.

Europe’s dependence on Russian energy poses great risks to
our economic security. Today, roughly a year into the Russian
invasion, virtually no Russian energy is coming to the
Netherlands. With the latest sanctions package on Russian oil
products, all the possible European energy sanctions are now in
effect. As a result, virtually no Russian oil products, crude oil and
coal are entering the Netherlands. The only exception to this is
liquefied natural gas (LNG) from Russia, which is supplied by ship
rather than pipeline. Although the Netherlands has greatly
reduced its dependence, other European countries have not yet
gone so far. Russia is using this dependency on Russian energy to
exert pressure on EU Member States and undermine European
cohesion. This has an effect on energy prices and the security of
supply, leading to high inflation.

Higher energy prices and rising inflation are placing increasing
pressure on Western unity. Russia takes advantage of this by
reinforcing the narrative that economic uncertainties in Europe
are the result of anti-Russian decisions by Western policy­
makers. Via disinformation campaigns, Russia is trying not only
to undermine the sense of political unity in the West but also to
further polarise public debate and diminish the level of support
for sanctions against Russia.


stability and a properly functioning multilateral system but
wants to remould the system to align with its vision in the
long term. The countries find common ground in their
opposition to what they see as a Western-oriented
international legal order, their anti-US stance and geo­
strategic competition with the West.[22] In Africa, the
population is expected to double in the coming decades.
Africa is suffering the hardest from the shock effects of the
geopolitical and geoeconomic crises plaguing the world.[23]
The demographic and economic centre of gravity is shifting
eastward, particularly toward China and the broader IndoPacific region. These developments will lead to a more
multipolar world order.[24] The Kingdom will have to realign
itself based on this changing balance of power.

The new power politics are not limited to the traditional
security domain. Increasingly, power is being exercised
through the use of economic instruments, control over
technologies, high-risk strategic dependencies and other
hybrid means. Examples of this include the use of migration
to exert pressure (instrumentalisation of migration)[25] and the
use of online and other means such as disinformation and
propaganda to influence public opinion. The NATO alliance
is under pressure due to the build-up of Russian military
capability, as well as an increase in naval activities in the
North Sea aimed at espionage, disruption and sabotage.
Several countries are also working on new types of weapons
of mass destruction and hypersonic missiles.[26]

These resources can affect various security interests such as
territorial security, economic security, physical security, and
social and political stability. Increasingly, countries consider
themselves less bound by multilateral agreements on arms
control and non-proliferation, and the current frameworks
are proving inadequate for regulating new developments.
To some extent, some players are trying to make themselves
more autonomous and less vulnerable to third countries
by partially ‘decoupling’ their economies and developing
alternative standards. In recent years, geopolitical
considerations have started playing a more prominent role in
international standardisation forums The risk of this is that


the new standards that are set may not be incompatible with
the norms, values, laws and regulations of the Kingdom, the
EU or other like-minded countries, which could eventually
harm our security. This also applies to the Caribbean part
of the Kingdom where our largest neighbour - Venezuela

-  happens to be located just a few kilometres away. In
Venezuela, the absence of democracy and a functioning
state based on the rule of law, combined with geopolitical
interference and the ongoing humanitarian crisis, remains
an unpredictable factor that could threaten the stability and
security of the Kingdom. The geopolitical interests of the US,
Russia and China also play a role here. In addition, the
interrelationship between organised crime and the
Venezuelan armed forces in the area of illegal drug, gold
and arms trafficking in Venezuela also has a destabilising
effect on the region. It is unlikely that Venezuela will harm
the territorial integrity of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
However, there is a chance of an unintentional escalation
due to possible misinterpretations and incidents as a result
of a decline in the professionalism of the military forces of
Venezuela.[27]


-----

2. Hybrid threats

In the current era of international and geopolitical threats,
both state and non-state actors are increasingly using hybrid
methods and techniques.[29] Hybrid threats are threats to
national security that manifest themselves largely below the
level of open armed conflict. In hybrid conflicts, state and/or
non-state actors use multiple means aimed at achieving
certain strategic objectives. Such means may include the use
of military intimidation, espionage and sabotage, cyber
attacks, disinformation campaigns, unwanted foreign
interference in diaspora communities, knowledge theft or
economic instruments. These means may be used in
combination with one another or alone.[30] As far as espionage
is concerned, the Kingdom is an attractive target because of
the specialised knowledge and technology available here, a
high density of internet hubs, the fact that the Netherlands
acts as a host country for various international organisations
(such as the OPCW and the ICC), and the geographic location
of the Caribbean part of the Kingdom (proximity to Venezuela
and the US).[31]

Hybrid threats do not only arise in direct association with
state actors. Criminal groups or even private parties (as
so-called proxies of state actors) may also pose a hybrid
threat.[32] In such cases, they are part of a hybrid campaign
launched by a state actor. This combined or hybrid use of
means and actors can pose a threat to our national security.
It can harm our economic security or affect our social and
political stability. Consider, for example, certain forms of
state interference, where communities in the Netherlands are
targets of various forms of influence by countries of origin
through the use of various online and physical tools by
different state and non-state actors.[33] This confirms the
importance of international cooperation to prevent and
combat hybrid threats.


3. Climate change

The potential impact of climate change on our national
security is becoming increasingly visible. There are everincreasing consequences that are becoming more difficult to
control. Climate and natural disasters have a broad impact;
with the exception of the security interest relating to the
international legal order, climate change affects all the other
security interests.[34]

For example, climate change is a major catalyst for various
threats against national security. Due to climate change,
extreme weather is becoming more common, increasing the
likelihood of drought, wildfires, floods and more powerful
hurricanes. Subsequently, these phenomena can disrupt
critical infrastructure such as drinking water, electricity and
telecom facilities. Climate and natural disasters may imply
the devastation of large areas, which can lead to physical
casualties and, in extreme cases, even lead to the collapse
of the healthcare system.[35]

Specifically for the Netherlands, the risk of drought, and
therefore wildfires, poses a problem (in addition to longerknown challenges such as flooding): it is not a question of
_if but when an uncontrollable wildfire will occur.[36] The_
consequences of these fires could quickly become very severe
in a densely populated country such as the Netherlands.

For the Caribbean part of the Kingdom, hurricanes are the
main threat.[37] Moreover, the consequences may be even
greater for these already vulnerable islands if critical
infrastructure and processes such as telecommunications
and electricity, drinking water and gas supplies are affected.
In the longer term, a rise in sea levels poses a significant
threat: millions of people in cities in and around the Kingdom
are increasingly vulnerable to sea level rise. By 2050, twothirds of the world’s population is expected to live in cities,
800 million of them in cities vulnerable to sea level rise.[38]
This applies specifically to Bonaire where, due to the effects
of climate change the island will be partially submerged


Other threats may also be amplified by climate change.
For example, higher temperatures in the Netherlands are
expected to create conditions that will allow new kinds of
infectious diseases to occur. Infectious diseases can result in
an impairment of physical security, such as during the COVID19 pandemic. Climate change issues also appear susceptible
to rapidly polarising views, the emergence of antigovernment sentiment regarding measures that are or are
not being taken and the uneven impact on vulnerable groups
in society. All of this can harm our social and political
stability.[40]

Climate change can also create tensions on the geopolitical
stage, for example, in international negotiations on
consensus and actions to prevent climate change or address
the consequences thereof. Furthermore, climate change
creates ‘new’ areas of geopolitical power struggles.[41]
Consider the case of melting polar ice where access to and
control of new Arctic shipping routes and resources could
lead to conflict. Climate change could result in water, energy
and food shortages worldwide, potentially causing instability,
increased competition among populations and migration.
Extreme weather events can also lead to the disruption of
international production and commercial chains, and
subsequent temporary or permanent shortages and price
fluctuations. Sea level rise can make ports inaccessible, thus
affecting global trade. This has implications for our national
security because it jeopardises the safeguarding of public
interests.

An adequate approach to tackling climate change calls for a
worldwide transition to renewable and clean energy. At the
same time, this transition exposes certain vulnerabilities. For
example, the Kingdom is heavily dependent on other
countries for our energy supplies: the war in Ukraine shows
us that Russia is using the European dependence on Russian
oil and gas to put pressure on EU Member States to
undermine European cohesion.[42] To achieve the energy
transition while reducing dependence on Russian oil and gas,
we need a greater supply of critical raw materials than what is
currently available for our economy [43] The energy transition


-----

**Societal discontent and the**
**COVID-19 pandemic[52]**

A pandemic can have a major impact on national security.
The COVID-19 outbreak illustrates that a pandemic not
only affects our physical security, but that it also has a
general impact on the social and political stability within
the Kingdom.

For example, the COVID-19 pandemic, with its disruption
of daily life and subsequent measures, resulted in
expressions of societal discontent throughout the
Kingdom. The pandemic and the government’s policy
response to it have succeeded in mobilising people who
are, to a greater or lesser extent, distrustful of the
government and have made them more ready to take
action. Often these manifestations occurred in a peaceful
and legitimate manner, but sometimes this societal
discontent was expressed in a persistently intimidating
manner, both in the digital and physical realms.

In the Netherlands, for example, there were calls for
committing arson at a Municipal Health Service (GGD)
testing centre and transmission towers were set on fire.
Incidents also occurred in which people issued threats
against politicians, journalists, scientists, the police and
special investigation officers, healthcare workers and
public transport staff. Several members of the Outbreak
Management Team (OMT) received threats: these were
not just limited to threats on social media but also
included visits to the homes of several OMT members and
leaving letters containing intimidating personal messages.
In the long term, this can contribute not only to
undermining public confidence in and the legitimacy of
government institutions, politicians, journalists or
scientists but also to a subversion of the democratic legal
order, leading to a situation where these institutions and
persons can no longer practise their profession freely.


oil and gas, to raw materials such as lithium, nickel and
copper. New vulnerabilities may arise in this area because
there are hardly any mining or processing activities for these
metals and minerals in Europe.[44]

4. Societal tensions, declining trust,
disinformation and a radical

undercurrent

Societal tensions may arise due to various reasons such
as a large influx of refugees, international conflicts and
instability impacting diaspora communities, increasing
inequality or fundamentally different views on how to
address climate change and the energy transition (see also
Intersecting Theme 3).[45] In the vast majority of cases, these
tensions express themselves in a manner that is appropriate
within a free and open society, such as through demon­
strations. Debate and protest are part of living together in
a democracy. But these tensions may also be expressed
through undesirable forms of action that involve exclusion,
threats, serious disturbances to public order, and even
physical violence in the form of assaults or vandalism.[46]
These processes can harm our physical security and social
and political stability.

Sufficient legitimacy and support are necessary for the proper
functioning of our democratic legal order. Many citizens are
critical of politics, for example, because they believe that
politicians do not come up with enough solutions to societal
problems.[47] Criticism, debate and protest are a part of living
together in a democracy. It becomes problematic when
people become completely disaffected and start acting
accordingly, for example, because they have a systematic
distrust of systems or because they no longer believe that
politics is capable of solving problems.[48] The manner in which
government and other institutions communicate has a direct
impact on increasing or eliminating distrust.[49]


In themselves, societal tensions do not necessarily form
a threat to national security. However, there is a radical
undercurrent within these protests that, under normal
circumstances, contribute positively to the democratic legal
order. For example, some extremists have turned against the
government and other institutions out of a fundamental
mistrust, anger and a sense of injustice. The storming of
parliaments abroad by people unwilling to accept the
outcome of the democratic process shows what this can lead
to. They oppose the way politics, the legal system, the media
and science are conducted. Some of them embrace
conspiracy theories or even share disinformation regularly.[50]
The use of social media plays an important role in this.
These conspiracy theories impair public confidence in the
democratic legal order. Such impairment is not immediately
noticeable but manifests itself insidiously. In addition,
citizens form opinions and make choices based on the
information disseminated within the public discourse.
The spread of disinformation, both from home and abroad,
can disturb this public discourse and have a disruptive effect
on society and the lives of individuals in that society.[51]


-----

5. Pressure on the democratic
legal order

We see several phenomena that may threaten our democratic
legal order and social cohesion. For example, societal
tensions, societal polarisation and the spread and normali­
sation of conspiracy theories may also be accompanied by
demonstrations of extremism (see also Intersecting Theme 4)
or terrorism. Currently, jihadism is the main source of terrorist
threats in the Kingdom.[53] In addition, the threat emanating
from right-wing terrorism, especially accelerationism, is
significant. Moreover, the entire extremist domain is in flux.
The extremist domain is made up of a hodgepodge of radical
views ranging from anti-Semitism to anarchism, from racism
to a deep-seated aversion to government and other
institutions, or a combination of some of these elements. It is
diffuse, variable and difficult to predict and is also influenced
by other issues such as energy, the climate and asylum.
Events and developments outside the Kingdom’s borders
may also have implications for extremist and terrorist threats
in and towards the Kingdom. Calls by terrorist organisations,
such as ISIS and Al-Qaida, to carry out attacks in the West are
proving successful. Right-wing extremists often find each
other online via international groups and draw inspiration
from international examples. Digitalisation and the increased
use of social media is being exploited for recruitment
purposes and for spreading propaganda.[54]

Another phenomenon that can threaten our democratic legal
order and social cohesion is organised subversive crime. The
open economy, proper financial and other infrastructure and
geographical location bring prosperity to our Kingdom, but at
the same time, all of this also makes us attractive to
organised subversive crime. The above aspects are misused
for illegal activities, which adversely affects our democratic
legal order and causes a significant social impact. Organised
subversive crime is becoming increasingly entrenched and
often operates via digital and global networks. On the one
hand, international criminal networks operate at home and
abroad with Dutch contribution; on the other hand the


6. Increased high-risk (strategic)
dependencies and their

consequences for critical

infrastructure and economy

Technological developments, digitalisation and globalisation
are increasing the level of connectedness and complexity of
various systems. As a significant economic player with a large
knowledge base, this offers the Kingdom many oppor­
tunities. For example, the Netherlands, as the ‘gateway to
Europe’, is an important logistics hub for world trade and a
transit country for military personnel and material of the
NATO allies.[57] At the same time, this connectedness also
implies risks and vulnerabilities, including the creation of
high-risk (strategic) dependencies within the critical infra­
structure and economy. Increased economic influence is
being exerted for geopolitical purposes (see also Intersecting
Theme 1).[58] addition, the increased dependence on the North
Sea and seabed for critical infrastructure gives opponents
more opportunities to disrupt our society in part or whole.

As a result of changing geopolitical dynamics, the Kingdom
is increasingly confronted with issues spanning the areas
of economics and security. The war in Ukraine illustrates
how dependencies in the energy sector or concerning food
security directly affect our economy.[59] Increasingly, major
state actors are focusing their efforts on creating unilateral
high-risk strategic dependencies in the economic and
technological spheres. They use these dependencies as a
means of exerting pressure to strengthen their geopolitical
position. In addition, this dependency increases oppor­
tunities for undesirable knowledge transfer, including
knowledge theft, in companies as well as within our know­
ledge and educational institutions. Actors from these
countries try to obtain knowledge via control structures
(mergers, investments and acquisitions), by winning tenders,
via digital attacks or by infiltrating institutions.


Netherlands plays a facilitating role in global, illegal trade.
This constitutes a serious threat to our democratic legal
order: deaths due to contract killings, intimidation and
attempts to infiltrate the public administration, violence
towards the media and the emergence of parallel societies
outside the sphere of government control. Even young people
are drawn into the criminal environment and used for
carrying out odd jobs, sometimes at an early age, and in this
way, they become entangled in the criminal underworld.[55]

Unwanted foreign interference by state actors also poses
a threat to our democratic legal order (see also Intersecting
Theme 2). This can lead to societal disruption and affect
the political and social stability within the Kingdom.[56] Such
interference often involves activities possibly controlled by
state actors targeted at diaspora communities living in the
Kingdom, with the aim of binding these communities to the
national and international political agenda of those countries.
Citizens may become victims of social pressure, intimidation
or threats and therefore be hindered in the free exercise of
their fundamental rights within the Kingdom. They may also
feel compelled to declare solidarity with the political agenda
of a foreign government machinery or head of state.

People who are responsible for preserving the democratic
legal order (such as judges and justices, public prosecutors,
lawyers, journalists, politicians and local officials) must be
able to do their jobs safely and without fear. Protection of
these individuals, as guardians of the rule of law, is therefore
a prerequisite for the functioning of the democratic state
under the rule of law.


-----

7. Technological developments
and digitalisation of systems

Besides the many benefits it offers our society, technological
developments also create new threats and make threats
more complex and interconnected. Digitalisation makes
systems more interconnected, and as a result, vital and nonvital processes become more susceptible to cyber threats
(see also Intersecting Theme 6). Potential adversaries are
investing heavily in strengthening their armed forces.
The proliferation of high technology and weapons, both
conventional and non-conventional, is increasing. This puts
pressure on the existing multilateral arms export control and
non-proliferation regimes. At the same time, the geopolitical
environment makes it difficult to reach new agreements on
new technology as part of these instruments for disarma­
ment. In addition, technological developments are increasing
the ‘proximity’ of military and other threats, for example,
due to the development of new weapons techno­logies
(hypersonic missiles and autonomous weapons systems).

The digitalisation of society creates many interdependencies
that are difficult to identify. With increasingly interrelated
digital and physical processes, the consequences of a
disruption in the functioning of the internet can potentially
lead to societal disruption as well. A disruption affects our
security interests such as territorial security. Territorial
security concerns not only the integrity of our national
territory and that of our allies but also the integrity of the
digital domain: the availability, confidentiality and integrity
of essential information services and infrastructure and
processes that depend on this.[61]

The digital threat is permanent and increasing rather than
decreasing, with all the associated consequences. On top of
that, the digital space - a complex interplay of interrelated
digital processes, operating via networks, ICT systems and
operational technology - is constantly changing, which in turn
creates new, unexpected dependencies and effects. This is a
dynamic that will not diminish [62] For example by using


High-risk strategic dependencies are also an important issue
specifically for the Caribbean part of the Kingdom. If a
cyberattack disrupts the supply of goods, food and energy,
the consequences will be severe, and there are very limited
alternatives to resume the crucial supply of goods and food.

**Climate and natural disasters and infrastructure critical**
**to the Caribbean part of the Kingdom [64]**

Climate and natural disasters can have a far-reaching impact on our national security. Especially if important processes
such as food and energy supplies are harmed or even break down completely. For the Caribbean part of the Kingdom,
failures of such crucial processes can be especially significant given its geographic location. The islands rely on maritime
and air transport for supplies of food and goods. If ports or airports become inaccessible or unusable, the consequences
will be drastic because alternative infrastructures are often lacking. On Saba, for example, there is only one power plant,
one port and one service station, and the telecom cables come ashore on one side of the island.

The Kingdom is increasingly vulnerable to climate and natural disasters such as extreme weather conditions such as heat/
drought and hurricanes. Hurricane Irma illustrates how a natural disaster can have a major impact on the Caribbean part
of the Kingdom, especially if multiple infrastructures are affected simultaneously. Sint Maarten, for example, was hit by
this severe hurricane in September 2017, which led to extensive damage to buildings and infrastructure. The destruction
of the airport and the maritime port cut off the supply and transport routes for people, food and materials, both in Sint
Maarten and the surrounding islands that depend on them, including Saba and St. Eustatius. Due to the difficult supply
of relief goods, stocks of water and medicine were largely exhausted after only a week. There was also virtually no
communication possible within the region after the hurricane, due to the damage caused to telecom masts and the
failure of power plants on Sint Maarten. Walkie-talkies, radios, the internet, mobile phones, landlines and satellite
phones were not working or barely working. This made it more difficult to request assistance of the other islands.

The likelihood of a tropical storm or major hurricane such as Hurricane Irma is lower for Bonaire, Aruba and Curaçao. Yet
also here, climate change has an impact on national security interests, for example, due to the risk of flooding. The water
level is steadily rising in the Caribbean Sea. By 2050, the lower parts of Bonaire are even at risk of permanent flooding due
to sea level rise. Moreover, Bonaire’s critical infrastructure is also vulnerable because it is located mainly in the south and
on the coast.


-----

**Cyber threats against the Kingdom[65]**

Digital systems are becoming increasingly intertwined in our society, and it is no longer possible to make a clear
distinction between the physical or digital domain. Cyber threats can therefore have a variety of consequences on our
social and political stability and physical and economic security. For example, physical security may be at stake if a
cyber attack on a hospital prevents doctors from providing accurate care to patients. Furthermore, a cyber attack on a
bank, for example, could have direct financial consequences; and social and political stability could be at stake if a
cyber attack at a power plant leads to prolonged power outages and results in societal unrest.

In June 2017, the world was alarmed by the rapid spread of the malware NotPetya that appeared to hold files hostage.
In effect, the files proved impossible to recover, making the malware devastating. The attack targeted users of a
software package used in Ukraine, but its effects were felt far beyond Ukraine. In the Netherlands, Maersk’s facility at
the Port of Rotterdam was affected, resulting in financial losses of 200 to 300 million dollars.

The Netherlands faced a vulnerability in connection with Log4J in December 2021. This is a frequently used software
module in ICT systems and is widely in use by large and small organisations at home and abroad. Every system using
Log4j appeared to be vulnerable: a malicious actor could execute a random code remotely. As Log4j is used in a large
number of systems all over the world, this vulnerability caused a great deal of concern. Ultimately, it was found that
both state actors and cyber criminals were exploiting this vulnerability in the Netherlands.

Cyber attack incidents also occur in the Caribbean part of the Kingdom, where the consequences can be socially
disruptive. One example of this is the major ransomware attack in 2022 on Sint Maarten’s sole water and electricity
company. The attack caused the company to lose access to its financial data while no recent backup was available. This
posed a threat to the operations and continuity of two vital processes: water and electricity. Another case is the 2019
ransomware attack on a hospital in Aruba. This attack disrupted the hospital’s course of operations and activities,
impacting both services and patients.


technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI) and quantum
computing[63] malicious actors can use high-performance
computing to launch automated attacks that can crack
cryptographic security systems. Technological leadership
and dominance in key technologies will determine the
geopolitical and military balance of power in the future
(see also Intersecting Theme 1).

At the same time, technological developments also offer
opportunities for promoting national security. Technologies
can help strengthen capabilities to make our society more
resilient to threats.[64] And, therefore, also strengthen our
resilience to societal disruption. For example, digitalisation,
data science and AI allow us to identify threats faster, reduce
dependence on human perception, analyse large amounts of
data and improve communication between the parties
involved. This helps ensure an improved intelligence position,
support for decision-making and increased efficiency of
operations. Quantum technology makes encryption stronger,
making data and communications more secure. New
technologies also provide opportunities for the development
of systems and capabilities requiring low labour intensity.
Robotics, for example, can be used to automate repetitive
tasks or in situations where it is dangerous for humans to
operate, as in the case of the dismantling of explosives or
inspection of buildings after an attack. Low labour-intensive
solutions also offer opportunities for addressing increasing
labour market shortages.


-----

##### Part 2
# Strategic course

The first part of the strategy shows how the impact could potentially be greater because of the interconnected­

ness and accumulation of threats. Strengthening national security is primarily the task of the government.

Nevertheless, the creation of a secure and resilient society requires commitment from all: not only from all

branches of government but also citizens, businesses and civil society organisations. This means that all of us

have to prepare ourselves for possible societal disruption so that if a crisis does occur, in any form, both the

government and citizens can act adequately to mitigate its effects.

_The three main objectives of the strategic course for national security are:_

1. A secure Kingdom in a multipolar world

2. A resilient democratic legal order

3. A ready and resilient society


-----

Part 2
## Strategic course

government and citizens can act adequately to mitigate its effects.

The first part of the strategy shows how the impact could potentially be greater because of the interconnected­

ness and accumulation of threats. Strengthening national security is primarily the task of the government.

Nevertheless, the creation of a secure and resilient society requires commitment from all: not only from all

branches of government but also citizens, businesses and civil society organisations. This means that all of us

have to prepare ourselves for possible societal disruption so that if a crisis does occur, in any form, both the


An integrated approach to these threats is more important
than ever. Focused on both the short as well as the long term.
In this second part, we describe the strategic course for
protecting our national security today and in the future,
based on the threats outlined in part 1.

The three main objectives of the strategic course for national
security are:

1. A secure Kingdom in a multipolar world
2. A resilient democratic legal order
3. A ready and resilient society

For each of these main objectives, we briefly describe the
relationship between the various threats to our national
security interests and subsequently outline the lines of action
for increasing our resilience to those threats. For each line of
action, we formulate priorities for the efforts to be made over
the next six years.


-----

###### 1. A secure Kingdom in a multipolar world 


A predictable, prosperous and secure international
environment is in the interest of the Kingdom. The proper
functioning of the international system of rules, standards
and agreements aimed at promoting international peace and
security is, therefore, of great importance. As is the proper
functioning of countries in the immediate vicinity of the
Kingdom and the EU. We strive for a world in which countries
cooperate on the basis of clear rules and universal human
rights and where countries can hold each other accountable
if these rules are broken or not followed.

The changing balance of power in the world,the growing
pressure on democratic societies and the rule-based
multilateral world order imply that we, as the Kingdom, must
adopt a strong position. The Kingdom will need to
strategically adjust or step up its priorities, policy instruments
and partnerships and offer support for the reform plans of
multilateral organisations, based on the principles that are
important to the Kingdom. At the same time, the Kingdom
will also have to make changes, where necessary. Targeted
diplomatic, civil[66], military and development efforts are
needed to get closer to achieving our foreign- and security­
policy objectives. The above policy is also aimed at protecting
the interests of the international legal order, promoting a
state based on the rule of law and fighting against impunity
worldwide.

The Kingdom has a constitutional obligation to promote the
development of the international legal order.[67] Therefore, it is
important to continue exerting influence on the multilateral
system along with like-minded countries.[68] Moreover, to
protect our economy and science or combat hybrid threats,
existing or new coalitions in the areas of economic security
and cybersecurity and technological developments (including
standardisation and countering of disinformation) can
contribute to joint actions, and therefore enhance resilience.
This calls for the following lines of action:


This will deter and help prevent armed conflict. But if conflict
does break out, we and our allies must be able to engage in
combat and sustain this effort, if this is necessary for
protecting our common interests.[74] Effective civil-military
cooperation is essential in this respect, also for the sake of
performing our host nation support task[75], since the
Netherlands is an important transit country for military
personnel and equipment of NATO allies. This is how we
intend to remain a resilient Kingdom, even across borders.

In addition to the necessary reinforcements to defend the
Kingdom and the allied territories, the Kingdom itself must
remain capable of contributing its fair share to military
missions and operations to promote the international rule of
law. In this respect, the strategic competition between the
superpowers will increasingly be an influencing factor that
must be taken into account. In addition, a broader effort is
needed, one that extends beyond the shrinking platform of
like-minded Western countries. Consequently, we also plan
to work more intensively with our less traditional partners.
This investment in new partnerships will have to be
accompanied by a willingness to make compromises sometimes uncomfortable ones - so we can work effectively
to advance national and collective interests, without
compromising on our norms and values.

Priorities for 2023-2029:

A. NATO is the cornerstone of our collective defence. For
this reason, the Netherlands invests systematically in
the NATO alliance and cooperation with NATO allies.[76]
The NATO Defence Planning Process (NDPP) is the main
instrument for identifying the required capabilities and
dividing their development and implementation
among the allies.

B. Within the EU context, work on strengthening the
Common Security and Defence Policy as outlined in the
EU Strategic Compass[77], an effort which will also help
strengthen the NATO Alliance


**Line of Action 1: Invest in international partner­**
**ships and strengthen the armed forces**
In a highly polarised world in which major powers vie for
power and influence and where direct conflict with Russia has
become more conceivable,[69] the Kingdom and EU must be
better able to defend their territories as well as defend and
strengthen our common security interests.[70] The power of
European cooperation lies in jointly tackling and sharing
knowledge about major, international challenges. We must
grow stronger together to protect our freedom, security and
prosperity. The Russian invasion of Ukraine has led Europe to
invest further in its security. European countries are
systematically increasing their defence budgets and applying
existing instruments such as sanctions and the European
Peace Facility more effectively.[71] The military capability of
both NATO and the EU is being strengthened through
investment in necessary military capabilities and intensified
(European) defence cooperation. More joint practices will
help increase readiness and deployability and contribute to
credible deterrence.

The increasing geopolitical competition will require the
Kingdom to make sharper trade-offs in its relations with third
countries based on strategic interests, including security
interests. We want to anticipate future threats to a greater
extent and remain committed to making targeted
improvements in terms of our combat power, readiness,
deployability within and outside our territories and the agility
of our armed forces.[72] We are also investing in European selfreliance, military-industrial sustainment and improvement of
the position of our defence industry [73]


-----

implementing organisations of global multilateral
treaties, including independent verification
mechanisms, such as the International Atomic and
Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).[78]

D. Ensure progress on the control of sensitive
technologies in international export control regimes,
explore opportunities for the mutual recognition of
arms export licences and commit to a further
convergence of the arms export policies.

E. Ensure effective military cooperation at the politicalstrategic, operational and materiel levels, with explicit
attention to interoperability, feasibility and
affordability, where we take a lead on specific topics
such as military mobility[79] and specialisation80.

We will continue with the integration of the GermanDutch army.

F. Continue to improve the readiness, deployability,
agility and combat power of the armed forces[81]by
various means, for example, through investments in
intelligence capabilities, cyber domain capabilities,
special operations forces and integrated air and missile
defence systems, including the reinforcement of
frigates, submarines, fighter aircraft and ground-based
air defence systems.

G. Intensify civil-military cooperation to better face
present and future threats by further pooling together
mutual knowledge and expertise. This cooperation
takes place as part of an integrated approach, with the
combined use of all available instruments (including
the armed forces, diplomacy and development
cooperation.

H. Strengthen cooperation with strategic partners such as
the UN, the Organisation for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), the African Union (AU) and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN); and
enter into new customised (bilateral) partnerships, for
example, in Latin America and the Caribbean, such as
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), Organization of
American States (OAS) and Association of Caribbean
States (ACS)


I. Continue the additional investments in development
cooperation, with a particular focus on the areas in
which the Netherlands is strong. Such investments help
in addressing the root causes of poverty, terrorism,
irregular migration and climate change, and therefore
also contribute towards achieving the UN Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs).[82] In this respect, special
attention is paid to human security[83] in general, and the
meaningful participation of women and girls in
decision-making processes for peace and security in
particular.[84]


**Line of Action 2: Counter hybrid conflict**
The security of the Kingdom is closely intertwined with the
international environment. Due to shifting geopolitical power
dynamics, increased geopolitical rivalry, and technological
developments, our Kingdom and its international partners
are increasingly faced with hybrid threats.

Since hybrid threats are often latent in nature andconsist of
a mix of different activities or instruments, it is necessary to
fight such threats in an integrated manner in multiple fields
ranging from the economy and trade to security and
education. Effective and comprehensive management of
hybrid threats requires cooperation involving the whole of
government and whole of society. We cannot do this alone as
a Kingdom, but must do it together with international
partners, both bilaterally and via alliances.

Priorities for 2023-2029:

A. Strengthen the whole-of-government and whole-ofsociety approach to hybrid threats, including improved
resilience and proportionate response in the
international context. The Nationwide Response
Framework against Threats from State-Sponsored
Actors (Rijksbrede Responskader tegen Statelijke
Dreigingen) will be closely aligned with initiatives in the
EU and NATO context such as the EU Hybrid Toolbox,
the EU Cyber Diplomacy Toolbox or the toolbox
focused on Foreign Information Manipulation and
Interference (FIMI).[85] This requires close cooperation
between the parties involved, including information
sharing, and a strong intelligence position for the
Kingdom’s intelligence and security services. This is
specifically true for the AIVD and MIVD where the aim


-----

is to leverage the operational strength to assertively
identify, investigate and mitigate new and growing
digital threats and attacks, particularly by state actors,
with safeguards for proper and effective oversight and
for digital civil rights.[86]

B. Increase the resilience of the government, public and
private partners, civil society organisations and citizens
by raising awareness about hybrid threats.[87] In this way,
we strengthen information and knowledge sharing
between public and private parties in the area of
economic security. These parties may include high-tech
businesses and knowledge institutions. We will also
invest in raising awareness about unwanted foreign
interference among various target groups such as
communities, policy officers at municipalities, police
officers and local politicians.

C. Strengthen our international partnerships and
coalitions within which we share information, address
hybrid threats and present a joint response, if
necessary.

D. Develop new and effective options for a diplomatic
response to cyber threats.[88]

**Line of Action 3: Increase the resilience of the**
**economy and protect science**
Our economy is open where possible and protected where
necessary.[89] In recent years, the main focus in the economic
domain has been on protecting the Netherlands from existing
threats. It is not only important to mitigate the current
identified threats but also to focus on increasing our
resilience by strengthening various sectors. This also needs to
be done in the European context It is about establishing a


balance where threats against national security are reduced
to a manageable level while maintaining the openness of our
economy as much as possible. We are committed to greater
diversification, coherence and integration between economic
security measures and to ensuring better control of national
and international policy, also for the sake of a stable global
economy and a reliable international trade system. An
important cornerstone for this is a rules-based international
legal order that is appropriate and effective for the Kingdom.

We strive to achieve this same balance with respect to our
science. Unprotected science poses direct risks to our security
interests and strategic position. At the same time, science as
a source of knowledge, innovation and influence is
indispensable for seizing opportunities relating to these
strategic interests. This will help strengthen the Dutch
knowledge economy and other economic sectors and also
help solve other complex challenges and lines of action
within this strategy.

Priorities for 2023-2029:

A. Invest in further identifying and assessing the risks of
strategic dependencies, an overarching picture of
critical commodities and technologies, the possible
policy instruments and the costs involved. This requires
national and international efforts, cooperation and
knowledge sharing.[90]

B. Increase awareness among national, local or regional
authorities, companies and knowledge institutions
regarding the threats posed by state actors to
economic and knowledge security.

C. Continue to mitigate economic threats through control
structures (mergers, acquisitions and investments,
procurement and tendering) and by more broadly
opposing undesirable knowledge and technology
transfer and espionage.

D. Mitigate the risks of strategic dependencies for the
Kingdom. In particular, in the areas of critical raw
materials, fossil and other forms of energy, medical
products knowledge technology and food security


Coordination at the European level is necessary
for this.[91]

E. Focus on developing technology leadership in key
sectors (including the semiconductor, quantum and
space industries).

F. Strengthen the approach to knowledge security at the
national level: continue the dialogue for, and selfregulation by, knowledge institutions, continue to
develop a national desk and expertise centre for
knowledge security and develop a legal assessment
framework for screening students and researchers
involved in sensitive technologies.

G. Strengthen the approach to knowledge security
internationally: strengthen relations with European and
other allies and maintain our significant (international)
knowledge position under the motto ‘open where
possible, protect where necessary’. A leading role for
the Netherlands contributes to a level playing field for
our knowledge institutions and helps to counter the
misuse of knowledge belonging to friendly countries by
unfriendly state actors. We can do this by, on the one
hand, encouraging (international) scientific
cooperation and, on the other hand, countering
undesirable knowledge transfer and covert influence.
In this way, the Kingdom and the EU can remain at the
forefront of high-tech innovative open economies. This
will require commitment both within the EU and within
bilateral partnerships aimed at reciprocity.

H. Strengthen the substantive contribution that can
potentially be made by knowledge institutions and
scientists to the necessary technological and social
innovations relating to our national security interests,
for example, to the lines of action defined within this
strategy (Science for Policy).

I. Strengthen the participation of the Kingdom in
international and European coalitions, so that
international cooperation for high-tech innovation
remains possible. For this, the Netherlands will also
remain closely aligned with EU initiatives in this area,
such as the Important Projects of Common European
Interests (IPCEIs)


-----

###### 2. A resilient democratic legal order

The Kingdom has an open and free democratic society. Social
and political stability is an important security interest, which
involves a societal climate in which individuals can function
undisturbed and groups of people can live in harmony with
one another. Our open society is characterised by various
freedoms, human rights, a democratic legal order and an
international orientation. This is a great asset that we will
continue to protect.

However, our democratic legal order is not a given. Our
Kingdom is facing major societal challenges. The Kingdom
and its democratic legal order can be affected by a broad
spectrum of activities from state actors or non-state, criminal
actors. Hybrid threats, extremist and terrorist threats,
espionage, unwanted foreign interference and organised
crime are examples of such activities.[92]

In addition, the resilience of a democratic legal order can
be affected by societal tensions and polarisation. Societal
tensions and differences in opinion are inherent to the proper
functioning of the democratic legal order, but radical
undercurrents can potentially have a major effect on the
proper functioning of society at large.[93]

It is important to place the focus on the resilience of our
democratic legal order and open societyby strengthening
democratic institutions, restoring trust between citizens and
government, and working towards reducing the likelihood
and impact of threats.[94] This is how we can maintain a
democratic legal order in which we can live together in
freedom and security. This requires commitment from the
government and citizens in collaboration with all partners
in society, by an approach focused on the lines of action
described below:


J. Develop and strengthen the range of instruments
(policy and legislation) in the area of economic security
for the Caribbean part of the Kingdom. This will lead to
increased awareness, a clearer picture of the threat and
an increased prospect of action.


**Line of Action 4: Increase social stability**
Societal tensions are part and parcel of a free and open
society. However, serious manifestations of tension and
polarisation can, in extreme cases, affect social and political
stability. These manifestations require a broad and coherent
approach on socio-economic aspects,[95] maintaining and
restoring trust in the democratic legal order, social stability,
and addressing societal tensions and unwanted polarisation.
At the same time, a major challenge for the government is to
reduce tensions, both where government action itself
contributes to these tensions as well as where these tensions
arise due to other causes. Restoration of trust between
government and citizens requires systematic self-reflection
within the government and skills in conflict management. For
this, it is essential to improve the quality of policy and
legislation as well as the communication by the government,
both locally and nationally. A visible and concrete
manifestation of the democratic legal order, through open
and approachable governance, says more than a thousand
policy documents.

Priorities for 2023-2029:

A. Strengthen the whole-of-government and whole-ofsociety approach to promote social stability, restore
trust in government and counter societal discontent
and unwanted polarisation. This will be done in
cooperation between national, regional and local
governments, including tailored (local) advice.
For this we are committed to creating an open and


-----

Priorities for 2023-2029:

A. Persist with a broad approach to organised subversive
crime that is sufficiently adaptive such that it remains
stable even if the environment changes. Such an
approach takes into consideration not only the changes
in the modus operandi of criminal groups but also, in
a more broad sense, the prevalent societal and
geopolitical changes. This means that the approach
should be ‘shockproof’ against incidents, whether
violent or otherwise: the risk of setbacks is real, so it
is essential to maintain trust among politicians and
society with the long-term perspective in mind.

B. Intensify national and international cooperation in the
common areas at the intersection of the approach to
organised subversive crime and the national security
approach. This includes increased cooperation to
prevent the use of criminal groups by state actors and
leveraging the foreign security policy to tackle
organised subversive crime internationally.

C. Intensify efforts in the Caribbean part of the Kingdom
to expand the approach against organised subversive
crime, including the development of legal and other
instruments against unwanted investments and the
strengthening of local services within the justice
system.

D. Improve information exchange within the Kingdom.


approachable government, increasing knowledge
about online or offline conspiracy theories and antigovernment sentiments, countering discrimination or
unequal treatment through broad-based prevention
efforts (including through education and in the social
domain), creating an open dialogue between
government and critical groups, and enhancing the
quality of policy and legislation.

B. Focus specifically on protecting the public discourse
from disinformation by preserving the pluriform media
landscape, strengthening citizens’ resilience to
disinformation, and reducing the influence of
disinformation (regardless of content, the disseminator
of the disinformation or the means of dissemination.[96]

C. Offer protection to persons for online and offline
participation in the public debate, with specific
attention to groups that face high risks in this respect
such as journalists. Commit to supporting at-risk
groups, develop effective interventions to combat
online and offline harassment, contribute to
discussions on setting standards for online conduct and
raise awareness.

D. Get a better insight into the various dimensions of
social stability and how they evolve and relate to each
other, by developing insights into society.

E. Get a better idea of the threats against national security
by continuing and broadening standard conceptions
with information about the resilience of the democratic
legal order and analyses of phenomena and
developments (within the applicable legal framework).
Support local identification of threats and deal with the
subversion of the democratic legal order where a
breach of the law/national security is not yet at issue
(for example, recognising and dealing with antidemocratic conspiracy theories, disinformation,
extreme polarisation, etc.).


**Line of Action 5: Fight organised subversive crime**
The impact of organised subversive crime is a serious threat
to our society, especially to the social and political stability of
the Kingdom. Criminals misuse vulnerable structures and
individuals in society and do not shrink from perpetrating
acts of extreme violence. Organised subversive crime is not
an isolated phenomenon but is strongly linked to cyber and
hybrid threats. Therefore, in the Netherlands, tackling
organised subversive crime is one of the major spearheads of
government policy. Efforts are also being made to formulate
an approach to this with the Caribbean part of the Kingdom,
given its location in an important maritime drug corridor
towards North America and Europe. This approach focused
on the Caribbean part of the Kingdom and Latin America
must be continued and developed further. International
cooperation and an international commitment are essential
to reduce the threat of organised subversive crime in the
Kingdom.

The approach to organised subversive crime takes into
consideration not only the changes in the modus operandi of
criminal groups but also, in a broader sense, the prevalent
societal and geopolitical changes. The approach to subversive
drug crime is shaped in cooperation with public and private
partners through the following tasks: prevention (which
includes addressing the recruitment of young people in
organised drug crime and other forms of crime), an
international offensive, tackling logistical hubs, dealing with
criminal financial flows, regional reinforcements and
strengthening the surveillance and protection system.[97]


-----

regulated such that disinformation campaigns can be
countered without unlawfully restricting individual
citizens’ freedom of expression. Also the European
response to disinformation produced or disseminated
by foreign or affiliated actors should be made stronger
and more effective. In the Netherlands, the latter falls
under the scope of the Nationwide Response Frame­
work against State-Sponsored Actors (Rijksbreed
_Responskader tegen statelijke dreigingen).[99]_

F. Widen the opportunities to criminalise espionage in
order to take action against conduct that may harm
national security.[100]

**Line of Action 7: Strengthen digital resilience**
Digital processes are the nerve centre of society and the
economy and require continuous reinforcement for
uninterrupted functioning. Despite earlier efforts to improve
resilience, there is still an imbalance between, on the one
hand, the increasing and rapidly developing threat and, on
the other hand, the build-up of resilience.[101] With the Dutch
Cybersecurity Strategy (Nederlandse Cybersecuritystrategie)[102],
the Netherlands is working to ensure that there is as little
imbalance as possible between the digital threat and digital
resilience today and in future. Specifically for the Caribbean
part of the Kingdom, cybersecurity policies are lagging
behind and need to be further developed. In this part of the
Kingdom, cyber attacks pose a particular threat to critical
infrastructure due to the lack of redundancy, with potentially
large cascading effects.


Cyber incidents do not stop at country borders. That is why
the government is actively utilising the opportunities for
cooperation within and outside the EU. As part of the
cooperation among EU Member States, cross-border digital
threats are addressed and a coordinated response is made to
large-scale cyber incidents and crises both within and outside
the EU. In addition, the Kingdom engages closely with the EU
and third countries in a multilateral context and is committed
to protecting cybersecurity agreements, the responsible use
of AI with legal safeguards to protect citizens from high-risk
applications, and an open, free, secure and interoperable
internet based on respect for human rights and democratic
values.

Priorities for 2023-2029:103

A. Increase the digital resilience and preparedness of
government, business and civil society organisations
by focusing on deliberate risk control and detection,
recovery and response capabilities.

B. Continue commitment within a multilateral context
with EU and third countries on protecting agreements
on cybersecurity, mitigating the risks of new
technology in development and deployment, the
responsible use of AI, and an open, free, secure and
interoperable internet, based on respect for human
rights and democratic values.

C. Reduce high-risk strategic dependencies in the area
of digital resilience.

D. Work towards a secure and innovative digital economy
with stronger digital open strategic autonomy and
secure products and services. This can be done by
investing in a strong cybersecurity knowledge and
innovation chain.

E. Counter digital threats from states and criminals,
including through attribution and response to attacks
by states in cooperation with partners, especially
within the NATO and EU context, and through more
effective cooperation in investigating and prosecuting
cyber criminals


**Line of Action 6: Counter unwanted foreign**
**interference and espionage**
Unwanted foreign interference by state actors poses a serious
threat to the Kingdom and its allies, which can lead to the
disruption of our society. To effectively deal with unwanted
foreign interference, we are committed to strengthening the
intelligence and information position of the Kingdom’s
intelligence and security services, intensifying the exchange
of information, opposing espionage and disinformation,
strengthening the approach towards increasing the resilience
of vulnerable groups, entering into diplomatic dialogue with
state actors that are committing unwanted foreign inter­
ference, and taking criminal action in the event of criminal
offences.

Priorities for 2023-2029:

A. Continue to develop the three-track approach
consisting of a resilience track, a diplomatic track and
a criminal/administrative track.

B. Gain better insight into and anticipate the threat of
unwanted foreign interference.

C. Increase awareness of this threat among target groups
and targets, specifically in connection with China,
Turkey, Morocco, Iran and Russia.[98]

D. Reduce the influence of disinformation by focusing on
developing expertise in communication in case of
disinformation relating to crisis communication and
national security.

E. International commitment by the Kingdom to
internationally shared standards for dealing with
disinformation where online platforms should be


-----

Priorities for 2023-2029:

A. For the Netherlands: to tackle violent extremism and
terrorism, the approach towards potentially violent
extremist loners, fighting terrorism and violent
extremism online, and ensuring a safe reintegration
process following detention are important.[105] In this
respect, the further development and safeguarding of
the information exchange between international
partners, healthcare partners and partners in the
security domain is essential (within the existing legal
frameworks). In this way, signs of radicalisation or
threat can be identified and shared timely to allow for
early intervention. The exchange of information and
best practices among international partners will be
continued.

B. Respond to the significant role played by social media
and internet forums in the spread of extremist
sentiments and ideas online. A challenge for the
coming years will be how we deal with the internet,
the limits of freedom of expression, and the level of
support for enforcement when certain boundaries are
crossed. In addition, we will strengthen legal frame­
works for information collection and sharing.
Additional agreements will also be made about how
to ensure that this information reaches the right people
so that it can help partners to continuously gain and
maintain insight into the nature and extent of the
threat.

C. Commit to strengthening society’s resilience and
power of resistance to reduce the appeal of extremist
and terrorist messages.

D. Keep track of the international terrorist threat, which
includes maintaining oversight of convicted terrorists
following detention, through international cooperation
at multilateral and bilateral levels. A terrorist threat
elsewhere may also affect the Kingdom. In the coming
years, this will also be an area of focus within existing
multilateral forums such as the EU, UN, Anti-ISIS
Coalition, NATO, the Global Counterterrorism Forum,
and the cooperation within the Caribbean region


F. Boost the cybersecurity job market and focus on
educating and developing the digital resilience of
citizens.

G. Limit the Kingdom’s attack surface for cyber threats
by making conscious choices in digitalising and
connecting processes.

H. Develop a cybersecurity policy for the Caribbean part
of the Kingdom. Legislation and policy frameworks are
needed to promote cybersecurity and counter cyber­
crime, which includes enhanced knowledge exchange,
cooperation and technical assistance between the
Netherlands and the Caribbean part of the Kingdom.
In addition, more effort is needed to increase cyber
awareness, implement cybersecurity policies and boost
technical expertise among citizens, government and
companies.

**Line of Action 8: Prevent and counter terrorism**
**and extremism**
Sustained commitment is needed to prevent and counter
terrorism and extremism in the Kingdom and beyond.
Jihadist and right-wing terrorist threats remain major
concerns. Both these forms of terrorism and extremism are
expected to pose threats for us in the coming years. At the
same time, the entire extremist domain is in flux. Particularly
notable is the rise of extremists who have turned against the
government and other institutions out of a fundamental
mistrust, anger and sense of injustice. The threat landscape is
diffuse and variable. These developments are also influenced
by events abroad.[104]


E. Invest in bilateral and multilateral cooperation and
address the root causes of terrorism to combat
terrorism and the threat posed toward the Kingdom
and the West.

F. Strengthen local capabilities in regions that are
strategic to the Kingdom to prevent and combat
terrorism at its source and eliminate root causes.
In the coming years, we will do this by continuing to
seek cooperation with international partners and local
authorities in partner regions and especially in fragile
states.

G. For the Netherlands: develop a broad-based strategy
with respect to all forms of extremism, both nonviolent and violent, with an additional focus on finding
out more about the instigators of extremism and how
to deal with them.

H. For the Caribbean Countries: start strengthening the
approach to terrorism and extremism, by also paying
additional attention to the formulation of a strategy
and the process of cooperation and coordination
required for this among the Caribbean Countries.
Efforts are needed to raise awareness about various
forms of terrorism and extremism and make soft
targets and critical infrastructure more resilient to
attacks.


-----

###### 3. A prepared and resilient society 

Threats to our national security are unpredictable and can
never be completely prevented. This is because absolute
security does not exist. What is important is to mitigate the
impact of threats as far as possible to prevent crises.
Preventive, adaptive and responsive policies - both
internationally and nationally - are needed to help society
adapt to the threat, even when there are multiple (latent)
crises occurring simultaneously that reinforce each other. This
inevitably calls for difficult choices and prioritisation of
efforts.

All of us together - the government, public and private
partners, civil society organisations, and citizens - are
responsible for protecting our security. Proper
communication about risks contributes to the enhancement
of a prepared and resilient society. This starts with being
open about the current risks as well as being clear about the
possible temporary or lasting impact of short and long-term
crises on the way of life we are used to. By communicating,
we make clear what the government is doing to prepare for
threats and crises ánd how citizens and businesses can
prepare themselves. After all, we may need to make changes
in our way of life to reduce the likelihood and impact of the
threat. The response to climate change and pandemics is an
important example of this. By linking the communication to
specific circumstances and providing a concrete prospect of
action, we can assist organisations and citizens in taking
action and increasing their resilience. A reliable government
and expert organisations are an important prerequisite for
this.

A prepared and resilient society requires not only certain
efforts by the government but by all parts of society.[106]
For this, we focus on the following lines of action:


Priorities for 2023-2029:

A. Achieve climate mitigation goals and reduce our
international footprint.

B. Increase the urgency of the implementation of the
existing national and international climate plans and
agreements, including strengthened cooperation
between public and private sectors.

C. Ensure that the Netherlands is fully circular by 2050.[108]
By dealing as efficiently as possible with the available
(critical) raw materials, we can increase the security of
supply, and at the same time, reduce the negative
impact of the extraction and processing of critical raw
materials on humans and the environment. We will do
this by focusing on four key circular strategies:
reduction of raw material use, raw material
substitution, product life extension and high-value
processing. In the EU context, the Netherlands is
pushing for the broad adoption of circular strategies,
especially in the context of the Critical Raw Materials
Act which is expected to be published in early March.

D. Ensure security of supply for critical materials needed
for the energy and digital transitions.[109] by taking
actions within and outside the EU.

E. In the area of spatial planning, we explicitly take into
account the risks to national security due to climate and
natural disasters. This is done especially in cases
involving cascading effects on critical infrastructure
that must continue functioning even in times of crisis.[110]
For the Netherlands, this is incorporated in the National
Environmental Strategy (Nationale Omgevingsvisie, NOVI),
which is to be reviewed.

F. Strengthen the approach to wildfire prevention and
suppression for the Netherlands, partly through the
administrative agreement on wildfires, sharing best
practices, increasing the deployable resources and a
national wildfire crisis plan.

G. Define a long-term approach to the effects of climate
change for the Caribbean part of the Kingdom The key


**Line of Action 9: Intensify climate mitigation**
**and adaptation**
The implementation of a national climate policy107, focused

on climate mitigation and adaptation, is currently well
underway. This calls for undiminished attention and there is
a growing urgency to reduce the threat to national security.
The Kingdom’s adaptive capacity against climate and natural
disasters must be increased, among other things through
climate-resilient spatial planning that will take into account
extreme weather, flood risks, the spread of infectious
diseases and wildfires. Ensuring more redundancy, in case of
the failure of critical infrastructure, is also important. This
approach requires proper coordination between ministries
and intensive cooperation between private and public
parties, next to close international and multilateral
cooperation.

In addition, preventing climate change is, and will remain, a
high priority. This is to be achieved through a secure energy
transition to renewable and clean energy, the agricultural
transition to reduced emissions, clean transportation
(including in the maritime and aviation sectors) and the
transition to a circular economy. As part of the EU, the
Netherlands is working ambitiously to arrive at international
agreements on this matter and is requesting other countries
to do the same, because it is important to limit the adapta­
tion task as far as possible. The Caribbean Countries are also
implementing international standards and agreements on
the climate to the maximum extent possible. Continued
attention and increased commitment in this respect is
necessary


-----

objectives are switching to solar and wind energy,
climate-proof spatial planning and increasing
redundancy in case of the failure of critical systems.

H. The Kingdom incorporates the impact of climate
change and climate transitions in the security policy
and takes climate risks and resilience into account in
the strategic context analyses, conflict analyses and
programmes.[111]

I. In specific sectors such as water, land use and food
security, Dutch knowledge regarding climate change
assists in the preparation of better climate vulnerability
and risk assessments. We strive to convince
multilateral and international partners and partner
organisations of the importance of following a conflictsensitive approach in their climate efforts.

J. Contribute to greater water security and water safety in
fragile states.[112] This will reduce the impact of threats
due to climate change and prevent other threats (such
as food shortages, geopolitical tensions, conflict and
migration).


software or hardware. In this way, the Kingdom will be both
digitally and physically resilient to threats, and be able to
mitigate these threats and recover resiliently from setbacks.

Priorities for 2023-2029:

A. An integrated and more committed approach to
protecting the continuity, integrity and confidentiality of
critical infrastructure. Strengthening the physical, digital
and economic resilience of critical infrastructure requires
guidance from the government, a clear division of
responsibilities and clear frameworks. To this end, the
duty of care of critical providers will be laid down by law.
In addition, the policy instruments, support for
providers, information exchange and level of supervision
will be expanded. As part of this, existing networks and
structures will continue to be developed as far as
possible, and the support and communication via
government offices will be streamlined.

B. Broaden the scope of critical infrastructure, with a focus
on the significance of a process or service for the
unimpeded functioning of the economy and society,
with the aim of protecting our national security.

C. Identify and subsequently reduce high-risk
dependencies of critical infrastructure and make sure to
include dependencies in production chains, services and
sectors as an integral part of risk assessments. The
mitigation of such risks is mandatory under certain
conditions insofar as these risks could affect the
continuity, integrity and confidentiality of a process or
service. The government offers intensive and integrated
support for critical providers for this, and together with
the sector, looks for possible solutions at the European
level or otherwise. This requires international
commitment.

D. Improve preparedness for widespread and/or prolonged
disruption. This is done by expanding emergency and
strategic (civilian and military) supplies, preparing and
practising crisis plans, and investing in the cooperation
and mutual support between the government (including


**Line of Action 10: Ensure better protection for**
**critical infrastructure**
The territorial security of the Netherlands and the unimpeded
functioning of the economy depend heavily on the integrity
of critical infrastructure and the continuity of vital
processes.[113] This requires infrastructure that is more resistant
to failure, disruption and manipulation, both intended or
unintended. High-risk dependencies will also need to be
greatly reduced. Critical infrastructure must continue
functioning during incidents and crises. That is primarily the
responsibility of businesses and organisations, with support
from the government. This responsibility is being laid down in
legislation for a growing number of sectors. The government
actively works towards ensuring the resilience of sectors and
services by gaining a better understanding of this aspect and
by taking measures - together with critical providers - to
increase this resilience when necessary.

To reduce high-risk strategic dependencies, the government
is working to strengthen the EU’s open strategic autonomy
(OSA) policy. More often than before, it will be necessary to
consider whether dependence on specific raw materials,
suppliers, services or specific countries creates an
unacceptable level of risk. In this way, OSA helps reduce the
high-risk dependencies with respect to critical providers.

The threat landscape demands robust critical infrastructure.
Increasing redundancy and reducing the negative impact of
the just-in-time economy is not only a task for the
government but also for public and private partners, civil
society organisations and citizens. If vital systems fail, you
must have backup systems that share as few single points of
failure as possible with production systems such as the same


-----

Priorities for 2023-2029:

A. Strengthen pandemic preparedness by working toward
reinforced public health and infectious disease control
systems, flexible and scalable care and improved
security of supply of medical products based on the
recently adopted Pandemic Preparedness Policy
Agenda and Programme (Beleidsagenda en -programma
_Pandemische paraatheid).[116] This instrument also_
specifically focuses on the ongoing (staffing) shortages
in, and the resilience of, healthcare services during
crises. Another key element is the relationship between
local and regional implementation and national
control, partly because of the separation between the
decentralised and the national crisis management
structures.

B. Intensify the cooperation between hospitals in the
Caribbean part of the Kingdom to better deal with
crises and the distribution of patients.[117]

C. Adopt a cross-sectoral approach to spatial planning
and quality of life, including climate change and
pandemic threats. This not only concerns the division
of the living environment in the Kingdom between
humans, nature and animals (One Health) but also
concerns related aspects such as mobility. Extra
attention must be paid to zoonotic risks, a virus that
passes from animals to humans. The important thing is
that spatial plans must take into consideration
infectious disease risks and the One Health approach.

D. Focus on prevention programmes to promote public
health that can help in reducing the impact of a
pandemic.

E. Commit to providing reliable information and
countering disinformation to prevent and discourage
societal unrest.


**Line of Action 11: Increase level of pandemic**
**preparedness**
The COVID-19 pandemic has taught us that we need to be
better prepared for pandemics. Our vulnerabilities in the
response to pandemics have been exposed. Such as the
set-up of the initial outbreak response, the availability of
specialised care (such as ICU care and artificial respiration
equipment), the separate nursing care options (quarantine)
that might be needed in the event of a new pandemic, as well
as the security of supply and availability of personal
protective equipment and vaccines.

The COVID-19 pandemic showed that a pandemic can also
create tensions within society and that measures or vaccines
can have a polarising effect. Foreign actors may instigate or
add fuel to such discussions. Moreover, there is a link to
hybrid threats, with the spread of disinformation as a
possible tool.[115]

Structural preparedness against infectious diseases and
continued preventive efforts are important. Not just for
another wave of COVID-19 but also, particularly, for another
pandemic that may be completely different in nature. For this,
cooperation in the international arena is indispensable for a
properly integrated approach.


Defence) and critical providers.

E. For the Caribbean Netherlands: identify the processes
on Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba that need to be
better protected to prevent societal disruption, taking
into account the local context. Subsequently, the
appropriate measures to be taken to ensure continuity
must be considered in accordance with the comply or
explain principle.

F. Strengthen the protection of critical infrastructure
against unwanted foreign takeovers, mergers and
investments by bringing newly designated critical
providers under the scope of the Investments,
Mergers and Acquisitions Security Screening Act
(Wet veiligheidstoets investeringen, fusies en overnames) or
other statutory investment review.

G. To properly protect the North Sea infrastructure from
state and non-state threats, the relevant ministries
work on the strategy implementation approach
together with critical partners and under the
coordination of the Ministry of Infrastructure and
Water Management. This also involves international
cooperation with EU Member States and NATO allies.[114]


-----

Priorities for 2023-2029:

A. Introduce and lay down by law a structural, national,
integrated and cyclical working method for preparing
for and the approach (response) to actual and potential
crises up to the post-crisis and recovery phase in the
Kingdom, both in a generic sense as well as for specific
threats and risks.

B. Strengthen the crisis response with regard to threats
emerging from the Nationwide Risk Assessment,
including climate-related threats, the failure of critical
processes, military threats and pandemics. This
requires joint national planning with attention to
specific issues such as the care, shelter and evacuation
of vulnerable groups.

C. Improve the cooperation within the components of the
Kingdom. This includes the improvement of
information-sharing processes, increasing the visibility
of crisis capacity and emergency supplies, making
agreements regarding aid and assistance, and
organising exercises. For the Caribbean part of the
Kingdom, there is an emphatic need - especially in
times of crisis - to pay greater attention to the local
context and autonomy to promote unity and
cooperation.

D. Utilise transnational partnerships in the Benelux, EU,
NATO and the Caribbean region[119] in a systematic
manner. For example, sharing information and
expertise, agreeing on the deployment of firefighting
helicopters and carrying out joint exercises.

E. For the Netherlands: establish multi-year ambitions in
the form of a shared national agenda, and where
necessary, shared national objectives. This is done in
close cooperation based on stronger supervisory roles
laid down by law for the Minister of Justice and Security
(centralised), the line ministers, the boards of the
security regions (decentralised) as well as
municipalities and public and private partners. In
developing these ambitions, there is a focus on civilmilitary cooperation in the event of military threats and
on ongoing developments relating to the


modernisation of (national) emergency legislation and
crisis legislation. The achievement and implementation
of these multi-year ambitions will be supported by a
national support capacity to be created for the central
government and the security regions.

F. For the Netherlands: create a legal basis for, and
establish a single shared nationwide digital information
infrastructure available 24/7 for crisis control
professionals.

G. For the Caribbean Netherlands: strengthen the crisis
control process and fire-fighting services using the
outline policy memorandum as a basis and explain any
decisions that deviate from this. The recommendations
resulting from the review of the Safety (BES Islands) Act
(Veiligheidswet BES) will also be taken into account.[120]

H. Increase the level of preparedness of society via
targeted information campaigns, training for public
administrators, company directors and administrators
of civil society organisations and (large-scale)
exercises.


**Line of Action 12: Strengthen crisis control**
**capabilities and increase preparedness of society**
The Kingdom must be adequately prepared for current and
future crises, which may be complex, unpredictable, largescale and protracted. This calls for the strengthening of crisis
control capabilities (in accordance with the outline policy
memorandum[118]) in cooperation with all partners and
increased preparedness of society. Society should be able to
count on an adequate response to a crisis or impending crisis,
but the resources and capabilities happen to be finite.
Therefore, we increase the level of preparedness of public
and private partners, civil society organisations and citizens,
including through better risk communication.

Together with local and regional governments and critical and
private partners, we are committed to preventing threats and
mitigating risks, by preventing future crises at much as
possible through robust and crisis-resistant policies and
legislation. We also focus on strengthening and making our
crisis control future-proof for when crises do occur.


-----

##### Part 3
# Control over  national security

This strategy sets the course for how we intend to protect our national security over the next six years.

But we need to do more. We also haveto make sure that we can implement this strategic course.

The government cannot do this alone. We need not just an approach involving the entire government

but also one that involves all of society so that we can protect our national security effectively.

-  A government that exercises integrated control over national security

-  An approach involving all of society

-  An approach that is evaluated annually and adjusted where necessary


-----

Part 3
## Control over national security

This strategy sets the course for how we intend to protect our national security over the next six years.

But we need to do more. We also haveto make sure that we can implement this strategic course.

The government cannot do this alone.[121] We need not just an approach involving the entire government

but also one that involves all of society so that we can protect our national security effectively.

###### A government that exercises integrated  control over national security


The strategic course for national security can only be
achieved through a more integrated control of the
implementation process. This is the only way to prevent the
strategic course from bein just paper. Integrated control
means that we focus not only on the individual lines of action
but also on the link between these lines of action and the
underlying priorities. Indeed, a decision on a particular policy
theme may immediately pose a risk or even provide a
solution for another theme. This kind of integrated control is
exercised across all levels of government, with cooperation
between national, regional and local governments. This also
characterizes integrated control.

This does not mean that the overarching strategy replaces the
existing control mechanisms in a specific policy domain, but
we do ensure consistency between the threats and the
approach to these threats. This is done without detracting
from the autonomous responsibility, in the area of policy or
otherwise, of each country in the Kingdom, each ministry and
each minister.


The integrated control over national security is exercised as
follows:

The Netherlands (including Caribbean Netherlands):

-  The central government monitors the progress of the
implementation of the strategy for the European and
Caribbean Netherlands, and this matter is discussed every
six months with the ministries and ministers concerned
within the existing bodies.[122]

-  Any dilemmas regarding strategy implementation as well
as any changes in the threat that call for changes in the
strategic course are discussed by the central government in
the National Security Council (Nationale Veiligheidsraad).[123]

-  The central government (the primarily responsible
ministries) translates the strategy into the underlying
thematic, policy agendas, action and crisis plans.[124] This is
done in cooperation with local and regional governments
that play an important role in the implementation. The
implementation of the integrated strategic course and
any ensuing dilemmas are discussed on an ongoing basis
between the national, regional and local governments.


The Caribbean Countries:

-  For the Caribbean Countries, the control and further
development of the strategy at the national level are
carried out within the context of applicable national
mechanisms.

Entire Kingdom:

-  We also maintain oversight of the strategy implementation
at the Kingdom level by discussing progress and any
problems in implementation annually.[125] This is also
important for maintaining a consistency of approach at
the level of the Kingdom. After all, threats do not stop at
borders.


-----

###### An approach involving all of society

National security cannot be achieved without the
commitment of all: government, public and private partners,
civil society organisations and citizens. Therefore, the
integrated approach to national security also implies a
whole-of-society approach. The central government provides
information on the development of threats and resilience
through which it makes it possible for other public
authorities, civil society organisations, businesses and
citizens to fulfil their responsibilities.

In addition, the network that has emerged during the creation
of this strategy will help ensure the follow-up of the strategic
course over the next six years. Together with all the parties,
we need to consider: what is going well in terms of following
this course, what could be improved, does the course need to
be adjusted? What concrete tools do parties need to
contribute to our national security? For this purpose, a
meeting is organised with the network annually. In addition,
we are working towards creating a broad knowledge network
of professionals from companies, civil society organisations
and public authorities in the field of national security who can
contribute based on their specific area of expertise and role in
society to eliminate the threats to our national security as far
as possible.[126] We also engage in dialogue annually with the
experts involved in creating the strategy. This is how we make
sure we stay on our toes, together. Citizens are kept informed
(through better risk communication) regarding the
uncertainties posed by the threats and what they can do to
prepare themselves.


###### An approach that is evaluated annually and adjusted where necessary

Controlling the course of the strategy also means making a
timely review of whether the course set is still the right one.
Knowledge and information are crucial for strategically
anticipating future developments and making timely
adjustments. The ability to anticipate requires an ongoing
analysis of future developments: geopolitical, militarystrategic, technological, societal and social. For this, we make
increased use of the various research agendas and activities
of the relevant ministries, their academies[127] as well as the
scientific input of knowledge institutes, universities and think
tanks. This is how we strengthen our ability to anticipate
changes in the threat. In addition to the evolution of the
threats, the developments in how society perceives these
threats are also taken into account.[128]

An interim review will be conducted midway through the
term of this strategy (2026). The starting point for this review
is the update of the underlying Nationwide National Security
Risk Assessment (Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse Nationale Veiligheid) by
the National Network of Safety and Security Analysts.
Subsequently, we will examine changes in the level of
resilience to the threats emerging from the updated risk
assessment. If necessary, the strategy will be adjusted. We
will inform the House of Representatives about this as well as
about our progress in the first three years. This will be done
under the coordination of the Ministry of Justice and Security
(NCTV), in cooperation with all the relevant governmental
units of the Kingdom. The broader network of public and
private partners will also be involved in this review, as well as
the experts involved in creating the strategy.


**The Caribbean Netherlands:**
**comply or explain**

In the Caribbean Netherlands, the comply or explain
principle is used as a basis. In addition, further efforts
are invested in bringing public bodies to a more equal
level with one another.

One of the guiding principles for this is the premise that
all European-Dutch policy reinforcements and resulting
legislation will apply in the Caribbean Netherlands
unless there are reasons to the contrary. These reasons
might include arguments such as limited
implementation capacity, insularity, the geographic
distance between the European Netherlands and the
Caribbean Netherlands, smaller scale, climatic
conditions, geographical conditions and coping
capacity.

The important thing is that, while these factors may be
grounds for customisation, they should not detract from
the ultimate goal of achieving a more equal level of
facilities in the Caribbean Netherlands. Therefore, a
certain degree of restraint, and perhaps deferment, is
appropriate here, for which it is essential to consult local
stakeholders properly and take into account the
‘absorptive capacity’ of the Caribbean Netherlands.


-----

##### Finally
# Appendices

Rationale and formulation of the strategy

Glossary

National security interests and impact criteria

Endnotes


-----

### Rationale and formulation  of the strategy 


1. Threat assessment

This strategy is based on the Nationwide Risk Assessment129,

which contains an overview of the threats to the national
security of the Kingdom prepared by the ANV. This
assessment considers the threats to national security in
relation to the likelihood and impact on the six national
security interests of certain specific threat scenarios, with a
planning horizon of approximately five years.

The assessment also demonstrates the interconnections
between the threat themes. In addition, the assessment
makes a qualitative assessment of the latent threats and
developments that may be particularly relevant in the longer
term (10-20 years) as well as the wild card scenarios lying at
the very edge of plausibility.

The ANV has also prepared an additional assessment that
specifically addresses the impact of the war in Ukraine on the
national security of the Netherlands. This assessment
considered three scenarios (continuation of the current
situation, escalation and de-escalation).

These assessments prepared by the ANV, together with
domain-specific analyses, are important input for the
strategy and they help in defining a strategic course for
national security that focuses not only on short-term threats
but also on actual or possible developments in the threat in
the longer term. The objective of this is to prepare the
Kingdom as effectively as possible for threats that may affect
the Kingdom’s national security, both now and in the future.


2. Resilience to the threat

Thereafter, based on the threats to national security emerging
from the Nationwide Risk Assessment, the degree of resilience
to these threats was considered. Via sessions with relevant
policy officers/coordinators, the level of resilience was
examined for all threat themes emerging from the risk
assessment. These sessions focused on any vulnerabilities in
resilience, which are important input for determining the
strategic course. The purpose of the sessions was not to reveal
a 100% complete picture of the extent of resilience or the gaps
therein but to expose the most pressing blank spots in terms of
the resilience to threats. These sessions were conducted for
the European Netherlands (involvement of the central
government and security regions), the Caribbean Netherlands
and the Caribbean Countries.

3. Determining the course

Based on the national security interests, the threat
assessment (including intersecting themes) and the level of
resilience, the required strategic focus and priorities were
determined. The strategic focus is partly based on existing
policies but also takes a step forward by connecting the
threat themes to one another and aligning the focus
accordingly. This results in an overarching strategic course,
as outlined in the present strategy document.


This strategy reveals the national security interests that need
to be protected, how these interests are currently under
threat and how we can deal with these threats. By considering
the threats in connection with one another and being mindful
of intersecting themes, an integrated strategic course has
been determined.

With three main objectives and 12 underlying lines of action,
the strategy gives direction to what we intend to do in the
area of national security. The threats are seen in correlation
with one another so that they can subsequently be controlled
in an integrated manner. How the strategic course is to be
implemented will be elaborated via domain-specific
strategies, policies and action plans and national crisis plans
for national security, for which this strategy serves as an
overall framework. The implementation of the strategic
course falls under the existing autonomous responsibility,
in the area of policy or otherwise, of each country in the
Kingdom, each ministry and each minister.

The formulation of the strategy can be broadly divided into
three phases:


-----

**Parties involved in the formulation of the strategy**
An inter-ministerial and nationwide project structure was set
up to formulate the strategy. For the Netherlands, all the
ministries involved were represented in this structure, as well
as representatives from the security regions. The Caribbean
Countries and the Caribbean Netherlands were also
represented in the project structure. During the course of the
project, the process and content were coordinated at the level
of the Kingdom (including in the Quadrilateral Judicial
Council), in national bodies (sub-councils and ministerial
councils) and in consultations with the Dutch security regions
(including in the Security Regions Council (Veiligheidsberaad)).

In addition, parties throughout the Kingdom outside of
government, were consulted during the formulation of the
strategy. As part of a focus group, experts (in the area of
science, from the private sector and from local or other levels
of government) were requested to offer their critical insights
regarding the content of the strategy. Stakeholder meetings
with private parties, knowledge institutes and civil society
organisations were held, both in the Netherlands and in the
Caribbean part of the Kingdom, in which the envisioned
strategic course was assessed and useful inputs were
obtained from the stakeholders. Finally, citizens’ reflections
on national security were also taken into consideration in the
strategy formulation, via focus groups and based on existing
measurements such as the Risk and Crisis Barometer
commissioned by the NCTV.


-----

### Glossary

Accelerationism

The far-right ideology in which the creation or acceleration
of chaos is sought to hasten racial warfare and the
replacement of democracy with a white ethnostate.

Crisis management

Coordination and decision-making of an urgent nature
about the entire range of measures, provisions, regulations
and prospects of action initiated by the central government
in cooperation with relevant public and private partners in
situations where national security is or may be at stake or in
other situations which have or may have a major impact on
society.

Critical infrastructure

The processes and services that are so essential that failure
or disruption would cause serious societal disruption and
threaten its national security.

Democracy

A form of state in which power rests with the people. In a
representative democracy, this means that citizens can
exercise their power by electing a people’s representatives
who, in turn, can legitimately make decisions that are
binding on all; and that political differences are
appropriately channelled and there are procedures laid
down for an orderly changeover of power; that political
minorities are respected and have, at all times, the
opportunity to become the political majority; and that
previous decisions can be reviewed, corrected and
improved through the appropriate democratic procedures.
The latter implies there is a limit on democracy: democracy
cannot be used to abolish democracy.


Democratic state under the rule of law

The characteristics of such a state are the acceptance of
fundamental rights (right to equality, freedom and
participation), the separation of powers, a government
subject to the law and an independent legal system. In a
democratic state under the rule of law, citizens enjoy
protection of their fundamental and other rights and
freedoms with respect to fellow citizens as well as the
government. We speak of a democratic state under the rule
of law when power lies with the citizens ánd the
government is bound by law. In a democratic state under
the rule of law, the democratic and rule of law
requirements are interrelated and complementary. This is
because the law, to which the government is bound and
based on which it derives its powers, must be drafted via a
democratic process. In turn, the rule of law ensures that a
democratically legitimised government respects the rights
of minorities and does not degenerate into arbitrariness or
abuse of power.

Democratic legal order

A social order based on law and democracy. The broad
approach to the democratic legal order sees this both as:

1. A political system (democratic state under the rule of
law) within which the relationship between
government and citizens is organised

2. A mode of living together (an open society) in which
relationships between citizens are mutually organised
(horizontal axis)

This makes the protection of the democratic legal order not
only a legal-institutional issue but also a socio-civic issue.


Disinformation

The deliberate, often covert, dissemination of misleading
information with the aim of impairing the public debate,
democratic processes, the open knowledge economy or
national security. This may affect national security.

Energy transition

The transition from the use of fossil fuels, such as gas, oil
and coal, to sustainable energy from renewable/clean
sources.

Organised subversive crime

When groups primarily focused on illegal gain
systematically commit crimes with serious, often
subversive, consequences for society and are able to
conceal these crimes in a relatively effective manner.

Hybrid conflicts

Conflict conducted between states, largely below the legal
level of an open armed conflict, involving the integrated
use of resources and actors, aimed at achieving certain
strategic objectives.

International legal order

System of standards and agreements aimed at promoting
international peace and security. This is inextricably linked
to the promotion of human rights, a rules-based
international financial-economic system and effective
multilateral institutions and regimes.

Climate adaptation

Adapting the spatial environment to ensure that we are
prepared for the risks posed by the changing climate.


-----

Climate mitigation

Preventing further climate change by, among other things,
reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

Societal unrest

Collective behaviour, visible or otherwise, in situations
arising from societal discontent, ranging from peaceful and
small-scale demonstrations to radical, punishable and
large-scale actions.

Societal discontent

A sense of fear, uncertainty, dissatisfaction or
misunderstanding as a result of intangible phenomena
such as globalisation, climate change, migration and
inequality. Societal discontent stems from a sense of
pessimism.

Open strategic autonomy

The ability, as a global player, to safeguard one’s public
interests based on one’s insights and choices and remain
resilient in an interconnected world, in cooperation with
international partners.

Polarisation

The emphasising of contradictions in society, which results
in further alienation between groups and increased
tensions.

State based on the rule of law

A state that wants to be based on and bound by law (rule
of law).

High-risk strategic dependencies

In a world characterised by increasing complexity and
unpredictability, there is a strong and often-increasing
level of mutual international dependence. This also affects
the Netherlands because of the open nature of our society
and economy. This kind of dependence creates risks.


Social cohesion

The involvement of people with one another as part of
community organisations and other social connections,
and within society as a whole.

Social stability

This means that our society is resistant to conflict from
within and without. Social stability is a dynamic
phenomenon: it is about organising sustainable resilience
in society so that it can withstand various adversities. This
social balance requires continuous efforts to maintain
networks that involve all of society: citizens, communities,
organisations, government and society as a whole.

Resilience

The ability to resist threats by reducing the likelihood of
threats occurring, limiting the amount of harm if threats do
occur and allowing for adequate recovery. To this end, we
take measures in different phases: from proactive action
(removing the causes of insecurity) and prevention
(preventing or eliminating threats at an early stage) to
preparation (preparing for a proper response when threats
occur), response (combating the threats that occur) and
recovery (returning to the normal or new normal).

Whole of government

Whole-of-government approach.

Whole of society

Cooperation between all actors involved, including civil
society organisations, businesses and knowledge
institutions.


-----

### National security interests  and impact criteria


**National Security Interests** **Impact Criteria**

_Territorial security_ 1.1 Violation of the integrity of the territory of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
1.2 Violation of the international position of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
1.3 Violation of digital infrastructure integrity
1.4 Violation of the territorial integrity of allied states

_Physical security_ 2.1 Fatalities
2.2 Seriously injured and chronically ill people
2.3 A lack of basic needs (physical suffering)

_Economic security_ 3.1 Costs
3.2 Violation of the vitality of the economy of the Kingdom of the Netherlands

_Ecological security_ 4.1 Long-term violation of the natural environment

_Social and political stability_ 5.1 Disruption of daily life
5.2 Violation of the democratic constitutional system
5.3 Societal impact

_International legal order and_ 6.1 Violation of state sovereignty, peaceful coexistence and peaceful conflict resolution
_stability_ (as codified in the UN charter)
6.2 Violation of the functioning and legitimacy of or adherence to international treaties
and norms on human rights
6.3 Violation of a rule-based international financial-economic system
6.4 Violation of the effectiveness and legitimacy of multilateral institutions and
international regimes
6.5 Instability of states bordering the Kingdom of the Netherlands and in direct vicinity
of the European Union


-----

### Endnotes

1 Article 5 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) lays down
the right to liberty and security: Everyone has the right to liberty and security of
_person. This is also stated in Article 6 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights_
of the European Union: Right to liberty and security. Everyone has the right to
_liberty and security of person._

2 The term ‘national security’ refers to the national security of all the
countries within the Kingdom and the security of the Kingdom as a whole.

3 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Internationale Rechtsorde](https://www.rivm.nl/sites/default/files/2019-10/Internationale%20rechtsorde%202019.pdf)
_[als zesde Nationaal Veiligheidsbelang [international Legal Order as the sixth](https://www.rivm.nl/sites/default/files/2019-10/Internationale%20rechtsorde%202019.pdf)_
National Security Interest], 2019, p. 17. In this respect, it should be noted
that certain parts of our national security fall under the framework of
international agreements in the context of NATO and the EU.

4 [The Netherlands Scientific Council for Government Policy, WRR-rapport nr.](https://www.wrr.nl/publicaties/persberichten/2017/05/10/wrr-rapport-nr.-98-veiligheid-in-een-wereld-van-verbindingen-een-strategische-visie-op-het-defensiebeleid)
_[98: Veiligheid in een wereld van verbindingen: een strategische visie op het defensie­](https://www.wrr.nl/publicaties/persberichten/2017/05/10/wrr-rapport-nr.-98-veiligheid-in-een-wereld-van-verbindingen-een-strategische-visie-op-het-defensiebeleid)_
_[beleid [WRR Report No. 98: Security in a connected world: a strategic vision](https://www.wrr.nl/publicaties/persberichten/2017/05/10/wrr-rapport-nr.-98-veiligheid-in-een-wereld-van-verbindingen-een-strategische-visie-op-het-defensiebeleid)_
on the defence policy], 2017, pp. 177-178.

5 [NCTV, Nationaal Handboek Crisisbeheersing [National Handbook on Crisis](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/12/06/tk-bijlage-2-nationaal-handboek-crisisbeheersing)
Control], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 29517, No. 25.

6 How the strategic course is to be implemented will be elaborated via
domain-specific strategies, policies and action plans and national crisis
plans for national security, for which this strategy serves as an overall
framework.

7 National security is a concept that appears in various European and Dutch
laws and regulations such as the Dutch Constitution and Article 8(2) of the
European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). This concept is used by
various bodies and treaties without there being an unambiguous definition
of the concept, neither at the European nor national level.

8 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022,](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
p. 16. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165. See also the appendix
‘National security interests and impact criteria’.

9 Appendix, National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Verdiepende
_Analyse: De Gevolgen van de Russische oorlog in Oekraïne voor de Nationale_
_Veiligheid van het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden [In-depth Analysis: The_
Consequences of the Russian War in Ukraine for the National Security
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands], 2023.


10 The ANV is a multidisciplinary network of knowledge institutes (National
Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), General Intelligence
and Security Service (AIVD), Military Intelligence and Security Service
(MIVD), the Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research
(TNO), Clingendael Institute, SEO Amsterdam Economics, and the Research
and Documentation Centre (WODC)). The ANV’s objective is to improve
the continuity, the safeguarding of knowledge and the multidisciplinary
approach to national security assessments.

11 These include the Terrorist Threat Assessment for the Netherlands
(Dreigingsbeeld Terrorisme Nederland), Threat Assessment State-sponsored
Actors (Dreigingsbeeld Statelijke Actoren) and the Cyber Security Assessment
Netherlands (Cybersecuritybeeld Nederland), as well as scientific studies on,
for example, the impact of climate change in Bonaire. Where applicable,
these assessments have been referred to in the strategy.

12 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022,](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
p. 59. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

13 [NCTV, Nederlandse Cybersecuritystrategie 2022-2028: Ambities en acties voor](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/10/10/nederlandse-cybersecuritystrategie-2022---2028)
_[een digitaal veilige samenleving [Netherlands Cybersecurity Strategy 2022-](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/10/10/nederlandse-cybersecuritystrategie-2022---2028)_
2028: Ambitions and actions for a digitally secure society], 2022, p. 3.
Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 26643, No. 925.

14 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022,](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
pp. 21-23. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

15 [According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),](https://www.unhcr.org/venezuela-emergency.html)
7.1 million Venezuelans have by now left the country, 80% of whom live in
Latin America, including the Caribbean parts of the Kingdom. These figures
are from January 2023.

16 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

17 The Caribbean part of the Kingdom, with the exception of Sint Maarten,
has no immediately adjacent countries. Based on this context, the
definition also refers to nearby states in the region.

18 [NAVO, NATO 2022 Strategic Concept, 2022, pp.1-2.](https://www.nato.int/strategic-concept/index.html)

19 [AIVD and MIVD, 24/2 De Russische aanval op Oekraïne: een keerpunt in de](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2023/02/20/24-2-de-russische-aanval-op-oekraine---een-keerpunt-in-de-geschiedenis)
_[geschiedenis [24/2 The Russian attack on Ukraine: a turning point in history],](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2023/02/20/24-2-de-russische-aanval-op-oekraine---een-keerpunt-in-de-geschiedenis)_
2023, p. 29. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 36045, nr. 153.


20 Appendix, National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Verdiepende
_Analyse: De Gevolgen van de Russische oorlog in Oekraïne voor de Nationale_
_Veiligheid van het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden [In-depth Analysis: The_
Consequences of the Russian War in Ukraine for the National Security of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands], 2023, pp. 76-77, 90-92; AIVD and MIVD,
_[24/2 De Russische aanval op Oekraïne: een keerpunt in de geschiedenis [24/2 The](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2023/02/20/24-2-de-russische-aanval-op-oekraine---een-keerpunt-in-de-geschiedenis)_
Russian attack on Ukraine: a turning point in history], 2023, pp. 25-29.
Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 36045, nr. 153.

21 Appendix, National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Verdiepende
_Analyse: De Gevolgen van de Russische oorlog in Oekraïne voor de Nationale_
_Veiligheid van het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden [In-depth Analysis: The_
Consequences of the Russian War in Ukraine for the National Security
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands], 2023, pp. 94-96.

22 [AIVD, MIVD and NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Statelijke Actoren 2 [Threat Assessment](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/28/tk-bijlage-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)
State-sponsored Actors 2], 2022, p. 37. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23,
30821, No. 175.

23 Advisory Council on International Affairs (Adviesraad Internationale
_[Vraagstukken, AIV), AIV Briefadvies 36: Urgentie van een nieuwe Nederlandse](https://www.adviesraadinternationalevraagstukken.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/07/14/urgentie-van-een-nieuwe-afrika-strategie)_
_[Afrikastrategie [AIV Letter with Recommendations 36: Urgency of a new](https://www.adviesraadinternationalevraagstukken.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/07/14/urgentie-van-een-nieuwe-afrika-strategie)_
Dutch Strategy on Africa], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 21501-02,
No. 2537.

24 [Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Beleidskader Mondiaal Multilateralisme: Positionering](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/12/23/beleidskader-mondiaal-multilateralisme)
_[van het koninkrijk in een veranderende mutilaterale wereldorde [Policy Framework](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/12/23/beleidskader-mondiaal-multilateralisme)_
for Global Multilateralism: Positioning the Kingdom within a changing
multilateral world order], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 36200-V,
No. 72.

25 [AIVD, MIVD and NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Statelijke Actoren 2 [Threat Assessment](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/28/tk-bijlage-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)
State-sponsored Actors 2], 2022, p. 19. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23,
30821, No. 175.

26 [AIVD, Jaarverslag AIVD 2021 [AIVD Annual Report 2021], 2022, pp. 25-26.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/jaarverslagen/2022/04/28/jaarverslag-aivd-2021)
Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30977, No. 162; National Network of
[Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risico­analyse Nationale Veiligheid -](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-internationale-en-militaire-dreigingen)
_[Themarapportage internationale en militaire dreigingen [Nationwide National](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-internationale-en-militaire-dreigingen)_
Security Risk Assessment - Themed report on international and military
threats], 2022, p. 47. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

27 [AIVD, MIVD and NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Statelijke Actoren 2 [Threat Assessment](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/28/tk-bijlage-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)
State-sponsored Actors 2], 2022, p. 12. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23,
30821, No. 175.


-----

28 Appendix National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Verdiepende
_Analyse: De Gevolgen van de Russische oorlog in Oekraïne voor de Nationale_
_Veiligheid van het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden [In-depth Analysis: The_
Consequences of the Russian War in Ukraine for the National Security of
[the Kingdom of the Netherlands], 2023; AIVD and MIVD, 24/2 De Russische](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2023/02/20/24-2-de-russische-aanval-op-oekraine---een-keerpunt-in-de-geschiedenis)
_[aanval op Oekraïne: een keerpunt in de geschiedenis [24/2 The Russian attack on](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2023/02/20/24-2-de-russische-aanval-op-oekraine---een-keerpunt-in-de-geschiedenis)_
Ukraine: a turning point in history], 2023, Parliamentary Papers II, 2022/23,
[36045, nr. 153.; AIVD, MIVD and NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Statelijke Actoren 2](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/28/tk-bijlage-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)

[Threat Assessment State-sponsored Actors 2], 2022. Parliamentary Papers
II 2022/23, 30821, No. 175.

29 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022,](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
p. 42. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

30 [Ministry of Justice and Security and other ministries, Aanpak statelijke](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/28/tk-aanpak-statelijke-dreigingen-en-aanbieding-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)
_[dreigingen en aanbieding dreigingsbeeld statelijke actoren 2 [Addressing threats](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/28/tk-aanpak-statelijke-dreigingen-en-aanbieding-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)_
from state-sponsored actors and presenting the Threat Assessment Statesponsored Actors 2], 2022, p. 2. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821,
No. 175.

31 [AIVD, MIVD and NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Statelijke Actoren 2 [Threat Assessment](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/28/tk-bijlage-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)
State-sponsored Actors 2], 2022, pp. 14, 26-27, 30. Parliamentary Papers II
2022/23, 30821, No. 175.

32 [AIVD, MIVD and NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Statelijke Actoren 2 [Threat Assessment](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/28/tk-bijlage-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)
State-sponsored Actors 2], 2022, p. 33. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23,
[30821, No. 175; National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-cyberdreigingen)
_[Risicoanalyse Nationale Veiligheid - Themarapportage cyberdreigingen [Nationwide](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-cyberdreigingen)_
National Security Risk Assessment - Themed report on cyber threats], 2022,
p. 57. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165; National Network
[of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse Nationale Veiligheid -](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-ongewenste-inmenging-en-beinvloeding)
_[Themarapportage ongewenste inmenging en beïnvloeding [Nationwide National](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-ongewenste-inmenging-en-beinvloeding)_
Security Risk Assessment - Themed report on unwanted interference and
influence], 2022, p. 13. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

33 [Ministry of Justice and Security and other ministries, Aanpak statelijke](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/28/tk-aanpak-statelijke-dreigingen-en-aanbieding-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)
_[dreigingen en aanbieding dreigingsbeel statelijke actoren 2 [Addressing threats](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/28/tk-aanpak-statelijke-dreigingen-en-aanbieding-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)_
from state-sponsored actors and presenting the Threat Assessment Statesponsored Actors 2], 2022, p. 5. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821,
No. 175.

34 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022,](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
p. 22. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

35 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-klimaat-en-natuurrampen)
_[Nationale Veiligheid - Themarapportage klimaat- en natuurrampen [Nationwide](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-klimaat-en-natuurrampen)_
National Security Risk Assessment - Themed report on climate and natural
disasters], 2022, pp. 29-34, 43, 67 and 73. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23,
30821, No. 165.

36 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022,](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
p. 22. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.


37 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022,](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
p. 53. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

38 [World Economic Forum, The Global Risks Report 2019 14th edition, 2019.](https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Global_Risks_Report_2019.pdf)

39 [Institute for Environmental Studies (IVM), The Impacts of Climate Change](https://assets-us-01.kc-usercontent.com/d8b6f1f5-816c-005b-1dc1-e363dd7ce9a5/0973b67e-3084-4590-9a76-fa123436d113/IVM_R22-06_Synthesis%20Report%202022.pdf)
_[on Bonaire, 2022, p.71.](https://assets-us-01.kc-usercontent.com/d8b6f1f5-816c-005b-1dc1-e363dd7ce9a5/0973b67e-3084-4590-9a76-fa123436d113/IVM_R22-06_Synthesis%20Report%202022.pdf)_

40 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022,](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
p. 65. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

41 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-internationale-en-militaire-dreigingen)
_[Nationale Veiligheid - Themarapportage internationale en militaire dreigingen](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-internationale-en-militaire-dreigingen)_

[Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment - Themed report on
international and military threats], 2022, pp. 13 and 47. Parliamentary
Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165; Clingendael (Netherlands Institute of
[International Relations), Military Capabilities affected by climate change: An](https://www.clingendael.org/sites/default/files/2023-01/Military_capabilities_affected_by_climate_change.pdf)
_[analysis of China, Russia and the United States, 2023; Ministry of Foreign Affairs,](https://www.clingendael.org/sites/default/files/2023-01/Military_capabilities_affected_by_climate_change.pdf)_
_[Nederlandse Polaire Strategie 2021-2025: Beslagen ten ijs [The Netherlands’ Polar](https://open.overheid.nl/documenten/ronl-cd19a1c9-2ddc-4caa-ae89-538cd7e23763/pdf)_
[Strategy 2021-2025: Prepared for Change], 2021; Ministry of Defence, Sterker](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/beleidsnotas/2022/06/01/defensienota-2022-sterker-nederland-veiliger-europa-investeren-in-een-krachtige-navo-en-eu)
_[Nederland, Veiliger Europa, Investeren in een Krachtige NAVO en EU: Defensienota](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/beleidsnotas/2022/06/01/defensienota-2022-sterker-nederland-veiliger-europa-investeren-in-een-krachtige-navo-en-eu)_
_[2022 [Stronger Netherlands, Safer Europe, Investing in a Strong NATO and](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/beleidsnotas/2022/06/01/defensienota-2022-sterker-nederland-veiliger-europa-investeren-in-een-krachtige-navo-en-eu)_
EU: Policy Document on the Armed Forces 2022], 2022. Parliamentary
Papers II 2021-22, 36124, No. 1; United Nations Climate Change Conference
[(UNFCCC), Decisions taken at the Sharm El-Sheikh Climate Change Conference,](https://unfccc.int/cop27)
2022.

42 [AIVD, MIVD and NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Statelijke Actoren 2 [Threat Assessment](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/28/tk-bijlage-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)
State-sponsored Actors 2], 2022, p. 25. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23,
30821, No. 175.

43 Critical raw materials are metals and minerals that are critical to our
economy and for which there is a supply risk. The rapidly rising demand
for critical raw materials is largely due to the energy transition, since these
raw materials are essential for renewable technology. See, for example,
[International Energy Agency (IEA), The Role of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy](https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/ffd2a83b-8c30-4e9d-980a-52b6d9a86fdc/TheRoleofCriticalMineralsinCleanEnergyTransitions.pdf)
_[Transitions, revised 2022.](https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/ffd2a83b-8c30-4e9d-980a-52b6d9a86fdc/TheRoleofCriticalMineralsinCleanEnergyTransitions.pdf)_

44 [Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy, Grondstoffen voor de grote](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/12/09/bijlage-nationale-grondstoffenstrategie)
_[transities [Raw materials for the great transitions], 2022. Parliamentary](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/12/09/bijlage-nationale-grondstoffenstrategie)_
Papers II 2022/23, 32852, No. 224.

45 [See also the report by Voogd, de J. & Cuperus, R. Atlas van afgehaakt](https://www.kennisopenbaarbestuur.nl/documenten/rapporten/2021/12/17/atlas-van-afgehaakt-nederland)
_[Nederland. Over buitenstaanders en gevestigden [Atlas of a disaffected](https://www.kennisopenbaarbestuur.nl/documenten/rapporten/2021/12/17/atlas-van-afgehaakt-nederland)_
Netherlands. About outsiders and insiders.]. Parliamentary Papers II,
2022/23, 36200 VII, No. 17.

46 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022,](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
p. 66. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

47 About half of the Dutch population is dissatisfied with politics. In contrast,
the Dutch continue to be highly satisfied with the democratic functioning
of the country. See The Netherlands Institute for Social Research (Sociaal
_[en Cultureel Planbureau, SCP), Burgerperspectieven Bericht 1 2022 [Citizen](https://www.scp.nl/publicaties/publicaties/2022/09/01/burgerperspectieven-bericht-1-2022)_
[Perspectives Report 1 2022] and Bericht 2 2022 [Citizen Perspectives Report 2](https://www.scp.nl/publicaties/publicaties/2022/12/29/continu-onderzoek-burgerperspectieven---bericht-2-2022)


48 See also the government's response to the report by Voogd, de J. &
[Cuperus, R. Atlas van afgehaakt Nederland. Over buitenstaanders en gevestigden](https://www.kennisopenbaarbestuur.nl/documenten/rapporten/2021/12/17/atlas-van-afgehaakt-nederland)

_[Atlas of a disaffected Netherlands. About outsiders and insiders.]. Parliamentary_
_Papers II, 2022/23, 36200 VII, No. 17._

49 [NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Terrorisme Nederland 57 [Terrorist Threat Assessment for](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/07/dreigingsbeeld-terrorisme-nederland-57)
the Netherlands 57], 2022, p. 43. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 29754,
No. 653.

50 [NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Terrorisme Nederland 57 [Terrorist Threat Assessment](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/07/dreigingsbeeld-terrorisme-nederland-57)
for the Netherlands 57], 2022, p. 4, 33-37. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23,
[29754, No. 653; AIVD, Jaarverslag AIVD 2021 [AIVD Annual Report 2021], 2022,](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/jaarverslagen/2022/04/28/jaarverslag-aivd-2021)
p. 8. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30977, No. 162.

51 [Ministry of Interior and Kingdom Relations, Versterkte Gedragscode tegen](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/29/kamerbrief-over-versterkte-gedragscode-tegen-desinformatie)
_[Desinformatie [Stronger Code of Conduct against Disinformation], 2022.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/29/kamerbrief-over-versterkte-gedragscode-tegen-desinformatie)_
Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 169.

[52 NCTV, Fenomeenanalyse: de verschillende gezichten van de coronaprotesten](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2021/04/14/tk-bijlage-nctv-fenomeenanalyse-coronaprotesten)

[Phenomenon analysis: the different faces of the coronavirus protests],
2021, pp. 8, 11 and 14. Parliamentary Papers II 2020/21, 29754, No. 593;
[National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022,](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
p. 26. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

53 [NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Terrorisme Nederland 57 [Terrorist Threat Assessment](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/07/dreigingsbeeld-terrorisme-nederland-57)
for the Netherlands 57], 2022, p. 3. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 29754,
No. 653.

54 [Ministry of Justice and Security, Aanbiedingsbrief Nationale Contra­terrorisme](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/05/20/tk-aanbiedingsbrief-nationale-contraterrorisme-strategie-2022-2026)
_[Strategie 2022-2026 [Letter of Presentation for the National Counterterrorism](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/05/20/tk-aanbiedingsbrief-nationale-contraterrorisme-strategie-2022-2026)_
Strategy 2022-2026], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2021/22, 29754, No. 641;
[NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Terrorisme Nederland 57 [Terrorist Threat Assessment for](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/07/dreigingsbeeld-terrorisme-nederland-57)
the Netherlands 57], 2022, pp. 3-5, 25-27. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23,
29754, No. 653.

55 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-ongewenste-inmenging-en-beinvloeding)
_[Nationale Veiligheid - Themarapportage ongewenste inmenging en beïnvloeding](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-ongewenste-inmenging-en-beinvloeding)_

[Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment - Themed report on
unwanted interference and influence], 2022, pp. 7-64. Parliamentary Papers
[II 2022-23, 30821, No. 165; Ministry of Justice and Security, Najaarsbrief](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/04/tk-najaarsbrief-georganiseerde-ondermijnende-criminaliteit)
_[Bestrijding georganiseerde criminaliteit [Autumn Letter on Fighting organised](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/04/tk-najaarsbrief-georganiseerde-ondermijnende-criminaliteit)_
crime], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 29911, No. 379; National
[Police, Veiligheid, Vertrouwen en Verbinding: Strategische agenda politie 2021-2025](https://www.politie.nl/informatie/strategische-agenda-politie-2021-2025.html)

[Security, Trust and Connection: Strategic Agenda of the Police 2021-2025],
2021, p. 18.

56 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-ongewenste-inmenging-en-beinvloeding)
_[Nationale Veiligheid - Themarapportage ongewenste inmenging en beïnvloeding](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-ongewenste-inmenging-en-beinvloeding)_
_[demo­cratische rechtsstaat [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-ongewenste-inmenging-en-beinvloeding)_

-  Themed report on unwanted interference and influence], 2022, p. 44.
Parliamentary Papers II 2022-23, 30821, No. 165.

57 Host nation support is a task referring to the support and facilitation of
movements of military equipment and personnel of NATO allies through
the Netherlands. For the purpose of exercises, unit changes or actual
operations. As the host country, the Netherlands assists with transportation
via ports, road, rail or air.


-----

58 [Bijlsma, M, et al. Geo-economische monitor: Strategische afhankelijkheden,](https://open.overheid.nl/documenten/ronl-7e6d5beba0e33fcc8b83e752a1753eebaac9fe84/pdf)
_[economische beïnvloeding, kennispositie en investeringsstromen [Geoeconomic](https://open.overheid.nl/documenten/ronl-7e6d5beba0e33fcc8b83e752a1753eebaac9fe84/pdf)_
monitor: Strategic dependencies, economic influence, knowledge position
and investment flows], 2022.

59 Appendix, National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Verdiepende
_Analyse: De Gevolgen van de Russische oorlog in Oekraïne voor de Nationale_
_Veiligheid van het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden [In-depth Analysis: The_
Consequences of the Russian War in Ukraine for the National Security
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands], 2023, pp. 38-42; National Network
[of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse Nationale Veiligheid](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-economische-dreigingen)

_[- Themarapportage economische dreigingen [Nationwide National Security](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-economische-dreigingen)_
Risk Assessment - Themed report on economic threats], 2022, pp. 31, 57.
Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

[60 National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-caribisch-deel-van-het-koninkrijk-der-nederlanden)
_[Nationale Veiligheid - Themarapportage Caribisch deel van het Koninkrijk](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-caribisch-deel-van-het-koninkrijk-der-nederlanden)_

[Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment - Themed report on the
Caribbean Part of the Kingdom], 2022, pp. 17, 19-24. Parliamentary Papers
[II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165; Institute for Environmental Studies, The Impact of](https://vu.nl/en/about-vu/research-institutes/institute-for-environmental-studies-ivm/more-about/the-impacts-of-climate-change-on-bonaire-2022-present)
_[Climate Change on Bonaire, 2022, p.43.](https://vu.nl/en/about-vu/research-institutes/institute-for-environmental-studies-ivm/more-about/the-impacts-of-climate-change-on-bonaire-2022-present)_

61 [AIVD, MIVD and NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Statelijke Actoren 2 [Threat Assessment](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/28/tk-bijlage-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)
State-sponsored Actors 2], 2022, p. 10. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23,
30821, No. 175.

62 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022,](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
p. 50. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

63 Vulnerable cryptography, as a result of which protocols and sensitive data
are no longer secure, as well as more computing power for malicious actors
to carry out automated attacks.

64 [Vliet van, P.j. & Mennen, M.G., Technologieverkenning Nationale Veiligheid:](https://www.rivm.nl/sites/default/files/2019-10/Technologieverkenning%20Nationale%20Veiligheid%202014.pdf)
_[Een verkenning van kansen en dreigingen van technologische ontwikkelingen voor](https://www.rivm.nl/sites/default/files/2019-10/Technologieverkenning%20Nationale%20Veiligheid%202014.pdf)_
_[de nationale veiligheid [National Security Technology Study: An exploration of](https://www.rivm.nl/sites/default/files/2019-10/Technologieverkenning%20Nationale%20Veiligheid%202014.pdf)_
the opportunities and threats of technological developments for national
security], 2014.

[65 National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-cyberdreigingen)
_[Nationale Veiligheid – Themarapportage cyberdreigingen [Nationwide National](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-cyberdreigingen)_
Security Risk Assessment - Themed report on cyber threats], 2022, pp.
11, 27. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165; National Network
[of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse Nationale Veiligheid](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-caribisch-deel-van-het-koninkrijk-der-nederlanden)
_[– Themarapportage Caribisch deel van het Koninkrijk [Nationwide National](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/themarapportage-rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-caribisch-deel-van-het-koninkrijk-der-nederlanden)_
Security Risk Assessment - Themed report on the Caribbean Part of
the Kingdom], 2022, p. 44. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No.
[165; NCTV, Cybersecuritybeeld Nederland 2022 [Cyber Security Assessment](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/04/cybersecuritybeeld-nederland-2022)
Netherlands 2022], 2022, pp. 37, 43. Parliamentary Papers II 2021/22, 26643,
[No. 891; NCTV, Cybersecuritybeeld Nederland 2018 [Cyber Security Assessment](https://www.nctv.nl/documenten/publicaties/2018/06/13/cybersecuritybeeld-nederland-2018)
Netherlands 2018], 2018, p. 15. Parliamentary Papers II 2017/18, 26643, No.
[540; Ministry of Justice and Security, Kamerbrief Kwetsbaarheid in Apache Log4j](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2021/12/17/tk-kwetsbaarheid-in-apache-log4j)

[Letter to the House of Representatives on Vulnerabilities in Apache Log4j],
[2021. Parliamentary Papers II 2021/22, 26643, No. 814; Maersk, Maersk](https://investor.maersk.com/news-releases/news-release-details/interim-report-q2-2017)
_[Interim Report Q2 2017, 2017.](https://investor.maersk.com/news-releases/news-release-details/interim-report-q2-2017)_

66 C t l t N d l _d_ _bijd_ _i i_ _ti_ [D t h


contribution to missions and operations], consulted in January 2023.

67 Article 90 of the Dutch Constitution states that the government will
promote the development of the international legal order.

68 [Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Beleidskader Mondiaal Multi­lateralisme: Positionering](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/12/23/beleidskader-mondiaal-multilateralisme)
_[van het koninkrijk in een veranderende multi­laterale wereldorde [Global Multi­](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/12/23/beleidskader-mondiaal-multilateralisme)_
lateralism Policy Framework: Positioning of the Kingdom in a changing
multilateral world order], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 36200-V,
No. 72.

69 [AIVD, MIVD and NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Statelijke Actoren 2 [Threat Assessment](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/28/tk-bijlage-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)
State-sponsored Actors 2], 2022, p. 10. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23,
30821, No. 175.

70 [The Kingdom’s commitment is in line with the EU Strategisch Kompas and](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/03/21/finale-versie-eu-strategisch-kompas)
[the NAVO Strategisch Concept.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/07/05/nato-2022-strategic-concept)

71 European Peace Facility (EPF) is an instrument for financing Common
Foreign and Security Policy operations that have military or defence
implications.

72 [Ministry of Defence, Sterker Nederland, Veiliger Europa, Investeren in een Krachtige](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/beleidsnotas/2022/06/01/defensienota-2022-sterker-nederland-veiliger-europa-investeren-in-een-krachtige-navo-en-eu)
_[NAVO en EU: Defensienota 2022 [Stronger Netherlands, Safer Europe.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/beleidsnotas/2022/06/01/defensienota-2022-sterker-nederland-veiliger-europa-investeren-in-een-krachtige-navo-en-eu)_
Investing in a Strong NATO and EU: Policy Document on the Armed Forces
2022], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2021-22, 36124, No. 1.

73 [Ministry of Defence, Defensie Industrie Strategie in een nieuwe geopolitieke](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/02/kamerbrief-defensie-industrie-strategie-en-nieuwe-geopolitieke-context)
_[context [Defence Industry Strategy in a new geopolitical context], 2022.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/02/kamerbrief-defensie-industrie-strategie-en-nieuwe-geopolitieke-context)_
Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 31125, No. 123.

74 The task of the armed forces is not just to deter but also to protect the vital
interests of the Kingdom (Article 97 of the Constitution) and to support
civilian authorities in maintaining order within the Kingdom, by controlling
disasters and managing crisis situations. In the event of extraordinary
circumstances and war, the armed forces will need to be able to act as a last
line of defence.

75 Movement of military equipment and personnel belonging to NATO allies
via the Netherlands for the purpose of exercises, unit changes or actual
operations. As the host country, the Netherlands assists with transportation
via ports, road, rail or air.

76 [NAVO, NATO 2022 Strategic Concept, 2022, p.6.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/07/05/nato-2022-strategic-concept)

77 [Ministry of Defence, Een strategisch kompas voor veiligheid en defensie: voor een](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/03/30/kamerbrief-met-verslag-raad-buitenlandse-zaken-21-maart-2022)
_[Europese Unie die haar burgers, waarden en belangen beschermt en bijdraagt aan de](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/03/30/kamerbrief-met-verslag-raad-buitenlandse-zaken-21-maart-2022)_
_[internationale vrede en veiligheid [A strategic compass for security and defence:](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/03/30/kamerbrief-met-verslag-raad-buitenlandse-zaken-21-maart-2022)_
for a European Union that protects its citizens, values and interests and
contributes to international peace and security], 2022. Parliamentary Papers
II 2021/22, 21501-28, No. 240.

78 [Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Beleidskader Mondiaal Multilateralisme:](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/12/23/beleidskader-mondiaal-multilateralisme)
_[Positionering van het koninkrijk in een veranderende multilaterale wereldorde](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/12/23/beleidskader-mondiaal-multilateralisme)_

[Global Multilateralism Policy Framework: Positioning of the Kingdom in a
changing multilateral world order], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23,
36200-V, No. 72.

79 [Ministry of Defence, Nationaal Plan Militaire Mobiliteit [National Military](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2021/01/22/kamerbrief-met-nationaal-plan-militaire-mobiliteit)
bili l li


80 [Ministry of Defence, Europese Defensiesamenwerking en specialisatie](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/12/22/kamerbrief-europese-defensiesamenwerking-en-specialisatie-en-appreciatie-van-rapport-specialising-in-european-defence-van-instituut-clingendael)
[en appreciatie van rapport ‘Specialising in European defence’ van Instituuut](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/12/22/kamerbrief-europese-defensiesamenwerking-en-specialisatie-en-appreciatie-van-rapport-specialising-in-european-defence-van-instituut-clingendael)
[Clingendael [European Defence Cooperation and Specialisation and](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/12/22/kamerbrief-europese-defensiesamenwerking-en-specialisatie-en-appreciatie-van-rapport-specialising-in-european-defence-van-instituut-clingendael)
assessment of the report ‘Specialising in European defence’ of the
Clingendael Institute], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 33279, No. 36.

81 [Ministry of Defence, Sterker Nederland, Veiliger Europa, Investeren in een Krachtige](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/beleidsnotas/2022/06/01/defensienota-2022-sterker-nederland-veiliger-europa-investeren-in-een-krachtige-navo-en-eu)
_[NAVO en EU: Defensienota 2022 [Stronger Netherlands, Safer Europe.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/beleidsnotas/2022/06/01/defensienota-2022-sterker-nederland-veiliger-europa-investeren-in-een-krachtige-navo-en-eu)_
Investing in a Strong NATO and EU: Policy Document on the Armed Forces
2022], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2021-22, 36124, No. 1.

82 [Ministery of Foreign Affairs, Beleidsnotitie 2022: Doen waar Nederland goed](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/beleidsnotas/2022/06/24/beleidsnotitie-buitenlandse-handel-en-ontwikkelingssamenwerking)
_[in is, strategie voor Buitenlandse Handel & Ontwikkelings­samenwerking [Policy](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/beleidsnotas/2022/06/24/beleidsnotitie-buitenlandse-handel-en-ontwikkelingssamenwerking)_
Document 2022: Doing what the Netherlands does best, Foreign Trade &
Development Cooperation strategy], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2021/22,
36180, No. 1.

83 Human security is based on the principle that peace, security, human rights
and development are linked to one another. See also Dutch Research
Council (Nederlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek), Menselijke
_veiligheid: een oefening in evenwicht [Human security: a balancing exercise],_
2020 and United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security, What is human
_[security? consulted in February 2023 via https://www.un.org/humansecurity/](https://www.un.org/humansecurity/what-is-human-security)_
[what-is-human-security.](https://www.un.org/humansecurity/what-is-human-security)

84 [Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Women, Peace and Security: Nederlands Nationaal](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2020/12/15/vierde-nationaal-actieplan-1325-vrouwen-vrede-en-veiligheid)
_[Actieplan (NAP 1325-IV (2021-2025)), [Women, Peace and Security: Dutch](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2020/12/15/vierde-nationaal-actieplan-1325-vrouwen-vrede-en-veiligheid)_
National Action Plan], 2020. Parliamentary Papers II 2020/21, 26150,
No. 190.

85 [Ministry of Justice and Security and other ministries, Aanpak statelijke](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/28/tk-aanpak-statelijke-dreigingen-en-aanbieding-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)
_[dreigingen en aanbieding dreigingsbeeld statelijke actoren 2 [Addressing threats](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/28/tk-aanpak-statelijke-dreigingen-en-aanbieding-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)_
from state-sponsored actors and presenting the Threat Assessment Statesponsored Actors 2], 2022, p. 8. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821,
No. 175.

86 [Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations, Impact coalitieakkoord](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/02/24/kamerbrief-impact-coalitieakkoord-en-stand-van-zaken-wijziging-wiv-2017)
_[en stand van zaken wijziging Wiv 2017 (2e herdruk) [Impact of the coalition](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/02/24/kamerbrief-impact-coalitieakkoord-en-stand-van-zaken-wijziging-wiv-2017)_
agreement and status of the amendment to the Intelligence and Security
Services Act 2017 (Wiv), (second reprint)], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II
2021/22, 34588, No. 91.

87 As outlined in Article 3 of the North Atlantic Treaty, which underlies the
creation of NATO, the members of NATO should continue to evolve in
response to changing threats. Raising awareness about hybrid threats is
an obvious part of this.

88 [NCTV, Nederlandse Cybersecuritystrategie 2022-2028: Ambities en acties voor](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/10/10/nederlandse-cybersecuritystrategie-2022---2028)
_[een digitaal veilige samenleving [Dutch Cybersecurity Strategy 2022-2028:](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/10/10/nederlandse-cybersecuritystrategie-2022---2028)_
Ambitions and actions for a digitally secure society], 2022, p. 40.
Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 26643, No. 925.

89 [Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Beleidsnotitie 2022: Doen waar Nederland goed](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/beleidsnotas/2022/06/24/beleidsnotitie-buitenlandse-handel-en-ontwikkelingssamenwerking)
_[in is, strategie voor Buitenlandse Handel & Ontwikkelings­samenwerking [Policy](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/beleidsnotas/2022/06/24/beleidsnotitie-buitenlandse-handel-en-ontwikkelingssamenwerking)_
Document 2022: Doing what the Netherlands does best, Foreign Trade &
Development Cooperation strategy], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2021/22,
36180, No. 1.


-----

90 [Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy, Grondstoffen voor de grote](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/12/09/bijlage-nationale-grondstoffenstrategie)
_[transities [Raw materials for the great transitions], 2022. Parliamentary](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/12/09/bijlage-nationale-grondstoffenstrategie)_
Papers II 2022/23, 32852, No. 224. In the field of technology, the National
Technology Strategy (Nationale Technologiestrategie) for the Netherlands will
be published in mid-2023.

91 [Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Kamerbrief Open Strategische Autonomie](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/08/kamerbrief-inzake-open-strategische-autonomie)

[Letter to the House of Representatives on Open Strategic Autonomy],
2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 35982, No. 9.

92 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022,](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
p. 31-40. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

93 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022,](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
[p. 66. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165; NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/07/dreigingsbeeld-terrorisme-nederland-57)
_[Terrorisme Nederland 57 [Terrorist Threat Assessment for the Netherlands 57],](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/07/dreigingsbeeld-terrorisme-nederland-57)_
2022, pp. 33-34. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 29754, No. 653.

94 [Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations, Samenstelling en werk­](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/10/07/kamerbrief-samenstelling-en-werkzaamheden-adviescommissie-versterken-weerbaarheid-democratische-rechtsorde)

_[zaamheden adviescommissie versterken weerbaarheid democratische rechtsorde](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/10/07/kamerbrief-samenstelling-en-werkzaamheden-adviescommissie-versterken-weerbaarheid-democratische-rechtsorde)_

[Composition and activities of the Advisory Committee on strengthening
the resilience of the democratic legal order], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II
2022/23, 29279, No. 753.

95 A continued commitment to safeguarding socio-economic security is
important (see also the Implementation of Plan Approach to Financial
[Concerns, Poverty and Debts ( Implementatieplan Aanpak Geldzorgen, Armoede](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/18/implementatieplan-aanpak-geldzorgen-armoede-en-schulden)
_[en Schulden)). The absence of such a commitment creates a potential](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/18/implementatieplan-aanpak-geldzorgen-armoede-en-schulden)_
breeding ground for various phenomena, such as societal tensions,
polarisation and organised subversive crime, that can threaten social
stability.

96 [Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations, Versterkte Gedragscode tegen](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/29/kamerbrief-over-versterkte-gedragscode-tegen-desinformatie)
_[Desinformatie [Stronger Code of Conduct against Disinformation], 2022.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/29/kamerbrief-over-versterkte-gedragscode-tegen-desinformatie)_
Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 169.

97 [Ministry of Justice and Security, Bestrijding georganiseerde criminaliteit [Fighting](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/04/26/tk-aanpak-georganiseerde-criminaliteit-op-hoofdlijnen)
Organised Crime], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2021/22, 29911, No. 348;
[National Police, Veiligheid, Vertrouwen en Verbinding: Strategische agenda politie](https://www.politie.nl/informatie/strategische-agenda-politie-2021-2025.html)
_[2021-2025 [Security, Trust and Connection: Strategic Agenda of the Police](https://www.politie.nl/informatie/strategische-agenda-politie-2021-2025.html)_
2021-2025], 2021, p. 18.

98 [Ministry of Justice and Security and other ministries, Aanpak statelijke](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/28/tk-aanpak-statelijke-dreigingen-en-aanbieding-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)
_[dreigingen en aanbieding dreigingsbeeld statelijke actoren 2 [Addressing threats](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/28/tk-aanpak-statelijke-dreigingen-en-aanbieding-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)_
from state-sponsored actors and presenting the Threat Assessment Statesponsored Actors 2], 2022, pp. 14-16; Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23,
[30821, No. 175; AIVD, MIVD and NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Statelijke Actoren 2](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/28/tk-bijlage-dreigingsbeeld-statelijke-actoren-2)

[Threat Assessment State-sponsored Actors 2], 2022, p. 20. Parliamentary
Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 175.

99 The EU refers to this as Foreign Information Manipulation or Interference
(FIMI).

[100 Ministry of Justice and Security, Wetsvoorstel Uitbreiding Strafbaarheid](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/12/14/tk-wetsvoorstel-nader-rapport-strafbaarstelling-spionage-indiening-tk)
_[Spionageactiviteiten [Bill to Increase Criminal Liability for Espionage](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/12/14/tk-wetsvoorstel-nader-rapport-strafbaarstelling-spionage-indiening-tk)_
Activities], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 36280, No. 2.


101 [NCTV, Cybersecuritybeeld Nederland 2022 [Cyber Security Assessment](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/04/cybersecuritybeeld-nederland-2022)
Netherlands 2022], 2022, pp. 7-8. Parliamentary Papers II 2021/22, 26643,
No. 891.

[102 NCTV, Nederlandse Cybersecuritystrategie 2022-2028: Ambities en acties voor](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/10/10/nederlandse-cybersecuritystrategie-2022---2028)
_[een digitaal veilige samenleving [Dutch Cybersecurity Strategy 2022-2028:](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/10/10/nederlandse-cybersecuritystrategie-2022---2028)_
Ambitions and actions for a digitally secure society], 2022. Parliamentary
Papers II 2022/23, 26643, No. 925.

[103 NCTV, Nederlandse Cybersecuritystrategie 2022-2028: Ambities en acties voor](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/10/10/nederlandse-cybersecuritystrategie-2022---2028)
_[een digitaal veilige samenleving [Dutch Cybersecurity Strategy 2022-2028:](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/10/10/nederlandse-cybersecuritystrategie-2022---2028)_
Ambitions and actions for a digitally secure society], 2022. Parliamentary
Papers II 2022/23, 26643, No. 925; Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom
[Relations, Werkagenda ‘Waardengedreven Digitaliseren’ [Working Agenda for](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/04/bijlage-1-werkagenda-waardengedreven-digitaliseren)
‘Value-Driven Digitalisation’], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 26643,
[No. 940. The European directives Network and Information Security 2 Directive](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/actueel/nieuws/2022/07/22/nieuwe-europese-richtlijn-moet-veiligheid-verhogen)
[(NIS2) and the Critical Entities Resilience Directive (CER) determine the priority](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/actueel/nieuws/2022/07/22/nieuwe-europese-richtlijn-moet-veiligheid-verhogen)
focus areas.

[104 NCTV, Dreigingsbeeld Terrorisme Nederland 57 [Terrorist Threat Assessment for](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/11/07/dreigingsbeeld-terrorisme-nederland-57)
the Netherlands 57], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 29754, No. 653.

[105 NCTV, Nationale Contraterrorisme Strategie 2022-2026 [The National Counter­](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/05/20/tk-bijlage-nationale-contraterrorisme-strategie-ncts-2022-2026-pdf-publicatie)

terrorism Strategy for 2022-2026], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2021/22,
29754, No. 641.

[106 NCTV, Nationaal Handboek Crisisbeheersing [National Handbook on Crisis](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/12/06/tk-bijlage-2-nationaal-handboek-crisisbeheersing)
Control], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 29517, No. 225.

[107 Climate Act (Klimaatwet), Bulletin of Acts and Decrees 2019, 253; Ministry of](https://zoek.officielebekendmakingen.nl/stb-2019-253.html)
[Economic Affairs and Climate Policy, Klimaatplan 2021-2030 [Climate Plan](http://4/24/klimaatplan-2021-2030)
2021-2030], 2019. Parliamentary Papers II 2019/20, 32813, No. 406; Ministry
[of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy, Ontwerp beleids­programma Klimaat](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/06/02/ontwerp-beleidsprogramma-klimaat)

[Draft Climate Policy Programme], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2021/22,
32813, No. 1049; Ministry of Infrastructure and Water Management,
_[Deltaprogramma 2023 [Delta Programme 2023], 2022. Parliamentary Papers](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/09/20/bijlage-deltaprogramma-2023)_
II 2022/23, 36200-J No. 4; Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment,
_[Aanpassen met ambitie: Nationale klimaatadaptatiestrategie 2016 (NAS) [Adapting](https://klimaatadaptatienederland.nl/overheden/nas/)_
with ambition: National Climate Adaptation Strategy 2016], 2016.
Parliamentary Papers II 2016/17, 31793, No. 162; Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
_[Internationale Klimaatstrategie: van ambitie naar transitie [International Climate](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/10/07/internationale-klimaatstrategie)_
Strategy: from ambition to transition], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II
2022/23, 31793, No. 231; Ministry of Infrastructure and Water Management,
_Hoogwater­beschermings­programma (HWBP) [Flood Protection Programme],_
[may be consulted via www.hwbp.nl.](https://www.hwbp.nl)

108 Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment and Ministry of Economic
[Affairs, Nederland Circulair in 2050 [Circular Netherlands by 2050], 2016.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/onderwerpen/circulaire-economie/nederland-circulair-in-2050)
Parliamentary Papers II 2015/16, 32852, No. 33; Ministry of Infrastructure
[and Water Management, Nationaal Programma Circulaire Economie 2023-2030](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/beleidsnotas/2023/02/03/nationaal-programma-circulaire-economie-2023-2030)
_[(NPCE) [National Programme for the Circular Economy 2023-2030], 2023.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/beleidsnotas/2023/02/03/nationaal-programma-circulaire-economie-2023-2030)_
Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 32852, No. 225.

[109 Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy, Grondstoffen voor de grote](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/12/09/bijlage-nationale-grondstoffenstrategie)
_[transities [Raw materials for the great transitions], 2022. Parliamentary](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/12/09/bijlage-nationale-grondstoffenstrategie)_
Papers II 2022/23, 32852, No. 224.


110 Climate resilience of critical infrastructure ensures that this infrastructure
is able to continue functioning during crisis situations. This is important for
the conduct of NATO military operations and/or for responding to crises.

111 [Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Internationale Klimaatstrategie: van ambitie naar](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/10/07/internationale-klimaatstrategie)
_[transitie [International Climate Strategy: from ambition to transition], 2022.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/10/07/internationale-klimaatstrategie)_
Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 31793, No. 231.

112 [Ministry of Infrastructure and Water Management, Nederlandse Internationale](https://zoek.officielebekendmakingen.nl/kst-32605-217.pdf)
_[Waterambitie [Dutch International Water Ambition], 2019. Parliamentary](https://zoek.officielebekendmakingen.nl/kst-32605-217.pdf)_
[Papers II 2018/19, 32605, No. 217; Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Internationale](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/10/07/internationale-klimaatstrategie)
_[Klimaatstrategie: van ambitie naar transitie [International Climate Strategy:](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/10/07/internationale-klimaatstrategie)_
from ambition to transition], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 31793,
No. 231..

113 Certain processes are so essential to Dutch society that failure or disruption
will cause serious societal disruption and threaten national security. These
processes together constitute the critical infrastructure. Electricity, internet
access, drinking water and payment transactions are some examples of
these critical processes.

114 [Ministry of Infrastructure and Water Management, Kamerbrief Strategie](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2023/02/08/strategie-ter-bescherming-van-noordzee-infrastructuur)
_[ter bescherming van Noordzee-infrastructuur [Letter to the House of](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2023/02/08/strategie-ter-bescherming-van-noordzee-infrastructuur)_
Representatives on the Strategy to protect North Sea infrastructure], 2023.
Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 33450, No. 118.

115 [National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022, p.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
26. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.

116 [Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport, Infectie­ziekten­bestrijding – Beleidsagenda](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/04/14/kamerbrief-over-beleidsagenda-pandemische-paraatheid)
_[pandemische paraatheid [Infectious disease control - Pandemic preparedness](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/04/14/kamerbrief-over-beleidsagenda-pandemische-paraatheid)_
policy agenda], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2021/22, 25295, No. 1836;
[Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport, Infectie­ziektenbestrijding – Beleids­](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/04/kamerbrief-over-beleidsprogramma-pandemische-paraatheid)
_[programma pandemische paraatheid [Infectious disease control - Pandemic](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/11/04/kamerbrief-over-beleidsprogramma-pandemische-paraatheid)_
preparedness policy agenda], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II, 2022/23,
25295, No. 1964.

117 This includes a regional cooperation among health insurers and the
establishment of the Dutch Caribbean Hospital Alliance (DCHA).

118 [Ministry of Justice and Security, Contourennota Versterking Crisisbeheersing en](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/12/06/tk-bijlage-1-contourennota-versterking-crisisbeheersing-en-brandweerzorg)
_[Brandweerzorg [Policy Outline Memorandum on Strengthening Crisis Control and Fire](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/12/06/tk-bijlage-1-contourennota-versterking-crisisbeheersing-en-brandweerzorg)_
_Services], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 29517, No. 225._

119 For example, the Framework Western Hemisphere Allied Cooperation
(FWHAC).

[120 Ministry of Justice and Security, Rapportage over de evaluatie van de](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/04/25/tk-bijlage-1-evaluatie-veiligheidswet-bes-eindrapport)
_[Veiligheidswet BES [Review report of the Safety (BES Islands) Act], 2022.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/04/25/tk-bijlage-1-evaluatie-veiligheidswet-bes-eindrapport)_
Parliamentary Papers II 2021/22, 29517, No. 221; Ministry of Justice and
[Security, Beleidsreactie op de evaluatie van de Veiligheidswet BES [Policy response](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2022/12/19/tk-beleidsreactie-op-de-evaluatie-van-de-veiligheidswet-bes)
to the review of the Safety (BES Islands) Act], 2022. Parliamentary Papers II
2022/23, 29517, No. 228.

121 Here, ‘government’ refers to both the government of the Netherlands and
the governments of the autonomous countries within the Kingdom.


-----

122 This takes place via the continued functioning of the National Security
Strategy Steering Committee (Stuurgroep Rijksbrede Veiligheidsstrategie) in
which all the parties involved are represented and through the sub-council
structure of the Council for Defence and International, National and
Economic Security (Raad Defensie, Internationale, Nationale en Economische
_Veiligheid, RDINEV). The other involved ministries (Ministry of Health,_
Welfare and Sport, Ministry of Infrastructure and Water Management,
Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment and Ministry of Agriculture,
Nature and Food Quality) are also invited to participate in this process.
A part of the process is carried out via the Missions and Operations Steering
Committee (Stuurgroep Missies en Operaties, SMO) and the Security and
Intelligence Council (Raad Veiligheid en Inlichtingen, RVI).

123 If this leads to a need for making adjustments in the strategic course for the
Netherlands, this task is placed on the agenda of the Council for Defence
and International, National and Economic Security, and the other involved
ministries are also invited to participate in this process.

124 This has already been done in some areas, for example, in the case of the
National Counterterrorism Strategy (Nationale Contraterrorisme Strategie) and
the Dutch Cybersecurity Strategy (Nederlandse Cybersecuritystrategie).

125 Existing consultation bodies such as the Quadrilateral Judicial Council
(Justitieel Vierlanden Overleg) and the Council of Ministers of the Kingdom
can be used for this purpose.

126 In this context, efforts are being made by the Dutch Defence Academy
(Nederlandse Defensie Academie) to set up a Masterclass on National Security
(Masterclass Nationale Veiligheid) in cooperation with the academies of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the NCTV and the National Police.

127 These include the academies of the Ministry of Defence, Foreign Affairs
and the NCTV.

128 Examples include Clingendael Institute’s annual Foreign Policy Barometer
(Buitenland Barometer) and the biannual Risk and Crisis Barometer (Risico_en Crisisbarometer) commissioned by the NCTV._

[129 National Network of Safety and Security Analysts, Rijksbrede Risicoanalyse](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)
_[Nationale Veiligheid [Nationwide National Security Risk Assessment], 2022.](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/07/31/rijksbrede-risicoanalyse-nationale-veiligheid-2022)_
Parliamentary Papers II 2022/23, 30821, No. 165.


-----

_The Security Strategy for the Kingdom of the Netherlands is the_
_outcome of broad participation on the part of public, private and civil_
_society organisations from all parts of the Kingdom, coordinated by_
_the National Coordinator for Counterterrorism and Security (NCTV)._

[www.government.nl/securitystrategy](https://www.government.nl/securitystrategy)


-----

