-----

**Illustrations:**
**Defence Audiovisual Service**


## Preface

In these times of financial crisis, the Defence organisation has to work hard to remain
affordable and relevant for the long term. Furthermore, we are going all out to make sure
our armed forces can make a difference and stand out for their quality, versatility and power
of renewal. My philosophy is that whatever we do, we must do it well. That cannot happen
without simplifying structures and processes, without joint planning, preparation and
execution of operations, or without having units and materiel that can be deployed
interoperably.

Yet it is not these developments that necessitate new doctrine. That has been prompted
above all by the rapidly growing complexity of the environment in which operations are
conducted and the developments in the ideas behind the deployment of instruments of
power. It has also become clear that certain topics at joint level require specific doctrine and
no longer need to be discussed in detail in the Netherlands Defence Doctrine (NDD).
This specific doctrine can be found in Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 5, Command and
control, and JDP 2, Intelligence. This generates a more straightforward structure of joint
doctrine publications, in line with those of NATO.


**2** **3**

In this revised NDD, greater emphasis is placed on the use of the comprehensive approach
as a common denominator for certain operational concepts. The context of the environment and the situation in which military personnel have to operate is given more atention.
An understanding of ‘factors and actors’ in an increasingly complex environment is crucial
for the commander, the planner, the military adviser or the diplomat. The context may be
so important in some situations that it could or should prevail over adherence to military
principles. Understanding of the context ensures a
more precise and more widely considered decision.
More than ever before, context has become an
inherent part of doctrine.

This NDD centres on joint, multinational and
interagency operations and describes the services as
part of the bigger picture and along the lines of the
particular domain in which they operate.

**Tom Middendorp**
**General**
**Chief of Defence of the Netherlands**


-----

## Inhoud

### Introduction 7

Background 7
Purpose and importance of the Netherlands Defence Doctrine (NDD) 10
Target groups 12
Definition of military doctrine 12
Position of the NDD 13
Sources of doctrine 15
Structure of the NDD 15

### 1. De nation and international environment 16


### 4. Fighting power 63

4.1 Introduction 63
4.2 The components and their relationship 66
4.3 The mental component 67
4.4 The physical component 69
4.5 The conceptual component 70
4.6 Fighting power in the operational environment 72
4.7 Operating in the maritime domain 75
4.8 Operating in the land domain 78
4.9 Operating in the air domain (Airpower) 80
4.10 Operating in the space domain 83
4.11 Operating in the information domain 95

### 5. Militaire doctrine 91


1.1 Introduction 16 4.10 Operating in the space domain 83
1.2 Actors en factors 19 4.11 Operating in the information domain 95
1.3 Interests 19
1.4 Means of power 20 **5. Militaire doctrine** **91**
1.5 Use of means of power 23 5.1 Introduction 91
1.6 The comprehensive Approach 27 5.2 Levels of military activity 92

**4** 1.7 Trends 28 5.3 Basic principles of military operations 97 **5**

5.4 Joint functions in military operations 102

### 2. Dutch security policy 33 5.5 National accents 106

2.1 Introduction 33 5.6 Coping with expectations 109
2.2 International security policy 35 5.7 Special responsibility 110
2.3 Dutch foreign and security policy 36
2.4 Dutch security policy 40
2.5 National security strategy 41
2.6 Defence policy 41

### 3. The armed forces as a government instrument 44

3.1 Introduction 44
3.2 The international legal framework 47
3.3 The national legal framework 49
3.4 Main tasks 50
3.5 Decision making for deployment 53
3.6 Rules of Engagement 59
3.7 Aansturing tijdens inzet 60


-----

## Inleiding

### Background
The Netherlands Defence Doctrine (NDD) was first published in 2005 as a result of the
growing cooperation between the individual Services, developments in respect of doctrine
within the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) and changes in the Defence organisation. The former Advisory Commission on the Future Role of the Chief of the Defence
Staff underlined the fact that doctrine, particularly joint doctrine, was one of the tools
available to the Chief of Defence to substantiate his role as corporate operator.

Afer more than seven years, the nature of military operations has evolved further. Military
deployment, particularly in Afghanistan and around Somalia, and the experiences gained
from it have shown that operations are more joint[1] in nature than ever before. Ideas about
the essence of the military contribution in upholding the international legal order,
understanding of contributions to conflict management and collaboration in the development of permanent solutions have all progressed further, and it is these developments that
have led to this revision of the Netherlands Defence Doctrine (NDD).

**6** **7**


**Doctrine in a historical context**

Ever since the Age of Enlightenment, there has been a growing belief in Europe that the
nature and manner of warfghting could be fathomed by study and analysis. The end of
the 18[th] and beginning of the 19[th] century saw the start of a wave of military
publications. It was during this period that many (military) authors took the frst step
towards describing ‘laws of war’ and lessons learned from military operations. The
most famous of these were Switzerland’s Jomini and Prussia’s Von Clausewitz. At the
same time, professionalisation and the trend towards mass warfare since the time of
the French Revolution meant that armed forces now needed to set out their future
actions in doctrine. Here, they defned the functions of the Services during a confict
and the way in which (large) formations could achieve their objectives. These
descriptions created unity of opinion and channelled military thinking at the diferent
organisational levels. Military history was regarded as the primary source of this
doctrine writing.

The frst doctrines provided unambiguous guidelines for the planning, execution and
completion of military tasks. Even then there was a certain stratifcation. There were


-----

publications which described operations by ‘large units’ at strategic level, as well as
publications which dealt with the tactical actions of arms and branches, and manuals
for operating at technical level, the modern ‘Tactics, Techniques and Procedures’. The
correlation between the various publications and the level of detail was still limited.

The Netherlands armed forces issued various doctrine publications over the course of
the 20[th] century, relating mainly to land and air operations. In 1925, the Air Arm of the
army issued the ‘Directive for use of Air Forces’, with the emphasis on operations by the
air arm in larger army units, such as what was then the feld army or a division. In 1926,
the army introduced the ‘Manual for combat by large units’ (the Combat manual). The
army doctrine dealt exclusively with the large-scale confict, in which the operations, in
all forms of combat, were on the whole fairly methodical.


principle of forward defence, whereby NATO troops would frst have to delay and halt
the atacker, afer which the original situation would be restored by a large-scale
counteratack, with or without the support of tactical nuclear weapons. The planning
and direction of operations was centralised.

At the end of the 1960s, NATO introduced the fexible response. In theory, this defence
concept was to be non-nuclear. In principle, NATO operations remained defensive in
nature, focusing mainly on the wholesale atrition of the enemy and the execution of a
decisive counteratack. A hallmark of the situation in the 1950s and 1960s was that the
individual Services were largely involved in waging their own war. The concept of joint
operations was still in its infancy, and multinational operations were mainly the domain
of the navy and the air force.


Responsibility for the execution of the internal and external security task in the Dutch In the 1980s, the conventional ascendancy of the Warsaw Pact had increased
East Indies lay with the Royal Netherlands East Indies Army (KNIL) and the Royal signifcantly, and to be able to deal with this successfully, the Americans developed the
Netherlands Navy (RNLN). The KNIL developed its own doctrine, which focused on AirLand Batle doctrine, which was partially adopted by NATO in its follow-on forces

**8** counter-guerrilla warfare in order to fght anti-colonial resistance. The core of the atack (FOFA) concept. With this, the Alliance was counting on its technological **9**

colonial approach consisted of small groups of indigenous troops who were under the superiority, which would also make it possible to atack the enemy in the depth. This
command of a Dutch lieutenant and who, armed with carabines and klewang, hunted method of warfghting required a great deal of planning and coordination between the
insurgents in the jungle. The method of using these mobile units proved successful and various command levels and units.
served as a model for operations by all KNIL infantry. It was laid down in the In 1989, the armed forces were still adapting their doctrines to this new concept when
‘Regulations for the execution of the army’s political police task’ (VPTL in Dutch), but the Iron Curtain was suddenly swept away. In the years that followed, the Warsaw Pact
afer the departure of the Dutch from the East Indies, any knowledge of this faded and the Soviet Union came to an end, and suddenly the NATO allies no longer had an
away. enemy that could be identifed in advance. The fxation on a major confict disappeared

and atention turned once again to other forms of military operation.


In the 1950s, the Dutch armed forces were reinforced to be able to perform a defensive
task under NATO. For the army, this primarily meant the co-defence of the IJssel-Rhine
line, but the allocated defence sector later shifed to German territory. The Dutch
Services also had a NATO-based task in the air and at sea. The navy concentrated on
the protection of convoys (sea lines of communication, SLOC), and the air force focused
on the fght for air superiority and ground-based air defence. It was in this period that
the army developed its own, national (land) doctrine. Because of the way air and naval
operations were embedded internationally, the RNLN and the Royal Netherlands Air
Force (RNLAF) based their operations mainly on NATO doctrine, supplemented with
national tasks and those in Dutch overseas territories.

The 1960s saw the implementation of a number of amendments, partly because of the


In the mid-1990s, the Services produced revised doctrines which were more in keeping
with the new situation. In 1996, the air force’s Airpower Doctrine and the general Army
Doctrine Publication (ADP) ‘Military Doctrine’ were issued; these were the umbrella
documents containing, respectively, the general principles of air and land operations.
Because the spectrum of deployment options had increased signifcantly, the army
doctrine was issued in several parts; subsequent volumes dealt with ‘Combat
operations’, ‘Peace operations’ and ‘National operations’. This new doctrine was based
on the guiding principles of the manoeuvrist approach and mission command. In 2005,
following on from the publication of the frst Netherlands Defence Doctrine, an
operational guidance document on the maritime component of military operations was
issued, namely the Navy Field Manual for Maritime Operations.


-----

### Purpose and importance of the Netherlands Defence Doctrine in collaboration with each other. This not only makes collaboration more straightforward, (NDD) but also ensures beter mutual understanding.
_Unity of opinion. Like other large organisations with a great diversity of work spheres and_
disciplines, armed forces must have the ability to manage complex activities and ensure that _Transparency. The NDD also serves as a reference work for other actors who are in any way_
organisational objectives are realised. Armed forces must also be able to adapt rapidly to involved in military missions. To enable collaboration, a clear definition needs to be given
changing circumstances and to continue to function effectively in chaotic and life- of the principles that form the basis for the deployment of the armed forces and of the way
threatening situations. Military personnel must be able to cope with complex situations in which operations are to be conducted. This will ensure that transparency is achieved for
and to act responsibly in extreme conditions. They have to be able to operate indepen- other actors, and this transparency will benefit anyone who, for whatever reason, wishes to
dently, possibly in isolation from each other and in accordance with the ethical and moral familiarise himself with Dutch military doctrine.
principles to which the Defence organisation adheres, as well as the set operational and
logistic guidelines. For this, unity of opinion within the organisation is essential. _New in this doctrine is a strong emphasis on the use of the comprehensive approach[2] as a_
This unity of opinion is also relevant in situations in which the connection between the common denominator for certain operational concepts[3]. The NDD issued in 2005 spoke
Dutch military contribution and the national interest is not self-evident, particularly in only about ‘integrated operations’. Conflicts are characterised to an ever-increasing extent
operations designed to uphold and promote the international rule of law. The profes- by the actions of irregular groups or elements that are not bound by government or any
sionalism and resolve of individual military personnel and units are supported by placing state authority. Today’s commander needs to be increasingly mindful of a growing and
the Dutch military contribution in the right context. diverse assortment of ‘actors and factors’ and thus of a considerably more complex

**10** At the tactical level, this unity of opinion means that actions are performed in the spirit of operational environment. Parallel to the introduction of the comprehensive approach, **11**

the military organisation in general and of the individual commanders in particular. joint, multinational and interagency[4] operations dominate the foreground more than ever

before. Lastly, specific doctrine has been developed for certain aspects at joint level, such as

_Means of control for the Chief of Defence. Doctrine also paves the way for the planning,_ command and control and intelligence; consequently, these subjects will no longer be
preparation and execution of military operations, making the operations more efficient and discussed in detail in this NDD.
more effective than they would be without unity of opinion. Joint doctrine provides the
Chief of Defence (CHOD) with a means of control, also for the activities of his own staff **Target groups**
directorates. Since 2005, the CHOD has played a key role in managing the Services The NDD is primarily intended for commanders and staffs at the military-strategic,
(operational commands) and the deployments of the Netherlands armed forces. The NDD operational and higher tactical level. It also forms the basis for military education, the
supports the CHOD in guiding the way in which the armed forces are deployed in the military training environment and for the further study of doctrine-related subjects.
context of Dutch security policy. Another target group is thus the military student or trainee. The NDD also forms the starting

point for the Dutch contribution to allied doctrine development and for the further

_National policy context. The NDD places doctrine in a Dutch context. Although NATO doctrine_ development of derived doctrine publications. This target group comprises researchers and
forms the basis for Dutch thinking with regard to the use of the military instrument, this doctrine developers. Finally, in the context of mutual understanding, the NDD is also
doctrine is ultimately the product of a consensus. This means that national emphasis may designed for non-military personnel in the Ministry of Defence and for personnel in other
differ from what is expressed in NATO doctrine. The NDD is the document in which these ministries and non-military organisations.
Dutch accents are highlighted. It provides the common framework that enables joint
deployment of the armed forces. The growing interlacing of operations by units from
different Services and the ever-increasing collaboration with other departments and 2  The comprehensive approach and the instruments or means of power at the government’s disposal are discussed in
(government) organisations mean that unity of opinion about the conduct of military Chapter 1.
operations is essential. The NDD substantiates this and provides guidance for the thinking 3  4 For example, information operations, efects-based approach and network-enabled capabilities.Collaboration and coordination with international and non-governmental organisations are elaborated further in


-----

### Defnition of military doctrine
Military doctrine is the formal expression of military thinking, valid for a particular period
of time. Doctrine is general, descriptive, and not prescriptive in nature. It describes
fundamentals, principles and preconditions for military operations at the various levels of
military action, and is thus the unifying element that guarantees unambiguous definitions
and ensures that the same approach is used by all commanders in the planning and
execution of military operations. This precludes the need for extensive explanations and
discussions at critical moments. Doctrine provides a common frame of reference for actions
and ensures unity of opinion. Yet doctrine is certainly neither dogma nor a set of rules; it
must always be applied with common sense.


##### THE MAIN FUNCTION OF DOCTRINE IS Derived directly from the NDD are the domain- TO ENHANCE THE EFFECTIVENESS OF specific doctrines: Grondslagen Maritieme Optreden ACTION; UNITY OF OPINION IS VITAL (“Fundamentals of Maritime Operations”) (GMO),

_Doctrinepublicatie Landoptreden (“Doctrine Publication for_
_Land Operations”) (DPLO) and Airpower & Space Doctrine (APSD)[7]. These domain-specific_
doctrines (for the maritime, land and air domains) in turn form the basis for derivative
publications within those domains. Even more detail can be found in manuals and
regulations; these publications are ofen mainly prescriptive in nature which means that,
strictly speaking, they do not fall into the category of doctrine.


As well as domain-specific doctrine, there are also doctrines for specific subjects that

##### DOCTRINE IS NEITHER The term ‘doctrine’ does not have the same meaning as the term transcend a particular Service or domain. These are issued in the form of Joint Doctrine DOGMA NOR A SET ‘concept’. Concepts are ideas, developed in response to changes in Publications (JDP), examples of which are JDP-2 ‘Intelligence’ and JDP-5 ‘Command and OF RULES! the security environment or with a focus on new technologies. control’. These are subjects which require defence-wide unity of opinion.

Before concepts can be incorporated into doctrine, they must be
studied, tested, analysed and validated, and ultimately finalised. Only then can they be **Sources of doctrine**

**12** referred to as doctrine. One important source of doctrine is practical experience. The lessons that stem from the **13**

practical application of doctrine, or, as the case arises, from operations for which no

Doctrine is based largely on past experience, but it also contains forward-looking elements. doctrine (yet) exists, may prompt the revision of existing doctrine or the development of a
Doctrine reveals implicitly where shortcomings lie. It can also influence requirements in new one. The armed forces usually operate in a multinational context and in collaboration
terms of the organisation, personnel and equipment of a military force. Its function is not with other government and non-governmental organisations. To ensure the required
to set out a series of specific rules, but to provide guidance for decision making, for the interoperability, the different doctrines must be closely in line with each other. The main
actions of service personnel and for the thinking about the most effective use of military fora in this respect are NATO, the EU and the UN, of which NATO’s doctrine development is
power. the most advanced. It is for this reason that the NDD is based mainly on NATO joint

doctrine, as expressed in the Allied Joint Publications (AJP). The EU has a framework for EU

_Unité de doctrine ensures unity of opinion in a broader sense in joint and multinational_ military conceptual documents. This framework contains a structure of conceptual and
operations in larger groups. This helps to achieve interoperability[5] and thus an anchor point doctrinal documents for the deployment of military means in an EU context; this structure
for seamless collaboration is based on NATO doctrine at all levels.

### Position of the NDD Doctrine is also based on policy documents, as doctrine follows policy. Just as NATO’s AJP
The Netherlands Defence Doctrine cannot exist in isolation. From the point of view of series is based on NATO policy, the NDD too is based on national policy, on ministerial
interoperability, it is closely related to the doctrine of multinational organisations, policy documents[8] and the CHOD’s Military Strategic Vision. In the development of joint
particularly to that of NATO. Apart from that, doctrine also stems from policy documents
and from lessons learned in practice. The NDD is the national umbrella doctrine docu- 5 Interoperability refers to the capacity for procedures and systems from diferent organisations to be coordinated with
ment[6], which means that it forms the basis for all other Dutch doctrine publications. For each other and to work together (see paragraph 4.4.3).
this reason, a national doctrinal structure has been developed, similar to that of NATO, and 6 The term capstone document is used internationally.
this structure ensures a vertical separation in levels and a horizontal separation according to 78  At the time of issue of this NDD, the GMO, DPLO and APSD were still being developed.The most recent policy document is the memorandum entitled ‘Defence afer the credit crunch: a smaller force


-----

and domain-specific doctrine, NATO doctrine is followed as closely as possible (ideally on a
one-for-one basis), given that this doctrine will normally have been ratified by the
Netherlands. Another source of doctrine is scientific research, when fundamental and
structural studies are conducted on the deployment of military power. In the accompanying
scientific debate, theory and practice are brought together, which can impact on principles
of doctrine.[9] Lastly, collaboration with non-military actors (such as international and
non-governmental organisations) might require that military doctrine be more in keeping
with the principles and work methods of those non-military organisations. Efforts will need
to focus increasingly on the exchange of knowledge and on coordination to gain a beter
insight into and understanding of the principles upon which the actions of both types of
organisation are based.



-  Chapter 2 – Dutch security policy describes Dutch security policy in general terms in the
context of international security policy.

- Chapter 3 – The armed forces as a government instrument looks at the role of the military
in government policy and the anchoring in state structures.

- Chapter 4 – Military power describes the contribution made by the armed forces in
realising government policy in the form of military power.

- Chapter 5 - Military doctrine introduces the principles that underlie the deployment of
military power.

Each chapter contains a military historical context. They also contain text boxes, in which
important principles are highlighted.


### Validity of doctrine for the Netherlands armed forces
The way in which the Netherlands armed forces operate is in principle based on national
doctrine. From the point of view of interoperability, national doctrine is primarily based
upon – or brought into line with – ratified NATO doctrine. National doctrine is, therefore,

**14** no longer developed or published if it can be taken one-for-one from NATO doctrine, as the **15**

Netherlands armed forces were involved in its development and have approved it. Afer this
publication, Dutch joint doctrine will only be writen and issued for subjects not covered by
NATO doctrine or in which specific Dutch aspects need to be emphasised, in cases where the
Dutch vision differs from that accepted within NATO or if clarification is needed for the
tactical level. NATO doctrine which is adopted one-for-one as national doctrine (possibly
with a number of specified exceptions or additions) will be given a title and place within the
Netherlands doctrine structure and finalised accordingly by the CHOD.

### Structure of the NDD
The way in which the Netherlands armed forces are deployed cannot be regarded without
the context in which that deployment occurs. The first consideration is the national and
international environment in which the armed forces operate. Next is the armed forces’
product, namely military power. The NDD closes with the principles that guide the
deployment of that military power. The chapter structure of the NDD is, therefore, as
follows:

      - Chapter 1 – The (inter)national environment describes the national and international actors
and factors that exert influence, the means of power at the state’s disposal, the
mechanisms that play a role in dealing with opposing interests and the conflict cycle.

9 Doctrine is seldom a direct result of scientifc studies, but it is ofen the result of an iterative process between
applied science and practice; examples are the efects-based approach the manoeuvrist approach and the


-----

## 1. The national and international environment

### 1.1. Introduction established a bureaucracy for the collection of taxes and the mobilisation of its
The Netherlands does not stand alone in the world, but exerts influence on other states, subjects. While states were to their citizens the protectors of peace and law and order,
international organisations and various actors. In reverse, these states, organisations and they were, with their armies (hired or otherwise), the main threat to other states. The
actors also affect the Netherlands, its citizens and its interests. The armed forces play an state was thus its own raison d’être.
important role in this interaction. To be able to understand military doctrine, it is vital to
first describe the environment in which the Dutch state and its means of power operate. Afer the secession of Belgium (1830), the Netherlands – a unifed state and kingdom
This chapter describes that environment from the point of view of the armed forces. since 1815 – withdrew into the isolation of armed neutrality. The former superpower

plied inconspicuously between the major European powers, most literally between

The historical perspective focuses mainly on states and the relations between them. Great Britain and what was to become Germany. The later’s vast territorial and
Nowadays, however, various non-state actors, such as international organisations, economic expansion from the mid-19[th] century was perceived in the Netherlands as
non-governmental organisations, and terrorist and insurgent groups, play an ever greater posing the greatest threat to the Kingdom’s integrity and its existence as an
role in conflicts and crises. This chapter will therefore look at these actors. It will also independent nation. Our country had by then been reduced to a small, rich trading
discuss Dutch interests and the means of power the Netherlands government has at its nation, still holding considerable economic sway. The Netherlands was exploiting
disposal to secure those interests. Because the use of means of power can escalate, the proftable colonies in the East Indies and in the Caribbean, and it was one of the
concepts of confrontation, conflict, crisis and disaster will be described in theory; the countries in Europe to see, in the mid-19[th ]century, the frst contours of a democratic,
possible causes, manifestations and phases will be discussed in the process. And finally, constitutional state (a liberal, parliamentary democracy).

**16** given that military doctrine is an expression of military thinking over a specific time period, **17**

this chapter will discuss the trends that could affect military operations over the next five to Afer the First World War and the Russian revolution – in efect the beginning of a
ten years. Trends with a longer-term effect will be looked at in other, scientific publications. period of confict between major world ideologies which was to last until the end of the

Cold War - the state gradually began to lose the role of protector. Threats and security
issues were seen less and less as a mater for a few states to deal with, or as maters of

**The national and international environment in a historical perspective** war and peace alone. The idealistic concept of a universal, supranational law that

eroded the sovereignty of individual states was also gaining ground. The same was true

The period from the 17[th] century is regarded as the era of the modern, sovereign of the idea of a supranational structure, frst in the form of the League of Nations, later
(nation) state, characterised by the constantly changing coalitions of states which kept to become the United Nations, for the peaceful resolution of confrontations and armed
each other in a balance of power and corrected any imbalance by waging war. conficts.
International relations revolved around diplomacy, mercantilism and the threat of or Furthermore, the industrial revolution and European imperialism had created a global
actual use of force. The frst political entity on Dutch territory, the Republic of the Seven economy that was transcending national borders to an ever-increasing extent.
United Provinces, was a global superpower in the 17[th] and 18[th] centuries. It was Important social, fnancial and economic processes were slipping out of state control,
constantly embroiled in an armed batle of competition with major rivals, the most while at the same time having a signifcant impact on global security issues of the time
important of which were Spain, Portugal, France and England, both on the continent of and on international stability. This became evident in the 19[th] century, for example in
Europe and on the world’s oceans. In the batle between the major powers, the the global depression of 1847 that became the catalyst for the revolutions of 1848, and
Republic, afer a ‘golden age’ of being a world power, gradually conceded defeat. in the 20[th ]century afer the stock market crash of 1929 and the Great Depression in the

years that followed. Technological advances ultimately resulted in the development of

The phenomenon of the state had grown since the Middle Ages to become the main weapons of mass destruction, frst chemical and biological and then nuclear, the
instrument of war and peace. The authorities promised law and order, and peace and destructive power of the later being such that states were no longer able to protect
security, in exchange for the monopoly of power, money (taxes) and loyalty. The later their people against them.


-----

At the same time, non-state actors had been geting involved in the game of
international relations since as early as the 19th century. Some of these actors placed
threats and security issues, such as human rights violations or manmade damage to the
environment, on the agenda of what was to become known as the ‘international
community’. Other actors were a threat in themselves, acting in the name of a
particular ideology or a (perceived) injustice, such as terrorist organisations. In the
course of the 20[th ]century, there was a growing global awareness of shared security
problems that were more than simply maters of war and peace or colonial politics.


### 1.2. Actors and factors
The international environment is determined by players (actors) and environmental
features (factors). Actors act consciously and afer due consideration, or subconsciously and
more impulsively. Examples of actors are states, (international) organisations, interest
groups, religious institutions, multinationals, influential individuals (warlords, heads of
state and government leaders), leaders of criminal and terrorist organisations, and local
administrators and businessmen. Actors always have specific interests and are led in
thought and deed by how they think their interests will best be served. Not all actors will
explicitly formulate their strategic aims or the way in which their interests are served.


referred to as globalisation, was able to take a frm hold because of the emergence of
mass media such as radio and television, and was to gain momentum afer the end of
the Cold War, partly as a result of the advance of the internet.


In the meantime, however, states continued to be the key players on the world stage groups, religious institutions, multinationals, influential individuals (warlords, heads of
and to be each others’ greatest threats. The Netherlands experienced this from 1940 to state and government leaders), leaders of criminal and terrorist organisations, and local
1945, when it groaned under the occupation by Nazi Germany until it was liberated by a administrators and businessmen. Actors always have specific interests and are led in
coalition of democratic countries led by the United States and Great Britain. Afer the thought and deed by how they think their interests will best be served. Not all actors will
Second World War, the threat came from further to the east, from the Soviet Union. explicitly formulate their strategic aims or the way in which their interests are served.
The danger posed by this communist dictatorship was deemed so great that the
Netherlands gave up its old position of armed neutrality. It joined the Western Factors are environmental features. These could be the availability of energy sources and

**18** coalition, which was made permanent in 1949 as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization raw materials, (changes in) climate and environment, cultural and historical aspects, **19**

(NATO). En passant, the Netherlands lost its colonies during the course of these post- religion, ethnicity and politically driven events, demographic developments, the presence
war years, as did most other European nations. of international media and access to the Internet, and many other factors; coincidence or

pure bad luck might also play a role.


Acting in the name of peace and with the aim of eradicating for ever the prospect of
disastrous, all-out warfare in continental Europe, the states of Western Europe entered
into far-reaching – in some respects even supranational - alliances. This occurred in
respect of vital industrial raw materials (the European Coal and Steel Community), of
nuclear energy (European Atomic Energy Community), of important economic
functions such as trade and agriculture (the European Economic Community), and of
human rights and the safeguarding of the democratic rule of law (the Council of
Europe). In respect of defence, there was the alliance of the Western European Union
(WEU), NATO’s cousin, as it were. Afer the collapse of the Wall in 1989, these
institutions expanded to include many of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe
and efectively became pan-European organisations.

A sign of those times was the warning in 1972 by a group of scientists (the Club of
Rome) of an impending catastrophe on a planetary scale caused by unchecked
population growth and migration, food shortages, environmental pollution, exhaustion
of raw materials and famine. Such topics, along with human rights and (humanitarian)
intervention issues, were becoming an increasing part of the security problem. People


### 1.3. Interests
A state’s interests usually consist of preserving national independence and integrity and
improving the well-being of its population. A state may also have higher ideological goals
and these will give rise to decisions and activities which, also fed by ideological aims, serve
this national interest. The promotion of the international rule of law and the prevention of
human rights violations are examples of such strategic aims. International organisations
such as the UN, the EU and NATO support the common interests of member states and
promote the international rule of law. Membership of these organisations and the
provision of an active contribution are thus in the national interest. Ideological and
humanitarian organisations, interest groups (mainly non-governmental organisations),
private businesses, companies, organisations and individuals with ideological foundations
(private volunteer organisations) have their own interests. These organisations therefore
have their own objectives and they too use means (of power) to exert influence and realise
their objectives.


-----

Actors such as states and organisations ofen express their national and international
interests and objectives in a grand strategy.[10] A state’s grand strategy significantly overlaps its
foreign policy, in which political leaders focus on the implications of national security
policy, in particular how and by what means and methods the policy will be implemented.
The Netherlands does not have a specific grand strategy, but the Constitution contains a
number of grand strategic elements. This will be discussed further in Chapter 2.

### 1.4. Means of power
Actors can use a range of instruments (or means of power) to realise their objectives and
safeguard their interests. These means of power are designed to influence another party and
induce that party to take a course of action that is favoured by the actor. By doing so, the
actor (for example, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, or an international organisation such
as the UN, NATO or the EU) can put its security policy into practice. By employing political,
diplomatic, economic, socio-cultural, humanitarian and military activities, influence will
be exerted or power exercised for the purpose of realising these objectives.


**1.4.2. The economic instrument** provides a range of options to improve a state’s wellbeing
and to support or combat other actors. This means of power includes economic aid on the
one hand, and measures such as embargoes or boycots on the other. In a general sense, the
economic instrument is used by adopting a particular trade policy and implementing fiscal
and monetary policy. Where economic instruments are used against an international actor,
the effect will usually only be felt in the long term. It is even the case in practice that the
desired effects are not always achieved because the economic instrument is not used
consistently, for example in the event of a change of government, or if there are parties who
do not consent to the imposed measures. Secondly, governments of Western democracies
do not have absolute control over the economic instrument, particularly in respect of
multinational corporations, which can easily circumvent local legislation.


as the UN, NATO or the EU) can put its security policy into practice. By employing political, **1.4.3. The military instrument can be used by a government or a coalition of governments**
diplomatic, economic, socio-cultural, humanitarian and military activities, influence will as a means to persuade other actors to take a particular course of action or to refrain from
be exerted or power exercised for the purpose of realising these objectives. one. The use of credible force is key here, the aim being to show all parties that the

government or coalition is willing and able to use force to

**20** Means of power are divided into the following categories:[11 ] _MILITARY ACTION ALONE_ achieve the desired end state. The military instrument thus **21**

     - the diplomatic instrument _CANNOT PROVIDE A_ distinguishes itself sharply from the other instruments with

     - the economic instrument _PERMANENT SOLUTION TO A_ the threat or actual use of force. The idea that the use of the

     - the military instrument _CONFLICT_ military instrument is particularly effective in combination

     - information as an instrument with the other instruments is an important principle in the

comprehensive approach. Not only because no crisis or conflict can be resolved by military

**1.4.1. The diplomatic instrument** is the means most commonly used by a state or an means alone,[12] but also because other instruments are less effective in the resolution of
international organisation to establish and maintain relations with foreign powers and armed conflicts.
other actors on the international stage and to protect its interests and realise its objectives.
Diplomacy is used to try to influence other actors. Diplomatic pressure can also be applied, The use of military power alone cannot bring about a lasting solution to a conflict. Such a
with or without the overt threat of the use of other means of power. International fora are solution always lies in the domain of other means of power. It is important, therefore, that
an important stage upon which actors use their diplomatic might. A state or international military planners and commanders consider a security issue in its entirety, making it
actor wields its diplomatic power through political leaders and ambassadors. Other means possible to estimate the effect of any integrated use of the military instrument. This does
of diplomatic power include the use of special envoys, negotiations, participation in or not detract from the fact that the threat or use of force can be a deciding factor in the
boycot of alliances or coalitions or the signing of treaties. creation of conditions, such as a safe environment, for a lasting solution. By contributing to

the successful use of other means of power, the military instrument provides support and
10 Grand strategy – the general and internationally accepted defnition is ‘a comprehensive vision for the longer-term creates the required conditions.
with a description of essential actions and activities by which a state or organisation plans to achieve its major
objectives. Key factors of this strategy may include the areas in which to specialise or to diversify, in which to join
strategic alliances or not, and in which to prioritize activities.

In this NDD, grand strategy is defned as the coordinated, systematic development and use of all means of power to serve national (or allied) interests


(see paragraph 5.2.1).

11 Th l l if i i i f ’ f h PMEC ( li i l ili i


12 Statement from the NATO Bucharest Summit Declaration of 2008, in which all member states expressed their


-----

**1.4.4. Information as an instrument. As well as the means of power defined above, states**
can also use information as an instrument. For reasons of national security and privacy, a
state’s information needs to be protected, and access to important information about a
proposed strategy must be denied. The controlled release of information is an important
instrument for influencing public opinion and perceptions held by other actors. Apart from
the release of information, the information instrument is also designed to influence an
opponent’s information and target his information systems, while at the same time
protecting the state’s own information and information systems.


### 1.5. Use of means of power
As described above, actors use their means of power to safeguard their interests and achieve
their strategic objectives. Means of power are always used in combination. It is not always
necessary to deploy all instruments at the same time; depending on the interests to be
protected or the objective to be realised, and on the prevailing situation (peace,
confrontation or conflict), one instrument will be more suitable than another. The use of
the military instrument is not, however, limited to conflict situations and crises; it can also
be used preventively in the event of conflicts of interests, confrontations or disasters. There
is a shif from ‘military deployment that does not per definition occur independently’ to
‘military deployment that per definition does not occur independently’. The general
tendency is also that any action is always taken within a coalition of countries or
organisations.


**1.4.5. Civil capacities. Other civil capacities exist alongside the diplomatic and economic** tendency is also that any action is always taken within a coalition of countries or
instruments, but these are not referred to as means of power in this context, as they are organisations.
either outside government control or unable to make a direct impact outside national
territory. A state might use the civil capacities at its disposal, such as the judicial system and **1.5.1. Conficts of interest, confrontations, crises and conficts. On the international**
the civil police, to realise its strategic objectives. Civil capacities encompass a wide diversity playing field, all actors have their own interests and objectives. A conflict of interests arises
of means, such as the use of legal powers, police force, administrative organisations, if a party’s interests and objectives are at odds with those of other actors. If that is the case,

**22** education, health care, media and utility companies. But there are also other organisations and actors persist in these differences, the situation becomes one of confrontation. **23**

with a religious, political, cultural or scientific background, international organisations and Confrontations can harden and result in a crisis or a conflict. To ensure an accurate
NGOs that can contribute to the realisation of strategic objectives. These civil organisations definition, these terms are explained below.
are not government-controlled, yet they can exert influence. The control and coordinated
deployment of civil capacities is complex, if only because many organisations, particularly In conflicts of interests and confrontations, there is an escalating difference of opinion
NGOs, occupy an independent position in respect of the government. Despite the ofen about objectives that is so crucial that neither party will concede. The root of the difference
specific and divergent interests and objectives of these civil organisations, all efforts need to of opinion normally lies in conflicting economic or political interests, and it is in that
be synchronised as much as possible to achieve an effective resolution of a conflict. The sphere that the solution must initially be sought. Nevertheless, the threat or actual use of
government will at the very least play a stimulating and coordinating role in this process. military might is sometimes made, and this would normally serve to protect, prevent or

deter.

**1.4.6. Other groups or entities with means of power. This summary of means of power and**      - _Protection of national interests. This includes, for example, airspace and border_
their various categories is not complete. As previously indicated, other groups or entities security, the military contribution to the coastguard and law enforcement on the high
may also possess such instruments. Examples are: seas, as well as operations to counter smuggling and piracy. The permanent presence

        - international organisations, such as the UN, the EU and NATO of military units at strategically important locations (e.g., the Caribbean islands of the

        - NGOs, such as humanitarian relief organisations (Red Cross) Kingdom) also falls into this category.

        - large international companies (multinationals)         - _Prevention of escalation. In this case, military deployment supports the use of other_

        - terrorist groups and criminal organisations instruments. Examples are military diplomacy, such as showing the flag and military

        - influential or powerful individuals or groups. visits, and the provision of military advice, assistance and training to friendly nations.
Generally speaking, smaller organisations or groups have a more limited choice of      - _Deterrence. Here, military deployment is intended to convince other actors of the_
instruments, or lack the capabilities to use them successfully. This does not, however, mean willingness to use the military instrument and to apply coercion. Examples are the
that these organisations or groups are powerless. The ability to use means of power is in any forward deployment of offensive military capabilities and the execution of joint


-----

as the characteristics of each bear close resemblance to each other. It involves the severe
disruption of public safety, usually caused by a single, brief and catastrophic event at a
single location. When a disaster occurs, a great number of people are put in grave danger,
and there is extensive material damage or significant damage to the environment, all within
a short space of time. Disasters can be caused by human actions (major accidents) or by
natural events (earthquakes, hurricanes, flooding, pandemics). The socio-economic
consequences of a disaster are ofen more catastrophic than the physical disaster itself.

In an armed conflict, the conflict of interests has escalated to such an extent that parties
resort to the use of weapons to secure their interests. A conflict may be small scale and
local, but it can also lead to large-scale violence.

**1.5.2. The conceptual confict cycle. If a conflict of interests or confrontation between**
actors or states escalates, it becomes a conflict. Each conflict is unique; no two conflicts
arise or progress in an identical fashion. The conceptual conflict cycle model[13] has four
phases. It should be pointed out here that the word ‘phase’ wrongly suggests that the

**24** phases must occur sequentially. Activities with features from two or even three different **25**

phases may also take place alongside each other in time and space. For example, activities
that bear the characteristics of intervention might be conducted in one region, while

The emphasis lies on the presence of military might; the actual use of force is not usually activities bearing the hallmarks of the stabilisation phase take place in another. Or both
relevant here. Confrontations may last extremely long, such as the Cold War, for example, types of activity might even take place in the same region at the same time. The phases
which was not actually a war but a confrontation. In conflicts of interest and confronta- ofen overlap, which means that the transition periods are ofen not clearly identifiable.
tions, it is crucial that the situation does not escalate and develop into a crisis or conflict.
This applies particularly in the case of vital interests, where the level of damage caused by an The conceptual conflict cycle has the following phases:
escalation may be disproportionately high or even irreversible. In the case of vital interests,      - _The prevention phase. There is not yet any question of a conflict in this phase, just a_
therefore, much emphasis will be placed on prevention and protection. By taking preven- conflict of interests or a confrontation. The use of means of power occurs as described
tive action, in which there is usually no question of the use of force or intervention in an above.
impending conflict, a state’s political leaders preserve the greatest freedom of choice for the      - The intervention phase. In the intervention phase, the emphasis is on military action. If
deployment of its means of power. preventive activities are not successful, a conflict could escalate in a short space of time.

Intervention means interceding in the conflict with capabilities that can operate in a

A crisis is deemed to have arisen when a state or population group loses control of the high-intensity environment. It has a coercive character and the use of military force will
situation because of a conflict of interest, a confrontation or an impending or worsening almost always be unavoidable. Intervention ideally takes place before any escalation, but
disaster. Crises have no set patern; each crisis has its own dynamic and characteristics. experience has shown that this is seldom the case. The aim of intervention is to resolve
Generally speaking, a crisis does not arise because of a single specific event, but because of a the conflict, ultimately reducing the level of force and thus creating the conditions for
series of events spread over time. Several conflicts of interest are usually to blame for a the subsequent stabilisation phase. An escalating conflict is accompanied by violence, of
crisis. which the local population are ofen the victims, intentionally or unintentionally, which


-----

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|normalisation|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||prevention|intervention|stabilisation||
||Escal|ation|||


Time


**26**


results in a humanitarian emergency. During this phase, the environment is usually so
dangerous that civil aid organisations can only have a limited presence, if any at all.
This may mean that military capacity will be required to provide emergency relief. The
boundary between the intervention phase and the stabilisation phase is difficult to
define; it is usually a case of a gradual transition. It is, therefore, vital that the planning of
an intervention takes account of the conditions required for the stabilisation phase.

_- The stabilisation phase. In the stabilisation phase, the accent shifs increasingly from_
predominantly military action to the deployment of other means to achieve the mission
objectives.[14] Operations in the stabilisation phase are geared towards the normalisation
of the security situation and thus create conditions for lasting development and peace.
Operations in the stabilisation phase of conflicts are complicated by the diversity of tasks,
changing levels of force and the large number of actors with different interests. Although
it is mainly rebuilding capacity that is needed in this phase, there may be various reasons
to use force or to demonstrate the willingness to use it. The circumstances are ofen such
that the peace is fragile and the level of force can suddenly increase dramatically. If the
military force is unable to contain this escalating violence, stabilisation is doomed to fail.
The possession of means and capabilities to enable escalation dominance is, therefore,
vital in this phase.

_- The normalisation phase. In the normalisation phase, the emphasis is on sustainable_
development and reinforcement of the local administration and the security sector,
taking account of local culture and tradition. Military input is reduced further in this
phase and will eventually focus on activities related to security sector reform (SSR)[15],
which will have been started in the stabilisation phase. The principle underlying the
support of rebuilding activities in this phase is ‘as civil as possible, as military as
necessary’.

The phases ofen overlap, which means that the transition periods are not clearly identifiable, and which is why these periods ofen carry the highest risk during an operation.
Diplomatic, military, economic and civil capacities are required in all phases, and the accent
differs according to the phase. The activities of all capacities need to be embedded in a
comprehensive strategy designed to realise strategic objectives.

14 See also ‘Crisis management operations in fragile states’, Advisory Council on International Afairs, March 2009.

15 Security sector reform entails activities designed to assist the rebuilding or restoration of organisations in a country’s
security sector so that the country can ultimately provide independent, legitimate and efective security for itself and
its citizens. That security sector must enhance the country’s stability and also be accountable for it; the population
must have equal rights and equal access to the judiciary.

16 At the time of the Dutch participation in ISAF from 2006, the term 3D (defence, diplomacy and development) was
introduced Although the term is convenient and has proved its worth it does not convey the full meaning The term


S
p
e
c
t
r
u
m

o
f

f
o
rc Escalation
e

### 1.6. The comprehensive approach[16 ]


**27**


Confrontations and conflicts in the international arena are complex. The causes vary widely,
but they almost always have economic, ideological and cultural dimensions. Such complex
problems require a comprehensive solution and a comprehensive approach. The integrated
coordination of all means of power at the disposal of one or more international organisations or a coalition of nations is thus the foremost approach for the resolution of
confrontations and conflicts.

In a comprehensive approach, the means of power available to a state are deployed in a
coordinated and cohesive manner, ideally in a coalition with other countries and in
conjunction with international and non-governmental organisations. The armed forces
must be deployed in such a way as to reinforce the deployment and efforts of other means
and parties and to keep any adverse effects to a minimum.

In a comprehensive approach, the means of power available to a state are deployed in a
coordinated and cohesive manner, ideally in a coalition with other countries and in
conjunction with international and non-governmental organisations. The armed forces
must be deployed in such a way as to reinforce the deployment and efforts of other means
and parties and to keep any adverse effects to a minimum.


-----

##### THE PURPOSE OF USING A COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH IS In a comprehensive 1.7.1. Demographic changes TO OBTAIN JOINTLY, WITH THE RELEVANT MINISTRIES, approach, those who are Developments of a natural, political or economic nature and population growth give rise to ALLIES, HOST NATION AND IO/NGOS, DURING directly involved[17] develop, increasing migration and urbanisation. This ofen leads to ethnic tensions or increasing PREPARATION, PLANNING AND EXECUTION, THE BEST on the basis of a common pressure on employment opportunities and social security systems, and could result in POSSIBLE MIX OF THE VARIOUS MEANS OF POWER AND analysis, a joint approach to security risks. The following factors intensify the effects of these demographic THUS BE MORE EFFECTIVE IN THE RESOLUTION OF A a specific crisis, in which developments. CONFLICT AND RESTORATION OF STATE FUNCTIONS mutual coordination, tasks, - Food and water shortages are a major problem for parts of the developing world.

roles and responsibilities                                        - Impoverishment and unequal distribution of resources can lead to resentment. They
are established and for which, ideally, joint planning will also take place. A comprehensive provide extremism and organised crime with a breeding ground. Poverty, starvation and
approach ensures optimum synchronisation of the various means of power with the aim of disease in the third world put increasing pressure on security.
achieving the best possible lasting solution to a confrontation or conflict.      - The unequal distribution of raw materials and resources and poor governance intensify

the problems in areas hit by demographic and climate change, whereby people are no

However, not all actors that are directly involved, including IOs and NGOs, have the same longer able to support themselves. This further increases the pressure on migration,
strategy or the same views in respect of the desired end state. This is the reason for the fact increases internal instability and may give rise to a need for humanitarian interventions.
that, although the actors concerned generally acknowledge the sense of a joint approach, a      - The growth in population and the inability of people to support themselves in rural areas
joint strategy and end state do not form part of the concept of the comprehensive approach. have led to a growing economic migration to urban areas. As a result, more and more of

**28** the world’s population will be concentrated in cities. One effect of this is that the number **29**

### 1.7. Trends of megacities numbering more than 10 million inhabitants will increase significantly. 
The concept of security[18] continued to develop afer the Cold War. In the traditional sense, This will be accompanied by the inevitable challenges in terms of infrastructure, public
security related mainly to the state: the extent to which national sovereignty and the services, the environment and criminality, and it will place enormous pressure on the
integrity of national territory were protected. In recent years, the concept of security has quality of local government.
also developed in other areas, such as food, energy and society. As a result of the heightened
threat of terrorist atacks and the necessary countermeasures, many individual freedoms **1.7.2. Globalisation**
have come under pressure, such as freedom of movement and freedom of expression. The It seems that the world is becoming ever more integrated in a global village. Conventional
financial crisis, climate change and the stricter rules in the public and social domain place borders and geographical distances are becoming blurred, both in reality (Schengen
even more restrictions on the individual freedoms that have been won over the years. Agreement) and in a virtual sense, through information and communication technology.

Worldwide economic activity and the global exchange of knowledge and information are

Environmental developments are propelled by four main strategic drivers: demographic inextricably linked to globalisation. Globalisation stimulates international cooperation,
change, globalisation, composition of the political arena and technological advances. There thus reducing the national influence of individual states. It also ensures that not only states
is a general consensus about these trends, but less agreement in respect of three others that but increasingly individuals, groups and multinationals play an important role in internaare developing rapidly: media, the cyber dimension and outer space. The question of how, tional relations and the mutual balance of power. As well as the many positive effects of
when and how quickly these trends will actually manifest themselves and shape the security globalisation, it is also accompanied by security risks. The repercussions of the financial
concept remains the subject of discussion. crises since 2008 have shown how interconnected states and businesses have become,

particularly in the financial sector. As a counter-response to globalisation, many countries
have experienced the alienation of part of the population from its own government, as a

17 These could be ministries or large and infuential international organisations, or states that form part of an result of which an upsurge of nationalistic feeling and polarised views is leading to unrest.
international organisation or a coalition of nations. The differences between the wealthy countries, which derive greater benefit from the effects

18 This is examined in more detail in section 2 5 when the National Security Strategy is discussed


-----

are finding it difficult or impossible to cope with the repercussions of poverty, tensions are
rising between population groups, or between sections of the population and the government, if it is seen as the cause of the worsening situation. If governments fail to function
properly if at all, it is ofen impossible to offer any resistance to forms of organised crime,
rising nationalism, radicalism or even terrorism. Poverty, food shortages and a lack of
security can cause migration flows. Another effect of globalisation is that infectious diseases
are able to spread more rapidly because of the virtually unlimited travel opportunities,
allowing them to develop into pandemics. Although continuing advances in medical
science and technological applications enable beter prevention and control, it is still
difficult to predict whether they will always be able to ensure an appropriate response.


nanotechnology, miniaturisation, biotechnology, space travel and information technology
present new opportunities. Technological development has up to now been the basis of the
military superiority of Western powers. At the same time, this superiority also represents a
weakness: opponents can concentrate on achieving their objectives by atacking this
dependence on technology. This is further reinforced by the fact that opponents in our
open and internet-based society have easier access to certain knowledge and technology
than ever before. It appears to be relatively easy to get detailed instructions (and raw
materials) from the internet for making weapons of mass destruction or dirty bombs.[19 ] It is
also becoming more and more difficult to protect vital information and operating systems
against the growing and increasingly significant cyber threat.


**1.7.3. Composition of the political arena** **1.7.5. Media**
Despite the effects of globalisation, individual nations still remain the main geopolitical The computerisation of society has brought with it an upsurge in the role and speed of
players. Nonetheless, the way in which state sovereignty is exercised is changing as a result reporting by the media. The media play an important role in reflecting and potentially
of the following factors. bolstering public opinion on issues affecting the armed forces and their deployment. In the

     - Greater, mutual dependence is being created between states; power is shifing from states decision making about a large number of military missions conducted by the armed forces

**30** to transnational organisations and networks of multinationals. The growing mutual since the Cold War, there has been intensive interaction between media atention, public **31**

dependence does, however, have the advantage that increased interaction leads to beter opinion and political decision making. Reporting about abuses in the world or within the
mutual understanding, thus reducing the risk of interstate conflicts. armed forces never fails to affect public perceptions, and these perceptions help to define

     - States are becoming more open societies. They are also becoming increasingly dependent the image of the armed forces and the level of public support for a military mission.
on global stability, particularly with their main trading partners in Europe, North America
and, to a growing extent, Asia. **1.7.6. Cyber dimension**

      - Failing states can pose a threat to global security. Non-state actors can exploit the vacuum Something that is becoming increasingly important is the digital information dimension.
created by the malfunctioning state authority. Furthermore, the strategic interest of a With some expertise and resources that are relatively easy to obtain, the ICT infrastructure
failing state could shif from the availability of raw materials or the geographical location can be targeted by cyber atacks. In the recent past, conventional atacks have been
to the possibility for non-state actors to form a base. It may, therefore, be necessary in preceded by cyber atacks designed to degrade and manipulate the opponent’s command
many cases to intervene to stabilise a dangerous situation in a poorly or non-governed and control systems, or even render them entirely ineffective. Both civil and military
area. networks are now being atacked on a daily basis, and this trend is expected to grow.

     - A country’s technological and economic superiority will force an opponent to look for
new ways to achieve his political objectives, including alternative ways of using force. A **1.7.7. Outer space**
state’s counter-response to such threats must come in the form of a joint approach using Dependence on both civil and military use of outer space will increase further over the
all its means of power. This requires close contact between multilateral networks and coming decades. Many information systems belonging to governments, banks, stock
organisations. markets and air traffic controllers, etc, rely on the performance of satellite systems. Society

**1.7.4. Technological developments**

19 A dirty bomb consists of conventional explosives (with relatively limited destructive power) and radioactive material

Technology remains a major driver for change and brings with it both opportunities and

(with associated risk of contagion, hence the word ‘dirty’), the threat or use of which could lead to mass panic and

risks. Technology is developing at an ever-increasing pace and advanced technology is very terror, ultimately resulting in extensive psychological and economic damage. Because of the use of a conventional


-----

## 2. Dutch security policy

### 2.1. Introduction
Dutch military doctrine defines military thinking as it is applied in the Netherlands armed
forces. Because the use of the military instrument is derived from Dutch security policy, it is
first necessary to define that security policy, thus providing an insight into the higher
framework in which the armed forces apply their doctrine.

This chapter looks first at security policy, both from an international and Dutch perspective.
This will be followed by a description of Dutch interests and the way in which the
Netherlands government serves these interests. which results in a grand strategy and a
national position based on the Constitution. Lastly, the chapter will set out what this means
for national security organisations and for the armed forces in particular.


**32**


**33**


**32**


and economic activity can suffer severe disruption if these satellite communications fail.
The significantly heightened situational awareness on the part of commanders in current
operations also relies on satellite systems at all levels. Many 3C systems, ISR assets,[20 ]

precision-guided weapons and logistic tracking systems can no longer function without
using outer space.

At the same time, a growing number of commercial providers are supplying satellite
products and services (such as satellite phones, GPS receivers, imaging equipment) not just
for friendly or collective allied use, but also to opponents. The safeguarding of knowledge
about dependence, vulnerability and potential risks and threats, as well as possible ways to
secure the required capacity, forms the starting point for further policy development within
the defence organisation in respect of the military use of outer space.


Dutch security policy in a historical context

From 1815, when the Kingdom of the Netherlands was established, the armed forces
had two tasks: 1) defending the Kingdom in Europe and 2) upholding law and order in
the colonies. The frst task was the responsibility of the army and navy; the second was
performed in the Dutch East Indies by the KNIL, the Royal Netherlands Indies Army. In
the Caribbean, the Netherlands Forces in Curaçao and the Netherlands Forces in
Surinam were tasked with the defence of the colonies. These armies concentrated on
land defence, on assisting with internal law enforcement and on ‘pacifcation’.
Expeditionary actions were mainly the province of the navy and the marine corps, who
at that time were engaged all over the world in the protection of trade and in showing
the fag.
In politico-strategic terms, the Netherlands maintained a policy of armed neutrality
until the Second World War. and the force in Europe concentrated mainly on the ability
to engage in a major confict in the event of any violation of that neutrality. The
assumption was that the opponent, an army of another European power, was likely to
conduct ‘regular’ operations. Afer the conquests of the 19[th] century, the colonial troops
focused mainly on restoring and maintaining internal law and order. The operations by
the KNIL were primarily directed at combating indigenous opponents who were
conducting guerilla warfare.

In 1913-1914, the very frst deployment of Dutch military personnel with a peacebuilding
task took place as part of a multinational operation in Albania. It happened again more
than twenty years later, in 1935, when marines were deployed in Germany’s Saarland in


-----

speaking, Dutch defence and security policy, like that of other Western countries, had
virtually no ambitions with regard to international crisis management and confict
resolution until long afer the Second World War.
Afer the end of the German occupation and the restoration of Dutch independence in
1945, Dutch defence and security policy focused on land defence with its allies against
the communist threat from the East. To protect vital interests, the Netherlands opted
– initially hesitantly, but gradually with more conviction – for international
collaboration and incorporation into multinational (security) structures, such as the
United Nations (UN), the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) and the European
Community, now the European Union (EU).


management and peace-keeping tasks (also outside the treaty area).

NATO also opted to enter into partnerships with non-member states and to extend the
hand of friendship to the old enemies on the other side of the former Iron Curtain. In
the years that followed, the alliance expanded greatly with the accession of many
Central and Eastern European countries and even a number of former constituent
republics of what used to be the Soviet Union. On its 50[th] anniversary in 1999, and again
in 2010, NATO revised the strategic concept, the member states being aware of the
increasing complexity of the global security climate and of the challenges that this
presented.


During the Cold War, the Netherlands’ immediate security concern was the territorial In line with this, the Dutch defence organisation also shifed its focus at the turn of the
defence of Western Europe as part of NATO against a military atack by the Warsaw century to the task of helping to resolve security problems which did not traditionally
Pact, led by the Soviet Union. The rebuilt Dutch military consisted of armed forces who make up the hard core of the military domain. The armed forces thus found themselves
were geared towards and equipped for regular combat. The Netherlands also agreed to dealing with overseas drug-smuggling and piracy, they reinforced specialist units’
contribute on a small scale to peace-enforcement and peace support operations by the counterterrorism capabilities, the navy and the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee joined

**34** new UN which, within certain limitations, was proving to be more capable of taking other EU countries for border control tasks on land and at sea on the external borders **35**

action than the League of Nations, and to humanitarian aid operations, providing that of the continent of Europe and provided military support in civil disaster relief, both at
such a contribution would not interfere too much with the NATO defence task. home and abroad.


The end of the Cold War heralded yet another new era. The revolutionary geostrategic
upheaval of the period from 1989 to 1991 caused a huge shif in Dutch security policy.
The Netherlands transformed its defensive army into a smaller, more fexible
instrument for crisis management. Deployment under the UN increased because the
Security Council was able to claim a greater role in the resolution of conficts. NATO
changed from a regional defence collective to a globally operating security
organisation. Participation in international NATO operations, in ad-hoc coalitions or in
EU military structures became the norm. Dutch policy makers were more concerned
about the aim of participating and gaining diplomatic prestige than they were about
the actual efectiveness of the missions. Afer the Srebrenica fasco in 1995, the
Netherlands became increasingly reluctant to participate in UN operations and
developed a preference for NATO and EU missions and for coalition-based operations.

NATO remained the Netherlands’ cornerstone in terms of security. Afer the security
situation changed in 1991, the alliance developed a new strategic concept. This
provided a wider, less territory-based, fexible security strategy, the essence of which
was reduced dependence on nuclear weapons and greater emphasis on the use of


### 2.2. International security policy
Our country has a vested interest in a stable and peaceful international environment; it
relies on good international relations and on well-functioning international organisations.
It is for this reason that the Netherlands makes an active contribution to the main institutions that look afer our security: the United Nations (UN), NATO, the European Union (EU)
and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). This membership
carries certain obligations, and the Netherlands undertakes to meet those obligations as
well as making a financial contribution. NATO remains the cornerstone of Dutch security
policy. Membership of NATO requires unconditional involvement and commitment under
Article 5 of the NATO treaty.[21] The Netherlands’ wellbeing relies on free trade, the unrestricted movement of goods and free access to raw materials. Despite the fact that, by virtue of
European and trans-Atlantic cooperation, the Netherlands is located in one of the most
stable regions in the world, it is still vulnerable to disruption, and it is in this context that

21 Art 5 of the NATO treaty (Washington 1949) regards an atack on one member state as an atack on all member


-----

NATO’s Strategic Concept and the EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy are particularly
important. Dutch foreign and security policy is in line with that of the organisations Anticipation
referred to above.

### 2.3. Dutch foreign and security policy Normalisation Prevention
Dutch society is vulnerable to security risks that originate elsewhere in the world. This is a
consequence of the open nature of Dutch society, the country’s external orientation and
worldwide interdependence. Both internal and external security policy, therefore, require Government

and security

an integrated approach, at a conceptual and a practical level. The inseparable nature of

Stabilisation Deterrence

internal and external security does not only apply to the Netherlands or to the global role
the country plays in peace and security maters, but is the same all over the world. Most
countries have internal security problems that are affected by factors outside their national
borders.

Intervention Protection

The main objective of Dutch foreign and security policy is based on the Constitution and is
to ensure the country’s independence, integrity, stability and wellbeing. The Netherlands’

**36** open economy benefits from the free movement of goods, information, services and people Figure 2.1 Strategic functions **37**

and free access to markets and raw materials. The Netherlands also wishes to promote the
international legal order and is commited to the alleviation of human suffering and the The seven strategic functions are:
prevention of human rights violations.      - _Anticipation: To be prepared for foreseen and unforeseen developments and events_

which could affect the interests of the Kingdom and the international rule of law.

Global trade, worldwide socio-cultural communication via the internet and the media, _- Prevention: To operate within and outside the national borders to prevent threats to the_
cross-border organised crime and international terrorism can all affect a state’s vital interests of the Kingdom and to the international rule of law.
national interests, which means that foreign and security policy cannot be seen in isolation _- Deterrence: To discourage activities that are at odds with the interests of the Kingdom_
from each other. and the international legal order by presenting the prospect of credible retaliatory

measures.

**2.3.1. Strategic functions[22]** _- Protection: To protect and if necessary defend national and allied territory and guarantee_

Looking afer security is one of the Netherlands government’s core tasks. This provision of the safety of Dutch citizens at home and abroad and of Kingdom-registered properties.
security supports Dutch foreign and security policy and the development of the required _- Intervention: To enforce a change of behaviour in actors deemed to pose a threat to the_
capacity. The ‘strategic functions of government’ model is a tool for bringing these security interests of the Kingdom or the international rule of law.
functions together and finding a clear and logical line of reasoning in the event of a crisis or _- Stabilisation: To assist in the termination of a conflict and to support stable political,_
conflict requiring quick and accurate decisions. economic and social development in a (former) conflict area to serve the interests of the

Kingdom and the international legal order.

Good preparation and the capacity for rapid and effective decision making strengthens the _- Normalisation: To restore acceptable living conditions afer a conflict or a manmade or_
government’s role in establishing security. The following model divides the government’s natural disaster.
security role into seven strategic functions.


-----

For the strategic function of protection, the Defence organisation performs the following
activities:

- the protection – and where necessary the defence – of national territory as well as NATO
and EU territory;

- assisting in the control of the EU’s external borders;

- providing permanent and incidental support within the Kingdom’s borders on the basis
of legal and administrative agreements;

- conducting evacuation operations for the protection of Dutch citizens outside national
borders, as well as protecting Dutch embassies abroad and merchant shipping registered
to the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

The Defence organisation’s contribution to the strategic function of intervention consists
of using military means to enforce a change of behaviour in actors deemed to pose a threat
to the security interests of the Kingdom or the international rule of law. The accent rests on
maintaining – and if necessary enforcing – the international legal order and on defending
the interests of the Kingdom outside national borders. Military action might also be
required to prevent wholesale violation of human rights.

The Defence organisation contributes to the function of stabilisation by assisting in the
termination of a conflict and supporting stable political, economic and social development
in a former conflict area to serve the interests of the Kingdom and the international rule of
law. For this function, the armed forces focus on participation in multinational stabilisation
operations, examples of which are:

- stabilisation operations in fragile states;[24]

- stabilisation operations designed to keep apart states or other actors as part of a peace
setlement or ceasefire;

- observer and police missions and small-scale missions of a civil-military nature.

For the strategic function of normalisation, the Defence organisation can supply military
assets for the following activities:

- humanitarian relief operations;

- reconstruction in a former conflict area;

- advice, training and education of security officials and organisations in post-conflict

23 The term security sector development (SSD) is used as well as the term security sector reform (SSR). This refers to
situations in which there are virtually no ofcial institutions in the security sector and so they have to be set up from
scratch.

24 States are referred to as fragile when state structures lack political will and/or capacity to provide the basic


**38**


As part of the government, the Defence organisation helps to fulfil each of these strategic
functions, and the role played by the Defence organisation focuses on the deployment of
the armed forces’ military assets. This is not confined to the Services (operational commands); other Defence elements, such as the Central Staff, the Military Intelligence and
Security Service, the Defence Materiel Organisation and Support Command (CDC) also make
a contribution.

The Defence organisation contributes to the strategic function of anticipation by keeping a
sufficiently capable and flexible force on stand-by. The defence organisation also needs to
set itself up in the best possible way for this strategic function. This is done by:

- gaining and maintaining a strategic intelligence position and constantly monitoring the
risks to Dutch security interests;

- maintaining military doctrine and a sufficiently broad and relevant knowledge base;

- conducting scenario analyses and prognoses;

- ensuring sufficient flexibility, adaptability and resilience in the Defence organisation;

- engaging in military cooperation with countries that could be important in the support
of operations in which Dutch troops are or will be taking part;

- managing a network of flexible facilities and capabilities on a call-up basis.

The Defence organisation contributes to the function of prevention by joining multinational, military partnerships, thereby helping to achieve good international relations and
effective security institutions. Examples are security sector development,[23] ensuring a
military presence in support of diplomacy, and joint exercises with regional partners.
Furthermore, the armed forces can, in conjunction with the use of other means of power,
contribute to - and where necessary lead - the deployment of military forces to prevent
damage to Dutch interests or an impending conflict. The armed forces can assist the
national civil authorities in maintaining public order and thus in preventing social
disruption in the Kingdom.

The military contribution to the function of deterrence is designed to prevent a country or
an organisation from conducting hostile activities, or to persuade that country or organisation that such activities will not have the desired effect and the cost will be unacceptably
high. The credibility of military deterrence depends on the military capabilities for and the
political will to actually take any action, such as seting up a blockade or retaliating afer an
atack. Credibility also depends on the military capability to stop an aggressor carrying out
his atack successfully.


**39**


-----

countries afer the stabilisation phase (security sector reform, SSR).

### 2.4. Dutch security policy
National interests are increasingly dependent on developments in the rest of the world, so
Dutch foreign policy focuses on fostering good international relatios. This translates into
efforts to achieve a well-structured, international society, in which human rights are
respected and the international rule of law is upheld and supported. The Netherlands’
national interests and objectives are set out in the Constitution, which includes the
cross-border, strategic objective: “The Government shall promote the development of the
international rule of law” (Article 90 of the Constitution).


### 2.5. National security strategy
The interwoven nature of Dutch foreign policy and Dutch security policy is also reflected in
the country’s National Security Strategy (SNV in Dutch).[25 ] Territorial security can be
endangered not only by an internal threat (terrorism, guerrilla warfare, civil war), but also
by external factors (another state or an international terrorist network).
For a trading nation such as the Netherlands, economic security is sensitive to disruptions
in international trade, even if those disruptions occur a long way from national territory. To
protect society and the population against internal and external threats, the government
has formulated the National Security Strategy. This is designed to protect the Netherlands’
vital interests in order to prevent social disruption.


Vital Dutch interests. In 2007, fve vital Dutch interests were identifed in the National **2.6. Defence policy**
Security Strategy. The aim of Dutch defence

policy is to use the effective

      - Territorial security: the undisturbed functioning of the Netherlands as an independent formation, upkeep and
state, and more specifcally the territorial integrity of our country. Territorial integrity deployment of the armed

**40** is jeopardised, for example, if there is a threat of occupation of the Kingdom’s forces to serve as an **41**

territory. instrument to implement

      - Economic security: the undisturbed functioning of the Netherlands as an efective and the government’s security
efcient economy. Economic security could be afected if, for example, trade with an policy. Dutch security policy
important foreign partner is discontinued. makes a distinction between

      - Ecological security: Having sufcient self-restorative capacity in the environment to internal security (national
repair damage. Ecological security can be threatened by, for example, disruption to territory, including overseas
the management of surface waters and also by climate change. territories) and external

      - Physical security: the undisturbed functioning of humans in and around the Netherlands. security (outside the
Physical security is put under pressure if, for example, public health is threatened by Netherlands). For internal
the outbreak of an epidemic, or in the event of a massive breach of a dike or an security, the most obvious
accident in a chemical plant. task is the provision of

      - Social and political stability: the undisturbed existence of a social climate in which groups military assistance for
of people can coexist peacefully within the confnes of the democratic constitutional disaster relief, crisis management, search and rescue, and other tasks[26 ]under civil authority.
state and shared core values.Social and political stability can be threatened if changes For external security, NATO is the cornerstone of Dutch security policy, and is also a priority
occur in the demographic makeup of society (e.g. solidarity between generations), in for the armed forces in terms of activities, procedures and doctrine.
the social cohesion or in the extent to which the population participates in social
processes.


These fve interests are all interconnected; if one is damaged, others may be damaged
too. An infringement of physical security could thus put social and political stability


25 See also Strategie Nationale Veiligheid [National Security Strategy], Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations,
2007.

26 Other tasks are the control of borders airspace territorial waters protection against damage of vital communication


-----

always be deployed under an umbrella strategy that is formulated by an alliance or
coalition. This does not preclude the exclusive deployment of Dutch forces for small-scale
operations,[28] a situation which generally arises in national operations.

_Interagency operations are the norm because, under the comprehensive approach, military_
capability is also deployed in conjunction with other means of power. This is based on the
accepted fact that military capability alone cannot resolve a conflict of interests, a security
problem or a conflict.

It is, therefore, highly unlikely that the Netherlands armed forces would be deployed
independently or without allied[29] or interagency coordination.

27 Also known as a coalition of the willing.

28 An example is a non-combatant evacuation operation (NEO), in which the Netherlands evacuates citizens with
Dutch nationality from an unsafe area


**42**


**2.6.1. Cohesion in policy**
The Dutch defence effort focuses on national interests, the protection and promotion of
Dutch values and foreign policy objectives. As stated previously, our country has a vested
interest in a stable and peaceful international environment, as it relies heavily on good
international relations and international security structures. The Netherlands therefore
pursues an active peace and security policy, a key element of which is the comprehensive
approach. This means that the Netherlands, when asked to do so and provided it has the
required parliamentary support, takes part in international deployments. The Netherlands
will participate by using the armed forces in the planning and execution of activities for
conflict prevention, de-escalation, stabilisation and, if the security situation does not allow
the deployment of civil organisations, rebuilding. The Netherlands is thus willing to assist
in the resolution of security problems within and outside Europe, even at great distances,
in view of the fact that, for many different reasons, confrontations and conflicts a long way
from home can still pose a threat to our security. An active security policy therefore includes
the will to intervene promptly if national interests are at stake or if security problems occur
elsewhere in the world. In principle, this occurs in an allied context or within a coalition of
states. It is then important to apply an integrated package of the various political, military
and economic means of power and civil capacities that the Netherlands has at its disposal.

**2.6.2. Joint, multinational and interagency operations**
The use of a comprehensive approach for the deployment of the armed forces is expressed
in multinational and interagency planning and execution, which almost always occurs in a
joint seting.

_Joint operations are the norm, because each of the Services has capacities that complement_
each other. Ensuring the integrated deployment of these complementary capacities of
different Services will achieve optimum effectiveness.

##### THE DESIRE TO USE THE COMPREHENSIVE Multinational operations are the norm, APPROACH MAKES JOINT, MULTINATIONAL AND because states are seldom willing or able INTERAGENCY OPERATIONS THE NORM FOR to operate alone. In the Netherlands’ THE DEPLOYMENT OF THE ARMED FORCES TO situation, multinational operations are ASSIST IN UPHOLDING THE INTERNATIONAL the norm because the country has LEGAL ORDER AND STABILITY chosen to be a member of NATO, to

operate as part of the EU or as part of
other security organisations of multinational composition. In specific cases, in which, for
instance, no consensus can be reached to operate as a collective, the country will choose to


**43**


-----

## 3. The armed forces as a government instrument

### 3.1 Introduction
One of the principles on which the Dutch state system is based is that the armed forces are
an instrument of the government. To understand the thinking behind the operational
deployment of the armed forces, it is necessary to understand the context of that deployment. This context is made up of the legal framework, the assigned main tasks, the strategic
functions that the government can perform to achieve its objectives and the decisionmaking process in respect of the deployment. This context affects the deployment of parts
of the armed forces and thus military doctrine itself.
This chapter looks successively at the legal principles of deployment within and outside
national borders and at the assigned tasks. Atention will then focus on the strategic
functions that may be performed as part of the selected grand strategy. Finally, the decisionmaking process for the deployment of parts of the armed forces and the control of forces
during that deployment will be discussed.


Until 1940, actual deployment of the armed forces was confned mainly to the colonies.
In the 19[th] century in particular, the Royal NL Navy and the Royal Netherlands East
Indies Army undertook many expeditions to ‘pacify’ the East Indies. The government
did not request ofcial permission for this kind of operation, nor was there any ofcial
accountability procedure. The colonial authorities waged war with the local
princedoms, without any formal declaration of war. On the subject of the authority to
declare war, the Constitution originally stated (in the 1815, 1848 and 1887 versions) that
war would be declared by the king, who would immediately notify both chambers of
the States General accordingly. When the Constitution was revised in 1922, this clause
was amended, and the law now stipulated that the King could not declare war ‘without
the prior approval of the States General’. The revision of the Constitution in 1983 meant
that it was no longer the king who could make a declaration of war, but the
government.

The Ministries of War and the Navy were merged in 1959 to form the Ministry of
Defence. The Dutch military afer the Second World War was, like its predecessors, an
organisation that was segregated according to Service and specialisation. From 1948,
the overarching part of the organisation was the United Chiefs of Staf Commitee
(CVCS in Dutch), a consultative commitee of the commanders in chief of the Services.
In the 1960s, because of the need for beter coordination of the increasingly intensive
allied and international cooperation, the chairmanship of the CVCS developed into a
permanent function. The full-time chairman of the CVCS was given his own joint staf.
This structure grew in the 1970s to form a policy directorate for operations, which in
1976 became the Defence Staf. From then on, it was headed by the Chief of the
Defence Staf (CDS).

The end of the Cold War brought with it a need for changes. The military became
smaller, more fexible and expeditionary instrument. Deployment for international
crisis management operations became a main task alongside the general defence task.
The ongoing ‘internationalisation’ of the deployment of Dutch forces led to an
expansion in the tasks of the CDS and his staf. The catalyst was the fall of Srebrenica in
1995. Afer that, the Defence Staf became fully responsible for the planning,
preparation, execution and evaluation of international operations. Over the years, this
responsibility grew to become a fully-fedged overall command. and in 2005, the
armed forces were defnitively placed under the single command of the CDS, who is
now known as the Chief of Defence (CHOD). The CHOD thus became the highest
national military-strategic authority.


**44**


**The armed forces as a government instrument in a historical perspective**

Decisions in the Netherlands about war and peace and about the deployment and tasks
of the armed forces were traditionally made by a small ruling elite. When the Kingdom
was established in 1815, these powers were constitutionally invested in the government
(head of state and cabinet). Initially, the king alone bore the political and military
leadership. He had ‘supreme command over the feets and armies’. Afer the state
reforms of 1848 and the introduction of ministerial responsibility, the cabinet –
specifcally the Ministers of War, the Navy and the Colonies – was put in charge of
directing the armies and the navy and developing military policy.

For a long time, the highest military command, supreme command in wartime, lay with
the monarch and his family. Since the time of the Republic, members of the House of
Orange had steadfastly flled the role of the highest military commander and did so
again during the expeditions at the time of the Belgian Revolt of 1830 and 1831 and in
the mobilisation for the Franco-German War of 1870. Because of the lack of male
Oranjes at the end of the 19[th] century, this position of the royal house was not to last. In
the mobilisation of 1914, the armed forces were for the frst time given a commander in
chief from the top of the professional military ranks. This happened again in 1939, on
the eve of the Second World War. In the Dutch East Indies, the governor-general was
both the civil-administrative representative of the Dutch Crown and the commander in


**45**


-----

The new, expeditionary era was characterised by a greater social and political focus on
operations. On deployment, the armed forces were under scrutiny and politicians were
keen to increase their control. The domestic political-strategic contextualisation of the
armed forces was rendered verifable and more concrete by the introduction of
deployment criteria. In 1993, the cabinet drew up a list of evaluation criteria, which was
formalised in 1995 in what became known as the Frame of Reference for participating
in military operations. This contained 14 points for determining the political desirability
and practical feasibility of participation by Dutch military personnel in international
crisis management operations. The Frame of Reference for participating in military
operations underwent some changes in 2001 and 2009. Since then, the 2009 Frame of
Reference for participating in military operations has served as the starting point for
decision making and supplying information to parliament for the deployment of
military forces, for which the information provisions pursuant to Article 100 of the
Constitution apply. This relates to the deployment or supply of the armed forces for the
purposes of maintaining or promoting the international legal order.


### 3.2. The international legal framework
The deployment of the military instrument outside national borders has its legal basis in
international law. The rule of thumb is that the Netherlands may not operate in another
country without that country’s consent. There are essentially two universal, legal principles
for this: the principle of sovereignty and the prohibition of force, as expressed in the UN
Charter. Afer looking at these two principles, this chapter will discuss several other legal
principles and treaties as well as the laws and jurisdiction that apply during military
operations.

**3.2.1. The sovereignty principle**
According to this principle, the authority of a state does not depend on another, higher
authority for actions within its own country. Under the non-intervention principle, no state
may intervene in the internal affairs of another.[30]


**3.2.2. Prohibition of the use of force**

**46** Public opinion, which for a long time seemed to be developing into an important Article 2, paragraph 4, of the UN Charter prohibits the use or the threat of military force in **47**

element in the decision making, has only had a limited impact over the years. international relations. This stipulation is intended to prevent states from taking military
Government and parliament do take note of the signals, feelings and perceptions action in the territory of or against another state, either on their own initiative or on the
picked up from the public, but at the same time, the Frame of Reference for basis of national legislation, and with or without the use of force.
participating in military operations has not contained the criterion of ‘public support’
since 2001, unlike the original version. In any event, the Netherlands always showed a **3.2.3. The use of force and the right to self-defence (jus ad bellum)**
great deal of support for international peacekeeping and peace support operations, International law consists of writen and unwriten rules that govern relations between
and the level remained constant for a long time. In the case of operations conducted in states. The jus ad bellum is the part of international law that deals with the justification of
the frst decade of the 21[st ]century, however, in which there were signifcant physical military operations in another state. This law has three generally accepted legal
risks for the participating troops and great uncertainty about the Netherlands’ direct foundations.
interest as well as the desired results, support has been more limited. The Dutch people
have proved more critical of the deployment of Dutch troops in these cases. The first legal basis[31 ] is the right to individual or collective self-defence, recognised in Article

51 of the UN Charter. Leading on from that, it is also the case that states may, under strict

In 2000, an active duty of information on the part of the government to parliament in conditions, protect their citizens and, if necessary, evacuate them from another country
respect of the deployment of military personnel was laid down in Article 100 of the with the use of military force. One of the conditions that apply here is that the host nation
Constitution. This duty of information has led to the development of a procedure that is no longer willing or able to offer those citizens the necessary protection. The second legal
allows parliament to perform its verifcation task, which includes the use of foundation is authorisation of the UN Security Council on the basis of Chapter VII of the UN
notifcations, interim reports and fnal evaluations. Although parliament does not Charter. The third legal foundation is an invitation from the host nation.
ofcially have a right to consent, an operation without a clear parliamentary majority is
inconceivable.

30 The sovereignty principle also applies to ships (fag principle): in principle, only the fag state (the state under


-----

There is also some discussion about other exceptions to the prohibition of force, in
particular about allowing humanitarian intervention. The Netherlands’ position is that
military intervention in a humanitarian emergency can be justified on moral and political
grounds. This means that humanitarian intervention is permissible as a last resort in
exceptional cases and under strict conditions. The consequence of the different legal
foundations is that the responsibilities and powers of military personnel can differ widely in
each operation.

**3.2.4. UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS)**
Operations at sea are governed by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS). This convention gives states the right to operate in open seas, so outside
territorial waters, in a number of specific cases, including operations to combat piracy and
the slave trade. The convention also deals with the duty to render assistance to persons in
distress at sea.


purpose of IHL is to find a balance between military necessity (the reality of the use of force)
and humanity (the prevention of unnecessary suffering). IHL grants powers and imposes
restrictions to this effect. The powers consist mainly of the right of combatants to take part
in hostilities, while the restrictions mainly encompass rules for the methods and means of
warfare and rules which govern the protection of people and goods.

IHL only applies officially if there is a situation of ‘armed conflict’; whether the situation is
one of armed conflict depends on actual events and not on declarations or political views of
warring parties. Even if IHL does not apply, Dutch and NATO policy is to use IHL restrictions
as a safety margin for operations by the Netherlands armed forces. This prevents any
confusion that might arise in respect of the powers of an intervention force as a result of its
changing status in a conflict area. This status can afer all range from armed enforcement of
peace or enforcement of the rule of law and stability to assistance in rebuilding and
alleviation of human suffering.


**3.2.5. Outer Space Treaty of 1967** **3.3. The national legal framework**

**48** Operations in outer space are covered by the UN Outer Space Treaty of 1967, of which the As well as being subject to international law, military deployment is also subject to national **49**

Netherlands has been a signatory since 1969. Signatory states to this treaty undertake not to legislation. This legislation includes, for example, stipulations about the existence of the
place in orbit around the earth any nuclear or other weapons of mass destruction, nor to armed forces, defines the circumstances in which the armed forces can be deployed and sets
install such weapons on celestial bodies, nor station them in outer space in any other rules for their deployment and actions. First, this chapter will look at a number of articles
manner. The treaty requires parties to use the moon and other celestial bodies exclusively from the Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands[32] and the Constitution, in so far as
for peaceful purposes. and also prohibits the seting up of military bases, installations or they determine military deployment. It will then look successively at the legal foundations
fortifications, testing of any kind of weapons and the conduct of military manoeuvres on for deployment in national territory, for military assistance in the Caribbean parts of the
celestial bodies. Kingdom and for military action in the event of extraordinary circumstances in the

Netherlands.


**3.2.6. Laws and jurisdiction**
The legal framework that applies during deployment outside the Netherlands is different for
each operation, and even sometimes for different areas or phases of the same operation.
For example, counter-drug and counter-piracy operations (law enforcement) could thus
also be subject to the Code of Criminal Procedure. In all cases, the way in which the
assigned tasks are performed and the authority exercised must be in accordance with the
basic principles of international humanitarian law.


**3.3.1. The Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands**
The Charter, which was last changed on 10 October 2010, deals with the legal order in the
Kingdom and distinguishes between the affairs of the Kingdom and those of its constituent
countries: the Netherlands, Aruba, Curaçao and St. Maarten. With regard to the armed
forces, the Charter stipulates that preservation of the independence and the defence of the
Kingdom is a Kingdom responsibility (Article 3, paragraph 1.a). The Netherlands armed
forces perform this task for all countries of the Kingdom.

32 Article 5 paragraph 2 of the Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands reads: ‘The Constitution shall have
regard to the provisions of the Charter’ The Charter thus takes precedence over the Constitution of the


##### INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW ALWAYS SERVES AS THE BASIS FOR MILITARY OPERATIONS,


**3.2.7.  International humanitarian law**
International humanitarian law (IHL), jus in bello, as
defined in the Geneva Conventions with the
associated supplementary protocols, determines the


-----

**3.3.2. The Constitution**
The existence, management and deployment of the armed forces are embedded in the
Dutch Constitution, mainly in Articles 97 and 100.
_Article 97_
1. There shall be armed forces for the defence and protection of the interests of the
Kingdom, and in order to maintain and promote the international rule of law.
2. The Government shall have supreme authority over the armed forces.
_Article 100_
1. The government shall inform the States General in advance if the armed forces are to be
deployed or made available to maintain or promote the international rule of law. This
shall include the provision of humanitarian aid in the event of armed conflict.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not apply if compelling reasons exist to prevent the
provision of information in advance. In this event, information shall be supplied as soon
as possible.


humanitarian aid, both nationally and internationally.
This list is not hierarchical: the tasks are equal and must be executable at all times. The
likelihood that a certain task will need to be executed may vary considerably over time.


**1. PROTECTION OF NATIONAL AND ALLIED TERRITORY**


**3.4.1. Main task 1**
Although the general defence task will continue to exist, it is unlikely that it will need to be
performed in its traditional form, namely warding off a large-scale offensive directed at one
or more NATO member states. Terrorism and the proliferation and deployment of weapons
of mass destruction, and all the implications they entail, now pose the most acute threat.[35 ]


2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not apply if compelling reasons exist to prevent the Because this explicitly benefits the security of the population in NATO member states, NATO
provision of information in advance. In this event, information shall be supplied as soon forces are now deployed outside the treaty area as well. Allied military capabilities still,
as possible. however, guarantee the territorial integrity of the member states. The Defence organisation

also remains responsible for the territorial integrity of the Kingdom’s Caribbean countries

Paragraph 2 of Article 97 stipulates that supreme authority over the armed forces rests with (Aruba, Curaçao and St. Maarten) and the Caribbean Netherlands (Bonaire, St. Eustatius and

**50** the government: the primacy of politics. That also means that the government bears Saba). **51**

political responsibility in respect of parliament, and ultimately that the government does
not relinquish that supreme authority, even when it makes troops available to international **2. PROMOTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL RULE OF LAW**
organisations. **AND STABILITY**


Article 100 states that the government must inform parliament in advance of deployment or
provision of military forces to maintain or promote the international rule of law, unless the
exception in paragraph 2 of the Article applies. In this event, parliament must be informed
as quickly as possible afer the start of deployment or the supply of troops. This duty of
information does not apply to the defence task, which involves individual or collective
self-defence as defined in Article 51 of the UN Charter. Deployment for collective self-defence may occur on the basis of the international obligation to assist in Article 5 of the NATO
treaty and Article 42 of the Treaty on European Union.

### 3.4. Main tasks
The allocation of the main tasks to the armed forces was set out by the Minister of Defence
in his leter ‘New Equilibrium, New Developments’;[33] he repeated this in his policy leter
‘Service Worldwide’ in 2007.[34 ]These main tasks are an elaboration of Article 97 of the
Constitution, and three main tasks can be identified:
1. protection of national and allied territory, including the Caribbean parts of the Kingdom;
2. promotion of the international rule of law and stability;


**3.4.2. Main task 2**
The promotion of the international rule of law and stability requires the execution of
expeditionary, usually multinational, operations, and the need for this second task is
increasing. This means that the size and structure of the armed forces are designed
increasingly on the basis of this task. Over the years, the accent of the missions has shifed
from deployment under Chapter VI of the UN Charter[36] in which peacekeeping efforts are
performed with the consent of the warring parties, to missions based on Chapter VII, in
which force may be used if necessary for peace-enforcement.[37 ] Particularly those operations
which aim to prevent or resolve intrastate conflicts increasingly require robust action.

33 Update leter “Nieuw Evenwicht, nieuwe ontwikkelingen” (“New Equilibrium, New Developments”), TK 30 300 X
no. 127 of 2 June 2006.

34 Policy leter “Wereldwijd dienstbaar” (“New Equilibrium, New Developments”), Ministry of Defence, TK 31 243
no. 1 of 18 September 2007.

35 NATO report entitled ‘Active Engagement, Modern Defence, Strategic Concept’, 19-20 November 2010.

36 Chapter VI of the UN Charter contains provisions for a peaceful setlement of disputes, for example by negotiation or the installation of a UN peace force.

Examples of such missions include UNMEE, in which the Netherlands participated in 2000-2001, and UNMIL (Liberia) in 2003-2004.

37 Chapter VII of the UN Charter provides for the possibility of using force to counter a threat to or disruption of the
peace and acts of aggression.


-----

These operations are characterised by an intense but relatively short intervention phase at
the high end of the force spectrum, followed by a lengthy stabilisation phase. Long-term
stabilisation operations are costly and carry high risks. It is for this reason, and because
prevention is beter than cure, that there is a growing preference for participation in
preventive operations, such as security sector development. A military presence, the
support of diplomatic missions and the education and training of - and exercising with other armed forces can also have a preventive effect. This second main task also includes
deployment for international law enforcement, such as the protection of merchant
shipping against piracy and the prevention of arms and drugs smuggling by sea. The
deployment of the Netherlands armed forces for the second main task occurs wherever
possible in an allied or coalition context, ideally with countries which are members of the
same security organisations as the Netherlands. Examples are the missions in Bosnia,
Kosovo and Afghanistan, as well as the counter-piracy operations around Somalia.


The third main task also has an international component. The armed forces could also
operate internationally as a security partner in the event of deployment for disaster relief
and the provision of humanitarian aid. Examples of such cases are the deployment of
engineer auxiliary batalions in Iraq (1991) and Kosovo (1999), the humanitarian relief
operation in Albania (1999), participation in the EU monitoring mission in Aceh (2006), the
supply of transport equipment and military personnel afer the severe earthquake in Haiti in
2010 and emergency relief afer various hurricanes in the Caribbean, such as Hugo (1989)
and Katrina (2005).


deployment of the Netherlands armed forces for the second main task occurs wherever **3.5. Decision making for deployment**
possible in an allied or coalition context, ideally with countries which are members of the Article 97 of the Constitution stipulates that the government has supreme authority over the
same security organisations as the Netherlands. Examples are the missions in Bosnia, armed forces. Any decision to deploy the armed forces will, therefore, always be made by or
Kosovo and Afghanistan, as well as the counter-piracy operations around Somalia. on behalf of the government. The form of the decision to deploy and the way in which it is

made depends on the reason for deployment. First of all, there is a distinction between

**3. SUPPORTING LAW ENFORCEMENT, DISASTER RELIEF** decision making in respect of the armed forces’ permanent tasks and decision making for
**AND HUMANITARIAN AID, BOTH NATIONALLY AND** incidental deployment. In the case of the later, decision making for deployment within the

**52** **INTERNATIONALLY** Kingdom also differs from that outside it. **53**


**3.4.3. Main task 3**
For a long time, the armed forces’ main role in respect of national security was to provide a
safety net for the civil authorities in the event of shortfalls in civil capacity. With their highly
specific and unique capacities, today’s armed forces have a broader range of capabilities.
They serve on a regular basis as a partner in activities such as emergency relief, search and
rescue, security and public order enforcement. In doing so, the armed forces have developed into a structural security partner to the police, fire service and medical services in
accidents and disasters. In principle, the whole of the armed forces is available for this third
main task, which also includes a number of routine activities, such as explosive ordnance
disposal, coastguard operations in the North Sea and the Caribbean, and patient transport
to and from the Wadden Islands.

Administrative agreements made under the Intensification of Civil-Military Cooperation
(ICMS in Dutch) have established the guaranteed availability of specialist capabilities (such
as airborne surveillance and security, EOD and CBRN defence[38]) for the armed forces. This
availability is linked to response times. Military capabilities are deployed under the
responsibility of the civil authorities. In exceptional circumstances, civil-military cooperation could lead to a decision to allocate operational leadership of sub-tasks, such as
evacuations in crises and disasters, to the armed forces. Ultimate responsibility nonetheless


**3.5.1. Decision making for permanent deployment of the armed forces within the**
**Kingdom**
Deployment of the armed forces is regarded as permanent if military personnel are
performing a routine, recurring task without a particular end state. Such tasks are normally
national and are performed in the Netherlands and in the Caribbean region of the
Kingdom. Examples of permanent deployment include:

- military presence in the Caribbean parts of the Kingdom;

- explosive ordnance disposal;

- coastguard duties;

- airspace control, including the quick reaction alert (QRA) task;[39]

- search and rescue (SAR) and medical air transport for the Wadden Islands.
Decisions about this permanent military deployment are made at ministerial level and are
set out in structural agreements between the Ministry of Defence and the other ministries
or departments involved. These arrangements are usually in the form of an order, a
covenant or a user agreement.

38 EOD: explosive ordnance disposal; CBRN: protection against chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
atacks

39 The QRA task involves keeping two F-16 fghter planes on standby 24 hours a day 7 days a week to intercept any


-----

**3.5.2. Decision making for incidental deployment of the armed forces within the** Civil-Military Cooperation
**Kingdom** (ICMS). These arrangements
Incidental deployment of the armed forces within the Kingdom is said to be the case when take the form of an order, a
public institutions are assisted or supported by military forces. The method of decision covenant or a user agreemaking for this type of military deployment depends on the sort of assistance or support ment. The guiding principle
and the place it is needed.[40 ] is that deployment of Defence

means for military assistance

The following basic principles exist for military assistance or support within the or support will always take
Netherlands. place under the responsibility

_- Military assistance under the Police Act. Under this act, the armed forces may be asked to assist_ of the civil authorities. As part
the police in upholding public order or in criminal law enforcement. Decision making of ICMS, a catalogue has been
about this type of deployment proceeds in stages. First, the question of whether the drawn up to provide the civil
assistance can be provided by the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee will be considered. In authorities with an insight
special cases, other sections of the armed forces may be asked to assist. A decision on that into the agreed personnel,
will be made by the Minister of Security and Justice in consultation with the Minister of equipment and logistic
Defence. On behalf of the Minister of Defence, the Secretary General of the Ministry of support that the Defence

**54** Defence will decide on deployment of the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee and the organisation is guaranteed to **55**

Director of Legal Affairs will decide on deployment of the other Services. Deployment of be able to supply.
special forces occurs afer a consultative process agreed between the departments.

        - _Military assistance under the Security Regions Act. In the event or serious threat of a fire, a_ In the case of military assistance in the Caribbean region of the Kingdom, a distinction
disaster or a crisis, military assistance can be provided for civil authorities. Any such needs to be made between the Kingdom’s Caribbean countries (Aruba, Curaçao and St.
request will be submited by the chairman of the security region to the Minister of Maarten) and the Caribbean Netherlands (Bonaire, St. Eustatius and Saba – the BES islands).
Security and Justice, who will then investigate whether the assistance requested could be      - For Aruba, Curaçao and St. Maarten, the legal basis for the provision of military assistance
provided by other civil emergency services. If this is not or only partly possible, the is the Royal Decree on instructions pertaining to the deployment of the armed forces
request will be submited to the Minister of Defence and the CHOD can then act on the (1987). This decree enables the governor of these countries to make sections of the armed
Minister’s behalf in deciding whether to provide military assistance. forces available to the governments of Aruba, Curaçao or St. Maarten for the purpose of

      - Military support in the public interest. If there is an urgent need for goods or services that the providing military assistance to maintain internal security and public order (also referred
defence organisation can provide, a request may be submited by an administrative to as ‘hard’), or in disasters, accidents and disruptions to traffic or communications
body. [41] This request will then proceed via the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom (known as ‘sof’). Decisions on assistance in disasters and accidents for which no specific
Relations or the Ministry of Security and Justice. If the required goods or services are authority is required are made by the Flag Officer Caribbean (CZMCARIB in Dutch) afer a
available, the CHOD may decide on behalf of the Minister to provide support. request from the governor. For assistance in maintaining internal security and public
The Defence organisation has made arrangements with other government departments order, decisions are made by the Ministerial Council or, in urgent cases, the Minister of
and lower authorities that are referred to collectively by the term Intensification of Defence, both following a request by the national government through the intermediary

of the governor.

40 The Secretary-General deals with this in his Directive SG A-972 Handboek militaire ondersteuning civiele autoriteiten        - As public bodies within the Netherlands, the BES islands fall under the Dutch state

[Handbook for military support for the civil authorities]. system. Under the BES Security Act (2010), the government representative has the

41 According to the Directive Militaire Steunverlening in het Openbaar Belang [Military support in the public interest] (MP authority to submit a request for military assistance to the Minister of Defence. This
d i i i b d i i i Q ’ i i dik d


-----

enforcement and associated tasks for the justice department. The Minister of Defence will
decide, in consultation with the Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations and the
Minister of Security and Justice, about the provision of assistance. The lieutenant
governor or the public prosecutor will decide, afer agreement with the Minister of
Defence, how the assistance will be provided. In the case of disasters and calamities, the
lieutenant governor of the island group can submit a request for support directly to
CZMCARIB. In the case of inter-island disasters or calamities, the request will be made by
the government representative.


Deployment of the armed forces outside the borders of the Kingdom usually occurs as part
of the first and second main tasks, namely:

- to protect national and allied territory (first main task);

- to promote the international rule of law and stability (second main task).

The decision-making process for deployment is virtually the same in all cases. Under Article
of the Constitution, the government will inform parliament in writing in advance of
decision to participate in an international operation and the conditions associated with
that participation. Three instruments are particularly important in the decision making:

- the threat analysis by the Military Intelligence and Security Service and General
Intelligence and Security Service;

- the Frame of Reference for participating in military operations,[42] with points that need
particular atention to ensure a well-considered decision to deploy. This includes such
things as political aspects, the mandate, other participating nations, feasibility and
security risks;

- the CHOD’s operational planning process.


**3.5.3. Operating in exceptional circumstances in the Netherlands**      - the threat analysis by the Military Intelligence and Security Service and General
A situation could arise in the Netherlands in which the usual powers of the government are Intelligence and Security Service;
no longer sufficient to allow an appropriate response or action. If there is also a vital      - the Frame of Reference for participating in military operations,[42] with points that need
national interest at stake, the situation could be regarded as exceptional. In such a particular atention to ensure a well-considered decision to deploy. This includes such
situation, the government may be able to use what are described as special powers, which things as political aspects, the mandate, other participating nations, feasibility and
are also created in a way that deviates from the usual legislation. These powers are extre- security risks;
mely far-reaching, and are set out in emergency powers legislation. Examples of these      - the CHOD’s operational planning process.

**56** special powers are area clearance/evacuation and the requisition of goods and services from **57**

civilians and other government authorities. For the armed forces, the most relevant legal The political process for deployment of the armed forces outside the Kingdom, to which
basis is the War Act. Article 100 applies, proceeds as follows:

                                                                   - If the Netherlands is requested officially or unofficially to supply a military contribution

**3.5.4. Decision making for deployment of the armed forces outside the Kingdom** for a particular operation, a provisional political-military assessment is made. On the
The decision to deploy the armed forces and to use military force if necessary falls under the basis of this assessment, a decision can then be made to investigate the request further.
primacy of the political leadership. Decision making on how and for what purpose the At this point, the government will notify parliament of this intention (the ‘notification’);
armed forces are deployed is linked to the grand strategy and international law. As part of      - Using the points in the 2009 Frame of Reference for participating in military operations,
the comprehensive approach, military deployment must be coordinated with the other consideration will then be given to the question of whether military deployment is
instruments used by the government. The strategic objectives of a military operation are desirable and feasible. A political decision to deploy is prepared by officials in the Military
established at ministerial level and in close cooperation with military leaders. Although a Operations Steering Group. As soon as all the required information is available, the
number of ministries could be involved in the decision making under the comprehensive government will make its decision. This will normally be done on the basis of a draf
approach, it is mainly the Prime Minister and the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Defence leter that deals with the topics in the Frame of Reference for participating in military
who play key roles in the decision making in respect of military deployment outside the operations (the ‘Article 100 leter’);
Kingdom. In NATO operations, the North Atlantic Council will decide on the deployment of      - The Ministers of Defence and Foreign Affairs (and any other ministers involved) will then
NATO forces, while the Netherlands government will make the decision on the possible send their joint, definitive leter to the States General, and a debate will follow. This
military contribution from the Dutch side. The Netherlands government will also make a parliamentary debate may lead to adjustments in the decision;
similar decision in respect of requests for participation in a military operation that come      - Parliament will then be informed periodically about the progress of preparations for and
from authorities within the EU (Political and Security Commitee), the OSCE or the UN. the execution of the deployment;
There are situations in which (sub-)operations are then executed under national command,
such as special ops and counter-piracy operations. 42 Joint leter from the Ministers of Interior Afairs and Kingdom Relations, Defence and Foreign Afairs and


-----

- Ultimately, every year on the third Wednesday in May, parliament will have an interim
evaluation of ongoing operations;

- On completion of deployment, a final evaluation will be drawn up with the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and any other ministries involved; this evaluation will also include aspects
from the Frame of Reference for participating in military operations.

In deployment for purposes other than the promotion of the international rule of law,
Article 100 of the Constitution does not formally apply. The decision-making process is
similar, but does not necessarily comprise all the elements referred to above. The
government has undertaken to inform parliament as much in accordance with the Frame
of Reference for participating in military operations as possible, certainly in the case of
large-scale civil missions involving military participation and in the event of missions with
overlapping objectives, i.e. where deployment of the armed forces is intended to protect
national and allied territory as well as to maintain or promote the international rule of law.


sector development. The interests are ofen more of an economic or diplomatic nature, for
example a military presence in support of a trade mission or to support diplomatic
negotiations. Decisions about this type of military contribution outside the Kingdom are
made by the CHOD in close consultation with the other ministries involved.

At an early stage of the preparatory process for military deployment outside the Kingdom, a
decision needs to be made as to whether a civil assessment is necessary. This is an assessment of the situation in a conflict area, in which an analysis is made of such aspects as the
causes of the conflict, the civil institutions, infrastructure, activities and atitudes of civil
authorities and other leaders, local population, etc. This analysis leads to conclusions about
the need for the use of non-military means of power and civil capacities. Ideally, this
assessment will be performed multinationally. If a civil assessment is necessary, it should be
carried out as early in the process as possible, ideally before the decision making starts, as
the results are important for effective military deployment.[44 ]


In deployment for purposes other than the promotion of the international rule of law, **3.6. Rules of engagement**

**58** Article 100 of the Constitution does not formally apply. The decision-making process i _RULES OF ENGAGEMENT ARE DIRECTIVES TO_ Once a state has a legal basis on which to **59**

similar, but does not necessarily comprise all the elements referred to above. The govern- _MILITARY FORCES INCLUDING INDIVIDUALS_ operate, a clear mission, an intent and the
ment has undertaken to inform parliament as much in accordance with the Frame of _THAT DEFINE THE CIRCUMSTANCES,_ rules of engagement (ROE) will need to be
Reference for participating in military operations as possible, certainly in the case of _CONDITIONS, DEGREE, AND MANNER IN_ drawn up for the military units about to be
large-scale civil missions involving military participation and in the event of missions with _WHICH FORCE, OR ACTIONS WHICH MIGHT_ deployed. ROE are mission rules for comoverlapping objectives, i.e. where deployment of the armed forces is intended to protect _BE CONSTRUED AS PROVOCATIVE, MAY BE_ manders of military operations and contain
national and allied territory as well as to maintain or promote the international rule of law. _APPLIED_ the official parameters in respect of the

##### NATO MC-362/1 nature of and methods for the use of force.


The duty of information in Article 100 of the Constitution not only applies to deployment
but also to the supply of military units for the second main task, as it is not yet a case of a
decision to proceed with the actual deployment of Dutch military personnel. This is covered
by the procedure given in Article 43 of the UN Charter[43], which so far has never been used in
practice. The promise of Dutch troops to the NATO Response Force of the EU Batlegroups is
not in itself subject to Article 100 of the Constitution. The government has, however,
expressed its willingness to clarify parts of the Frame of Reference for participating in
military operations, in so far as it is possible and relevant, at the time of assignment of
forces for this purpose. It is aware that such an allocation is not without obligation and that
it gives rise to both national and international expectations.

Units of the armed forces may also find themselves outside Dutch territory without there
being any official deployment as defined above. This could happen, for example, in


ROE are not a means of assigning specific tasks. Commanders may curtail the relevant ROE
for subordinate commanders at any time, but they cannot in principle take it upon
themselves to expand them. ROE must at all times remain within the parameters of the
applicable legislation, including IHL. Besides the mission rules in the ROE, instructions for
the use of force are also issued to the commander as well as to individual personnel.
Because thestate has the monopoly of force, the
legitimacy of the use of force must be evaluable; _RULES OF ENGAGEMENT NEVER RESTRICT_
the ROE are instrumental here. ROE never restrict _THE INHERENT RIGHT TO SELF-DEFENCE_

43 Article 43 of the UN Charter makes provisions for the supply of forces to the UN Security Council, on its call, for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

44 Lessons learned in Final Evaluation of the Netherlands’ contribution to ISAF 2006-2010, Ministry of Defence, 23


-----

the universal right to self-defence. In a multinational deployment, ROE are established
within the relevant alliance or union, or - in the case of an operation by a coalition of states

- in consultation with the states participating in the coalition. On the basis of national
policy or national law, a country may deviate from the agreed ROE and issue these deviations to the deployed forces as supplementary instructions. In practice, the restrictions to the
ROE are designated as caveats and must be communicated to the force commander. The
force commander must ensure when planning the assignments to his units that no
assignments are issued that fall outside the ROE or outside the caveats that apply to those
units. The Dutch senior national representative acts on behalf of the CHOD in monitoring
the mandate, the application of the ROE and the observance of caveats on deployment of
Dutch forces. As the red card holder, he can intervene if necessary.
The right to self-defence is an inherent right. The most relevant ROE are summarised for
individual service personnel in an ‘instruction card for the use of force’ and for officers and
NCOs in an aide-mémoire.


**3.7.2. Direction of deployment of the armed forces outside the Kingdom**
Once the government has made the decision to participate in a mission, the CHOD will set
out in an ‘Operational directive’ the national guidelines, missions, tasks and responsibilities, as well as the arrangements that have been made for the transfer of authority (TOA) to
the multinational force commander.
The TOA is confined to the operational part of the mission. The Dutch government retains
ultimate control (the supreme command referred to in the Constitution) and the CHOD has
full command. The decision for Dutch troops to participate in an operation may be
accompanied by national caveats for the deployment of Dutch units or specific (weapon)
systems, or for the interpretation of the rules. One should be aware, however, that national
caveats do restrict the multinational force commander’s freedom of action. The CHOD will
ensure that this commander is mindful of the stated caveats. Even afer the TOA, he will
retain full responsibility for the deployed units, and is responsible for directing them. The
CHOD will direct the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee in missions abroad for non-police
tasks.


### 3.7. Direction during deployment

**60** Deployed units from the armed forces are always under the command of the CHOD, **61**

regardless of whether these units are deployed within or outside the Kingdom’s borders.
There is, however, a difference in direction between deployment within the Kingdom
(under the third main task) on the one hand, and, on the other, deployment outside the
Kingdom (regardless of the main task). Both situations are explained here. 45 The senior national representative (SNR) is the CHOD’s representative in the mission area. He will advise the

international force commander and block the deployment of the national contingent if necessary. This function
is ofen combined with that of contingent commander.

**3.7.1. Direction of military assistance and support within the Kingdom** 46 Red card holder is a term used internationally for a designated national ofcial who has the authority to prohibit
Once a decision has been taken to deploy the armed forces under the third main task, units or stop an operational action by his country’s participants in a multinational operation.
are placed under civil command. The decision to deploy may be accompanied by conditi- 47 Provided the principles of proportionality - no more force than is necessary to stop that being used by an

aggressor - and subsidiarity - the last possible resort to stop the aggressor - are adhered to.

ons, restrictions and instructions for the deployment of forces or specific (weapon) systems 48 In the Allied Joint Doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (AJP-3[B]), full command - the highest degree of
or the interpretation of rules. These units remain under the command of the CHOD. The authority - is defned as the military authority and responsibility of a superior ofcer to issue orders to
CHOD will provide a military adviser to support the civil authorities in the planning and subordinates. It covers every aspect of military operations and administration and exists only within national

Services. The term ‘command’, as used internationally, implies a lesser degree of authority than when it is used

execution. The CHOD will also appoint an official to monitor the mandate for each mission; in a purely national sense. No NATO or coalition commander has full command over the forces assigned to him.
this official will operate with the civil authorities in a role that is similar to that of the senior 49 Authority over deployment of the armed forces, or units thereof, as part of the third main task means the
national representative and red card holder in an international deployment. These administrative power to instruct their deployment for the purpose of conducting whatever mission the

administrator deems desirable or necessary. This authority is accompanied by the administrative responsibility

functions (military adviser and said official) will be combined wherever possible. All military and thus also carries the duty of accountability for the decisions taken and the instructed deployment of military
operations within the Kingdom are in principle directed by the CHOD, with the exception of units and equipment. Command relationships determine the powers that commanders have to issue missions
police tasks assigned to the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee under the Police Act; these are or orders to their subordinate commanders or units to execute the mission assigned by the competent authority.

In other words, an ofcer who has full command authority over a unit does not thus have the authority to give

conducted under the competent authority (in accordance with the stipulations of the Police that unit orders for actions or in respect of areas that do not fall under his decision-making authority.
Act). 50 The Transfer of Authority (TOA) is the handover or return of operational authority between one commander and

another. It may, as in the case of all operational command arrangements, be a phased process. TOA takes place,
for example, when a national contingent is placed under the commander of a multinational force commander


-----

## 4. Fighting power

### 4.1. Introduction
The total of capabilities supplied by the armed forces to perform strategic functions is
known as fighting power. This fighting power comprises not only personnel and equipment, but also factors such as willingness, cohesion, leadership, doctrine, power of
renewal, and so on. Military doctrine encompasses not only the deployment of personnel
and materiel but also that of these less tangible factors. To be able to apply doctrine, an
understanding of all the factors that make up fighting power is essential.

Fighting power is expressed in a model which consists of a mental, physical and conceptual
component and which is described in this chapter. The deployment of fighting power at sea,
on land, in the air, in space and in the information domain will then be discussed on the
basis of the specific characteristics of these domains.

**Fighting power in a historical perspective**
For centuries, the armed forces have been the state’s instrument of power. The extent
to which this instrument could be used depended heavily on its potential. The term

**62** ‘fghting power’, consisting of a conceptual, a physical and a mental component, has **63**

been used in doctrine since the 1990s. These aspects were in themselves nothing new
in the exercise of military power. They have always played a major role in the deployment of the armed forces, but the form they take has changed signifcantly since the
beginning of the 19th century. Although all three components are necessary for the
development of an efective military force, the emphasis placed on one of them has
changed dramatically over time.


_The physical component_
From the middle of the 19th century, the development of weapons technology was
constant. With the advent of automatic weapons, rapid-fre artillery, smokeless
ammunition, armoured (steam)ships, aircraf and tanks or ‘batle wagons’, the
efectiveness of the armed forces grew, and so too did the combat distances, on land,
at sea and (eventually) in the air, as well as the ‘destructive power’. This was made
possible by the continuing industrialisation of Western nations, which enabled the
required mass production of weapons, ammunition, equipment, etc, to support the
huge armies that had been created. The growing grip that ‘the government’ had on
society also meant that more and more people and equipment could be mobilised to
serve the state’s interests.

The technological advances, which can roughly be divided into increased frepower


**62**


-----

and control capabilities and computerisation (end of the 20th and beginning of the 21st
century), have led to a situation in which there are now manned (weapon) systems and
fewer armed men. This also means that the number of ‘combat soldiers’ (those who
actually use weapons) has diminished considerably. Modern armed forces have an
ever-growing need for logistic and technological support, but the smaller number of
‘fghters’ are able to deploy more and increasingly accurate and efective frepower.

_The conceptual component_
The introduction of conscript armies brought with it a need for a centrally formulated
method of operating. enabling army leaders to ensure that unity of opinion existed
within the armed forces. This meant that senior commanders ‘knew’ in which doctrinal
framework their subordinate commanders were acting. Given the size of the armies
and the hugely increased breadths of the front lines, this coordination mechanism was
vital to be able to direct the armies efectively.


cope with it virtually disappeared from military thinking.

Until the First World War, Western nations regarded the mental component as the
deciding factor. The country and therefore the armed forces with the greatest resilience
would ultimately win the war. Based on experiences in that war, the emphasis shifed
to the conceptual element, particularly in Germany, and the physical element, mainly in
France. The German generals came to the conclusion that the use of the ‘right’ doctrine
should be the deciding factor, so a great deal of atention was focused on doctrine
development in both the Reichswehr and the Wehrmacht. The French army was mainly
concerned with the physical component, as the next war would be a repetition of the
last one. If sufcient assets were available, both mobile and static, the next war could
also be waged successfully. The Second World War showed that it was the physical
component which would ultimately decide the outcome. The Americans deployed
overwhelming amounts of materiel, while the Russians were also willing to sacrifce
untold numbers of personnel.


In the course of the 19th and 20th centuries, countries developed their ‘own’ doctrine,

**64** based on their own wartime experience and also particularly on the opinions of society. During the Cold War, both sides also emphasised the physical component. Initially, it **65**

The philosophies of traditional military thinkers such as Jomini and Von Clausewitz was in this way that the West tried to cope with the Warsaw Pact’s great superiority in
(land operations), Mahan and Corbet (maritime operations) and Douhet and Mitchell terms of materiel. This proved socially and fnancially untenable and, partly as a result
(air operations) still infuence the conceptual thinking of today’s armed forces. of this, more importance was atached to doctrine development. By fghting intelli
gently and by exploiting the technological superiority more efectively, the physical

_The mental component_ dominance could be overcome.
The mental component is the least visible of the three elements, but traditionally plays
an important role in determining fghting power. In the 19th century, under the Afer the Cold War, emphasis shifed more towards the conceptual component. In the
infuence of the French military philosopher Charles Ardant du Picq, the main emphasis new world order, it was no longer possible to concentrate exclusively on full-scale
was on physical and mental strength, self-sacrifce and the ability to withstand heavy combat. Armed forces now had to cope with a variety of threats and had to perform a
losses without losing the will to fght (and to win). At the beginning of the 20th century, wide diversity of tasks. It was not so much that these tasks, such as peace operations,
generals had doubts as to whether conscripted military personnel had the required peacekeeping, counter-insurgency, were new, but about the fact that issues arose that
mental toughness to be able to fght in ‘modern combat’. Standards of living had, had not demanded the atention of the European armies for a long time. Now, the old
according to these generals, increased to such a level that ‘civilian’ soldiers were neither doctrine developed for those tasks was once again studied and put into practice, and
tough enough nor resilient enough. The First World War showed that they need not one of the consequences of this was that the Dutch armed forces began to rewrite their
have worried. doctrine.

Over the course of the 20th century, the emphasis shifed away from physical sacrifce
and more atention was focused on maters such as motivation, team spirit, training,
justifcation and social acceptance and support. In most Western armed forces and
societies, the mental component was still associated with perseverance and operating


-----

### 4.2. The components and their relationship
Fighting power is the ability to conduct military operations in a cohesive totality of
operational functionalities and components in an optimum composition. It is more than
just the availability of operational means (capacities); there must also be the willingness
and ability to deploy these means (capability). If this is properly developed, it then becomes
fighting power, and capacities are elevated to capabilities. Fighting power is thus made up
of a mental, physical and conceptual component. These cannot be seen in isolation; they all
affect one another. Sophisticated equipment is thus useless without highly motivated and
well-trained personnel and without a well-considered, doctrine-based deployment method.


### 4.3. The mental component
Warfare is an activity conducted by people. The willingness to engage in combat if necessary
plays a key role in that activity. The mental component of military operations is thus a
combination of four interrelated factors: motivation, leadership, responsible organisation
of the deployment of available personnel and materiel, and understanding. The mental
component is extremely important, for the very reason that military personnel usually
operate in conditions that not only call for great mental resilience, but which also place
heavy demands in terms of conduct and atitude in a mission area. Such requirements could
include cultural awareness, empathy and an open atitude, as well as the need to
demonstrate appropriate initiative, creativity, even business instinct or negotiating skills
and the mental atitude to exercise restraint in the use of force.


political-strategic
opinions, policy
study of confict and
environment, actors
and factors


innovation,
development of
expertise


**4.3.1. Motivation**

environment, actors development of

Motivation is the result of training, confidence in the equipment, effective leadership and

and factors expertise

management, strong discipline, self-respect, mutual respect and a good understanding of
what is going on. In practice, motivation is closely linked to high morale. Motivation can be

**66** HR: stafng doctrine influenced by external factors, such as public opinion. An individual serviceman’s belief **67**

that the public support deployment in a conflict, regarding the mission as legitimate and

conceptual

seeing that the necessary materiel is available to support the military activities contribute

component

substantially to his willingness to fight. The media play a key role in this respect.


‘kit’:
equipment
materiel Psychical

development of
military capacity

sustainability

Figure 4.1 The components of fghting power


**4.3.2. Efective leadership**
The commander is the embodiment of effective leadership. That gives commanders at all
levels an important role in the mental component. He is also responsible for the training
prior to the mission. During the mission, it is the commander who, as leader, ensures the
execution of tasks through action, motivation, inspiration and the power to instil the will
to “go for it” into his personnel. On deployment, the commander is the face of the unit. His
actions will shape the image held by all the other members of the unit. He is responsible for
the actions of all individual military personnel under his command.

**4.3.3. Organising the deployment responsibly**
The way in which a commander organises the deployment of his assets will influence the
mental component. By doing this responsibly, he will ensure that his personnel trust in
their own abilities and in the organisation, and he will create a support base for the
operation. Organising the deployment responsibly means, amongst other things, that
sufficient assets (personnel, materiel and funds) are available for the successful execution of
an operation. A support base is also necessary, among military personnel as well as the


training, exercises


training &
education

motivation,
team spirit

values: ethics,
faith, politics


-----

planning are organisational preconditions for success. In the organisation process, account
needs to be taken of the impact that deployment in a mission area, constant exposure to
danger, ofen in difficult conditions and far from home, will have on individuals.

**4.3.4. Military work is about people**
Deployment of the armed forces can only be effective if personnel are sufficiently
motivated, trained and educated. Despite advances in unmanned technology and
developments in robotics, the human factor remains key. The physical presence of military
personnel is still necessary, as this is the only way to establish contact with the local
population. That personal contact is essential in gaining a good understanding of needs,
expectations, intentions and local conditions. Support among the local population can
only be established through a physical presence: military personnel are thus relevant for
more than just fighting. Furthermore, it is only people who can respond quickly to
changing circumstances, read emotions and act in the spirit of the commander.


### 4.4. The physical component
The armed forces’ operational assets form the physical component of fighting power; these
are the personnel and materiel that are organised for deployment in an operation. The term
‘operational readiness’ is used for the planning, preparation and deployment; this is the
state in which the organic unit is in a position to perform an organic task within the set
response time. To ensure that the physical component has the right composition, size and
quality, it is essential that there is a clear level of ambition for deployment of the armed
forces. Deployment options are linked to that ambition level and form the basis for
requirements and education and training programmes.

**4.4.1. Personnel**
With the materiel supplied, the deployed personnel must be able to conduct military
activities that are within the government-set ambition level in any conditions. Recruitment
and selection is designed to appoint personnel in the right numbers and of the right quality
to meet this requirement. Personnel undergo special instruction and training which focus
on specific elements derived from the deployment options. This means that during each
phase of instruction and training, there must be atention for motivation and mental
toughness (see the mental component), for knowledge of possible deployment options, for
knowledge of tactics and techniques (skills and drills), for basic skills (including physical
training, physical toughness) and for specialist, function-specific skills. When units or
individuals are assigned to a specific mission, they might need supplementary training
specifically tailored to the requirements of the particular mission. This mission-specific
training may take place in the Netherlands before departure to the mission area or in a safe
part of the mission area itself. This training can also be given to crews and embarked units
on board ships during the outward voyage.
To keep personnel available and deployable consideration needs to be given to
sustainability, motivation and mental health. More and more atention is being focused on
possibilities for computerised and unmanned systems to take over tasks currently
performed by people. This would mean that military operations could be conducted with
fewer personnel and a lower risk of losses through physical or psychological problems.

**4.4.2. Materiel**
The development, acquisition, maintenance and periodic upgrading of materiel should be
in keeping with the ambition level that has been established for the Netherlands armed
forces. A mix of assets with different functionalities will provide the commander with the
necessary flexibility to achieve his operational objectives. Innovation is highly important to
allow the necessary response to further developments in operations, and this will be


**68**


**69**


**68**


-----

**4.4.3. Standardisation**
Standardisation plays a major role in the effective and efficient accomplishment of
objectives. Standardisation is the imposition of a particular norm or standard on the
design, construction, testing and/or use of a product or on the application of a process. In
striving for a certain level of standardisation in the military organisation, the aim is to
achieve uniformity in operational procedures. With this standardisation, processes,
activities and materiel will ultimately be interchangeable, workloads can be shared more
efficiently, methods and results can be compared to each other and collaboration with
other units or organisations can take place with lower adjustment costs. On the other side
of the coin, standardisation might occur at the expense of flexibility and the range of
available options.


experience. To do so, it brings together historical experiences, developments in operational
practice (through lessons learned, analyses and experiments) and an ongoing study of the
future strategic environment.

The main function of the conceptual component is to provide a conceptual framework with
which military leaders can acquire an understanding of their profession and of the activities
they are expected to deploy, both now and in the future. The conceptual component
supplies the commander with the necessary understanding of the context in which he is
operating, and is the basis for creativity, ingenuity and initiative in complex situations. The
successful execution of military operations requires intellectually precise and clearly
formulated opinions that are based on experience. The intellectual activity needed to arrive
at clear views is known as ‘military thinking’, and it is this intellectual process that leads to
concepts for strategic, operational and tactical practice. This scientific process is fed by
military history, by recent conflict experiences and by innovative ideas. The concepts
generated by this process are a response to challenges in military operations.


Standardisation is crucial for multinational forces to be able to operate efficiently and concepts for strategic, operational and tactical practice. This scientific process is fed by
effectively, hence the existence of a separate agency within NATO, the NATO Standardization military history, by recent conflict experiences and by innovative ideas. The concepts
Agency. In NATO, standardisation is defined as ‘the development and implementation of generated by this process are a response to challenges in military operations.
concepts, doctrines, procedures and designs in order to achieve and maintain the

**70** compatibility, interchangeability or commonality which are necessary to atain the required These operational concepts form the basis for doctrine. Doctrine is the formal expression of **71**

level of interoperability’. Standardisation can be achieved at three levels: compatibility, military thinking, valid for a particular period of time. This means that an armed force or
interchangeability and interoperability. Compatibility is the suitability of devices, systems, service adopts one or more operational concepts and officially accepts it or them to ensure
processes or services for use together under specific conditions without causing unity of opinion for a certain period of time. These operational concepts are further
unacceptable interactions or side-effects. Interchangeability is the ability of one device, elaborated and refined in doctrine publications. Doctrine is thus the core of the conceptual
system, process or service to be used in place of another to fulfil the same requirements. component, but to ensure a proper understanding, this also includes the arguments, the
Interoperability is the ability to act together with other units or organisations coherently, underlying motives, the alternatives and the context that have led to this doctrine.
effectively and efficiently to achieve common tactical, operational and/or strategic
objectives. The main function of doctrine is to establish unity of opinion in order to bring about
The Netherlands supports this standardisation and is adapting its own standards (work effective operations. Doctrine is thus the unifying element that guarantees unambiguous
methods and procedures, tactical and technical standards and coding) to bring them as far definitions and ensures that all commanders use the same approach in the planning and
as possible into line with those of NATO. In doing so, the Netherlands is helping to achieve execution of military operations. It provides a common frame of reference as a guideline for
the greatest possible interoperability with its allies. A simple example is the use of the actions. But doctrine is certainly neither dogma nor a set of rules. It must always be used
English language as standard, no longer translating concepts, doctrines or procedures into with discretion. Skill in the application of doctrine can only be acquired by studying the
Dutch for use in a Dutch environment, even in exercise or training situations. conceptual component as broadly as possible and by learning it.

### 4.5. The conceptual component 4.5.1. Conceptual innovation
The conceptual component provides the coherent, intellectual basis and theoretical The conceptual component is constantly being developed through conceptual innovation,
foundation for the deployment of military units and troops. It is relevant for all operational whereby consideration is given to what changes could occur because of a changing
levels; at the strategic level, it provides the intellectual background for effective decision environment, new technologies[51 ] and challenges[52], or because of a new environment or
making on the political-military dividing line. The conceptual component also plays a new activities, methods and processes. Conceptual innovation, together with new


-----

thus in its continued relevance. This innovation is brought about through scientific debate
about military operations, by research and development and by an institutionalised process
in which lessons learned are interpreted, evaluated and implemented.[53 ]
Innovation can take place within organisations and also in a broader context. The
innovation process encompasses all human activities directed at renewal. It is more than
simply technological improvement or modernisation. Innovation can also occur in, for
example, command and control, management or policy. The impact of a new way of using an
existing work method or procedure for the introduction of a new weapons system, for
example, could be as great as that of the new system itself with its much-enhanced
effectiveness. The advent of the internet is thus a technical innovation which would probably
have been less successful without the upsurge of social media (and e-business strategies).


If collaboration takes place with international, government and non-governmental
organisations in the planning and preparation phase, the operation is referred to as joint,
multinational and interagency.


innovation process encompasses all human activities directed at renewal. It is more than Each domain has specific characteristics which help to determine the way in which a means
simply technological improvement or modernisation. Innovation can also occur in, for of power is used.
example, command and control, management or policy. The impact of a new way of using an      - The land domain is characterised as the ‘home base’ of the actors in the international
existing work method or procedure for the introduction of a new weapons system, for arena. It is divided into territories, separated by national borders. Natural features such
example, could be as great as that of the new system itself with its much-enhanced as mountain ranges and rivers ofen form natural boundaries between territories and
effectiveness. The advent of the internet is thus a technical innovation which would probably population groups. On the other hand, borders are sometimes established without
have been less successful without the upsurge of social media (and e-business strategies). taking any account of population groups, which can be a cause of conflict. The land

domain contains many different kinds of terrain (mountains, deserts, jungle, cities,
open plains), each of which affect capabilities of certain types of military operation.

### 4.6. Fighting power in the - Only a small section of the maritime domain consists of territorial waters, namely 

##### Information (incl. cyber)

### operational environment those which border directly onto the coastline (within 12 nautical miles). The rest of 
The environment in which the armed the waters of the seas and oceans is designated as ‘public domain’, where any actor may

##### Space

**72** forces deploys its assets can be move freely (freedom of navigation). The sea is not, however, man’s natural habitat **73**

divided into five domains: sea, land, and the domain can only be used with the aid of ships. The maritime domain has its
air, space and the information own third dimension, namely the underwater dimension.
domain, which includes cyberspace. Air      - The air domain includes airspace above land as well as the sea. It corresponds to the
The five domains are dynamically characteristics of the other two domains: above land, the airspace is divided into
linked to each other; a change in one ‘territories’ (national airspace). Above the open sea, the airspace too is a public domain
domain usually has implications for in which freedom of navigation applies.
the situation in the others. If the       - The space domain is physically located above the air domain (above an altitude of 100
fighting power of two or more km). Unlike the air domain, the whole of the space domain is ‘public domain’ which
services is synchronised in can be freely used by anyone.
deployment in a military operation, Sea Land      - The information domain is different from the others in that it is not a physical domain.
this is referred to in military jargon as This domain encompasses all forms of storage and transfer of information, regardless
a joint operation.[54] If other military of the form it takes (oral, on paper, via radio and television, internet or other electronic
units from more countries are also or non-electronic means). Although the information domain is ofen dependent on
involved, it becomes a joint physical means in the other domains (transmiters, satellites, servers), it is in principle
multinational operation. largely unaffected by the boundaries that apply in the other domains. The dimension

Figure 4.2 Domains in the operational environment referred to as cyberspace forms part of the information domain and comprises the

storage and transfer of information by digital media.

51 E.g. the shif from armed men via manned weapons to unmanned weapons.

5253 CHOD Directive A-1200, Evaluatie van militaire operaties (“Evaluation of military operations”). E.g. being able to have people in units and organisations work together in a form of networking. Most armed forces are divided into three services, designed for the maritime, land and air

54 AAP-6, NATO Glossary defnition of joint: ‘…activities, operations and organizations in which elements of at least domains. Although this structure is a historical one, even today each domain has its own


-----

techniques. The Netherlands armed forces are also set up for the three domains: sea, land
and air. Naval, land and air forces all have their specific capabilities and their own input in
operations. In addition, all the services have an input in the information domain and they
make use of the space domain. When bringing these capabilities to bear, the effects of the
services are not limited to their own natural environment (land, sea, air, space), as many
effects transcend the domain to a greater or lesser extent. The underlying philosophy is that
the services support and complement each other, thereby achieving a synergetic effect.

**4.6.1. Joint operations**
Joint operations involve the deployment of fighting power of different services in order to
use their specific capabilities to achieve synergy in an operation and thus realise the
operational objectives. The benefit of such integration can only be fully realised if the
activities of the various actors are coordinated, synchronised and prioritised.


**4.6.2. Characteristics of military operations in the maritime, land and air domains**
The main characteristics of operations in the maritime, land, air, space and information
domains are described in the following paragraphs. For the sea, land and air domains, the
characteristics of the respective services will then be discussed. Although there would
appear to be a one-on-one match between domain and service, a service will in practice also
operate in other domains, as described previously.

### 4.7. Operating in the maritime domain
Lines of communication and intersections can be secured through superiority at sea. This
occurs for civil purposes, such as trade and energy transport, and for military purposes, such
as sea-based operations and the support of those on land. Emphasis appears to be shifing
away from the traditional threat from submarines and large surface ships in the open sea to
asymmetric and hybrid threats and protection against piracy in coastal waters. Such threats
are in no way confined to territorial waters.


_Coordination is the process in which the various capacities and activities are brought together_
in a harmonious order. Supplementary measures promote mutual support and the Operations in the maritime domain are also designed to affect the situation on land. From
deconfliction of incompatible aspects results in the best possible use of the available the sea, humanitarian aid actions and evacuations are conducted, intelligence is gathered,

**74** fighting power. land-based targets are engaged and forces are brought to shore and supported on land. **75**

Sea-based support needs to be provided over prolonged periods, so sustainability is

_Synchronisation in time and space. Coordination is strengthened by synchronisation, in which_ required. Ships provide substantial transport capacity for that. The maritime domain offers
the capacities and activities are brought into a sequence at the right speed, in time and room to manoeuvre and the possibility of geting close to the mission area without
space. The relationship between foreseen activities and the availability of assets determines infringing on the territorial integrity of other countries. Maritime presence prior to or early
the degree of simultaneity, succession and autonomy of those activities. in a conflict also gives a political signal. A flotilla is an easily protectable base from which to

project influence on land.

_Prioritisation. Coordination and synchronisation highlight conflicting requirements in time,_
space and means; prioritisation determines the allocation of time, space and means for the The navy and the marines specialise in amphibious operations, in which a force is brought
commander’s plan. Because circumstances can change, the commander must constantly to shore by sea. Units from other services can also be set ashore from the sea. Amphibious
assess his priorities in order to identify risks and exploit opportunities when they arise. operations not only involve securing a landing site or taking out targets from the sea, but

are also mobile operations in which capacities on land, at sea and in the air are deployed in

In joint operations, assets from different services can also be combined. This requires more combination, for instance to penetrate and temporarily occupy a particular area.
coordination and increases the complexity, and this must be balanced with the desired Amphibious units are by their very nature ‘light’, but they need to have sufficient
advantage. The capacities of the Services will usually be synchronised for deployment protection, firepower and mobility, for which they always need to work with other units.
without disrupting organic arrangements.

Forces operating in the maritime domain must, therefore, possess differentiated and

In a joint operation, support relationships will be defined between the units of the different mobile potential that can be put to use throughout the maritime environment, ranging
services. One of the commanders will be designated as the supported commander and the from open seas to coastal regions, and in conditions ranging from hospitable to hostile.
commanders of the other services will then be supporting commanders. This means that This potential also enables collaboration with or deployment of land forces, air forces and
the supported commander’s actions primarily determine the tempo and the use of time and special ops forces. Operations by and deployment of Dutch naval forces are elaborated


-----

to operate in a radiologically or chemically contaminated area with limited loss of
operational power.

- _Lif. An important element of maritime power is the provision and protection of_
strategic sea transport: the sea lif. This provides land and amphibious forces with the
opportunity to deploy in a mission area relatively quickly and in sufficient numbers.

- _Influence. Naval forces can help to gain access to a mission area and to influence_
situations on land, thus exerting a grand strategic and military influence on the
situation on land.

**4.7.2. Limitations**
Naval forces are able to cover great distances independently. The speed at which a flotilla
can advance is limited, however, and can be affected by weather conditions; movements are
thus relatively time-consuming. This limitation can be compensated by a preventive
deployment, as flotillas can operate in the open sea without territorial restrictions.

**4.7.3. Contribution of naval forces to joint operations**
Because maritime units operate in international waters, they always operate in an international environment. Composite NATO flotillas made up of forces from member states
operate under international command and are supported by airborne naval and air force
units.

Maritime combat operations take place at the high end of the force spectrum when batle is
waged at and from the sea. At sea, naval forces engage with and defend themselves and
others against hostile naval and air forces. Naval forces can also help in the defence against
ballistic missiles. Other tasks include the provision and protection of sea transport for
military assets and clearance of sea mines. In sea-based combat operations, naval forces do
their part in the land batle by conducting amphibious and special operations, contributing
to air defence and providing fire support. If aircraf carriers are available, naval forces can
also provide air support.

Maritime security operations are designed to counter sea-based activities that threaten
security at sea or on land. These would include tasks such as counterterrorist, counter-piracy
and anti-smuggling (including arms) operations, coastguard tasks and enforcement of
maritime embargoes.
In the case of maritime assistance, naval forces provide support for the legitimate authorities, for example by supplying emergency aid, performing evacuations, assisting in
rebuilding activities and seting up maritime capacity, conducting maritime diplomacy and


**76**


**4.7.1. Characteristics of naval forces**
Naval forces have a number of fixed characteristics that make them useful in a broad
spectrum of operations.

- _Access. Two thirds of the earth’s surface is covered by sea; the largest part comprises_
open sea, international waters, the use of which is free to anyone. Naval forces are able
to access most areas and have the freedom of movement to reach and remain in those
areas.

- _Mobility. Naval ships can cover hundreds of miles a day. Together with freedom of_
movement in international waters, this provides naval forces with important strategic
and operational mobility.

- _Versatility. Most of the larger warships have defensive and offensive capabilities for all_
the dimensions in a mission area (air, surface, underwater and the electromagnetic
spectrum). Individual ships can operate in a wide variety of conditions. They can
perform different tasks and can respond rapidly to a changing mission. Furthermore,
amphibious units are able to conduct complex military actions at sea, from the sea and
on land, even in extreme climatic and geographical conditions.

- _Range. Maritime units have integral logistic support, such as recovery facilities and_
medical care. This provides individual ships or flotillas with range and sustainability
and contributes to the ability to operate a long way from shore for prolonged periods.
The range can be increased further by using supply ships.

- _Resilience. Warships can sustain a great deal of damage before they become non-ope_
rational. Damage will have an adverse effect on performance, but crews are trained to
make all systems operational again as quickly as possible. Warships are also equipped


**77**


-----

unit are brought together as combined arms units. This occurs at virtually all organisa
tional levels.

- _Flexibility. Land forces are organised, equipped and trained in such a way that they can_
provide units and formations that are capable of tactical manoeuvres, either indepen
dently or together with other units or with coalition forces. They possess the combat
power that is needed to defeat or destroy an opponent, but at the same time have the
flexibility to adapt and deploy other types of activity.

- _Signal effect. The deployment of land forces is a sign of strong political involvement._
By its very nature, such deployment indicates a willingness to undertake great risks, not
only in terms of money but also in terms of human lives. The presence of land forces
thus makes a real contribution to the credibility of a mission.

**4.8.2. Limitations**
Another characteristic of land forces is their organisational complexity. Whereas naval and
air forces man their weapons, land forces arm their men. This results in larger numbers and
mass, which makes leadership more complex. Moreover, more functionalities are required
these days than simply the operation of a weapon. The broad set of tasks covering the entire
conflict spectrum also brings limitations and usually necessitates some supplementary
education and training prior to a mission.


**78**


### 4.8. Operating in the land domain
The source of human existence lies in the land domain. Conflicts are ultimately decided on
land because that is where the continued existence and wellbeing of a nation, a population,
a group, an ideology, etc, can be ensured. There is by definition, therefore, always a land
dimension inherent in a conflict. Hostile military forces, both regular and irregular, operate
in this domain. A large part of the information domain is also situated within the land
domain. Potential opponents are increasingly deploying their potential where it is difficult
or impossible to bring the technological and conceptual advantages of the Netherlands
armed forces to bear. This asymmetry is intensified when the conflict takes place in difficult
terrain (such as mountains, swamp or desert areas, jungle) or in urban areas where the
presence of the population has a significant effect on how operations are conducted. Land
forces can operate decisively against regular or irregular opponents; in doing so, they
operate close to or even among the population. To achieve the required physical and
psychological effects, they need to collaborate with a large number of other actors, such as
representatives from international and non-governmental organisations, authorities of the
countries involved, etc, and the outcome of the collaboration is difficult to predict. The
media also play a role. All these factors make operations in a land environment complex
and dynamic. Operations by the Dutch land forces are described in the Doctrinepublicatie
_Landoptreden (DPLO) (“Doctrine Publication for Land Operations”)._

**4.8.1. Characteristics**
Land forces are characterised by the following features.

- _Size. Land operations usually require a large number of military personnel and weapon_
systems, so land forces are considerably larger than other services. The number of units
that can be directed in tense and high-risk situations is, however, limited. As a result,
land forces have multiple organisational levels, which means that extra capacity is
needed to manage the organisation.

- _Human activity. Land operations are fundamentally a human activity; the nature of the_
fighting is determined more by human behaviour than by the number of weapons or
the interplay of technology, although both are crucial. In combat, each individual is
exposed to immediate and actual danger, and is thus subjected to severe mental
pressure. More than those in the other domains, operations on land go hand-in-hand
with uncertainty and chaos, violence and danger, friction and stress. Each individual
reacts differently, which means that land forces make more use of techniques and
drills.

- _Composition. Operations by combat units need to be synchronised with the support_
provided by combat support and logistics units and with operations by other services.


**79**


-----

the division between heavy and light units goes some way to compensate for this, land
forces still need time to be able to deploy in a mission area.


makes it possible to move personnel and equipment rapidly and over great distances
without being impeded by land-based obstacles. Operations by and deployment of Dutch
air forces are described in ‘Airpower and Space Doctrine’ (APSD).[55]


**4.8.3. Contribution of land forces to joint operations**
Land forces normally play an important and ofen decisive role in joint operations. They are **4.9.1. Characteristics**
nearest to and thus the greatest threat to the opponent. In many cases, success can only be Air forces have the following characteristics:
achieved by a direct confrontation, or the threat thereof, by ground troops to force an      - _Altitude, speed and range. Altitude, speed and range are hallmarks of airpower, and_
opponent to stop the fight. This is why it is ofen the land forces that are supported by units enable air forces to operate with speed and flexibility in the entire mission area as well
from other services in particular phases of an operation. Land forces contribute to joint as outside it. The combination of speed, altitude and range means that assets can be
operations as follows: concentrated quickly and from a distance.

        - _Occupying and securing strategically or operationally vital ground. Physical occupation by_         - _Deterrent role. Their fast, accurate and destructive power enable air forces to play a_
ground units is the only way to fully guarantee long-term security in an area. This deterrent role. Stealth[56 ] technology, combined with sensors and precision weapons
applies particularly to urbanised areas. In the end phase of combat operations, that can perform in any weather conditions, makes it possible to deploy airpower
strategic sections of terrain could consist of the locations of, for example, command anywhere at any time. Awareness of this can also have a psychological effect on the
and control or CBRN capacities. Occupation and control of these can make a huge opponent.
contribution to the definitive elimination of an opponent. Ultimately, land forces        - _Flexible deployment. Air forces are able to deploy to a mission area rapidly and with_

**80** contribute in the form of combat with opponents upon whom our will cannot be relatively low risk. They also have a small footprint and can be assigned to and **81**

imposed in any other way. This combat takes the form of offensive or defensive withdrawn from an operation relatively easily.
confrontations.

        - Influencing the local population. Human contact is the best way to exert influence,
which is vital for long-term stability. Well-trained military personnel deployed amidst
the population can significantly influence that population.

        - _Ensuring a secure environment. Stability in the longer term depends on other_
government and non-governmental organisations responsible for aspects such as
humanitarian aid, rebuilding and restoring public administration and government
functions. By maintaining a physical presence, land forces enable other organisations
to do their work. These organisations can only work in an environment in which
ground forces have established a certain level of security.


### 4.9. Operating in the air domain (airpower)
Operating in the air domain, also referred to as the third dimension, has a strong impact on
the ‘underlying’ domain (sea and land). Ascendancy in this domain – in other words,
freedom of operation because all other opponents lack or have been denied the freedom to
operate – is vital for the execution of operations on land and at sea, as well as in the air. The
ability to control the airspace enables air forces to realise strategic, operational and tactical
objectives directly and throughout the mission area. Precision air support can be delivered
for land and naval forces in order to provide them quickly with tactical superiority over the


55 This publication was still being compiled at the time of publication of this NDD.

56 Defnition of stealth: using form materials or special equipment to reduce the signature (i e the detectability of


-----

        - _Central planning. Airpower is scarce, while the demand for it is high. These scarce_ ascendancy may also be contested at lower altitudes by opponents in possession of
assets therefore need to be centrally directed to make them as effective as possible portable missile systems;
throughout the mission area.        - _Atack: airpower is ideally suited to atacking strategic ground targets such as enemy_

        - _High-quality specialists. Air forces use high-tech and expensive equipment that requires_ leaders, energy sources and infrastructure deep in enemy territory (strategic atack) and
high-quality, specialist personnel. thus break the opponent’s will and ability to fight. Airpower can be deployed for direct

support of ground troops or naval forces by atacking the military capacities in enemy t

**4.9.2. Limitations** territory and the opponent’s lines of communication (air interdiction). Airpower can
The scarcity of air assets means that their deployment in joint operations requires thorough also be used to deliver direct support to ground troops in combat (close air support or
planning. In a dynamic environment where there is a high demand for air assets, this could close combat atack). Small teams specialising in local target identification and
affect the planned operations in terms of time and space. Central leadership and coordina- designation can provide additional support here.[57]
tion is vital and so the allocation of scarce assets usually takes place at high (joint) level.      - _Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (information gathering): the earth’s_
Thanks to the development of high-quality supporting technology, for example improved surface and the sea can be observed from the air and from space. Various sensors can
sensor capacity, integrated night-vision devices and long-range precision weapons, gather information day and night in any weather conditions. Having more and beter
environmental factors such as weather and terrain are having less and less effect on the current information than the enemy provides a significant advantage in terms of
execution of operations. preserving the initiative. This information may consist of photographs, video images,

communications data and radar images of the situation on land, at sea and in the air.[58 ]

**82** Air forces can be deployed independently or sometimes even as the only asset in a particular By using data link networks, this information can be shared in real time with other **83**

operation. In by far the most cases, airpower will be of a joint nature, and in these cases, units. This provides forces on the ground or at sea with enhanced situational awareairpower will perform a supporting role. The four main basic roles of joint airpower are: ness, which can result in rapid and accurately targeted actions and reduce the risk of

        - _Counter air (ataining air superiority): air superiority enables free use of the airspace_ blue-on-blue incidents.[59] Batle damage assessment – establishing the damage
and thus preservation of the initiative. In virtually all conflicts, ataining and main- incurred afer the event – is also an important product in this category.
taining air superiority is key in determining the outcome. In situations in which        - _Air mobility: air transport enables the rapid movement of personnel and equipment_
opponent aircraf is able to take off, air assets are forced into a defensive role and over long distances to and from a mission area. Air transport in the mission area itself
obliged to devote a relatively large amount of capacity to defensive counter air (DCA). can also enable rapid movements above the water or above difficult terrain. Special
An effective offensive counter air (OCA) campaign could prevent such a situation and and airmobile units can thus be deployed anywhere and quickly and transportation of
thus play an important role in achieving air superiority, above both enemy and friendly casualties can be conducted quickly and relatively safely by air. Air-to-air refuelling
territory. In operations under the second main task, the maintenance of the inter- increases aircraf range and on-station time so that they can provide support for
national legal order, the mission mandate does not always allow forces to operate ground and maritime forces at greater distances and for longer periods of time.
outside the boundaries of the area of operations. In these cases, counter air operations
and the atainment of air superiority are confined to the airspace above friendly **4.10. Operating in the space domain**
territory. In operations in the air domain, the atainment of air superiority always As described in Chapter 1 under ‘Trends’, the use of space-based objects has become a staple
remains the primary objective that must be realised before follow-up operations are of today’s society. These means are used for such purposes as satellite communications for
possible. Once air superiority has been achieved, above both friendly and hostile fast, broadband communication applications, for precision navigation that regulates traffic
territory, local populations and naval and land forces can be protected much more flows efficiently and accurately, for accurate timing that facilitates global financial traneffectively and with less capacity. OCA can also be performed by special forces on the sactions and for remote sensing, which monitors the state of our planet’s health.
ground that take out enemy radar systems, missile systems and aircraf. It is rarely
possible to achieve 100% air superiority. Although it is vitally important to atain air 5758 For example, a forward air controller or a fre support team. Also sonar images of the situation under water


-----

**85**


earth-based targets through the use of military assets which are stationed in space or
which are orbiting the earth. Ballistic missile defence also belongs to this category.

### 4.11. Operating in the information domain
The information domain is regarded as a public domain which cannot be captured but in
which temporary and local information superiority can be achieved. This can be brought
about by the power of the technological assets that are used, by the substance of the
information or by a combination of the two. Military operations in the information domain
are designed to maintain an information advantage in order to retain the initiative, achieve
surprise, dominate the batlefield and protect friendly military capabilities. They also focus
on the civil environment and on the protection of vital civil capacities, namely information
and communication networks that are vital for the functioning of organisations that play an
important socio-economic role, such as health care, justice and police, air traffic control,
and so on. Such organisations cannot function effectively if information streams are
interrupted or crippled. The distribution of electricity via networks, the flow of money
between banks, regulation of information about air, rail and road transport and the supply
of information about calamities are all disseminated via information and communication

60 Blue-force tracking is a digital system that shows the locations of all friendly units partly to prevent any


**84**


The protection of the freedom to use outer space is, therefore, strategically important. Free
access to space-based means is also equally important for military operations. These assets
have become an integral part of both the planning and the execution of military operations.
An inability to use space-based assets will impact on the effectiveness of many military
systems, such as precision weapons, drones, blue force tracking[60], early warning of
incoming ballistic missiles, and on the ability to share collected information and
intelligence.

**4.10.1.** **Characteristics**

Operations in the space domain have a number of unique characteristics and features
compared to the land and air domains and, to a lesser extent, the maritime domain.

- _Freedom of operation. Space has no territorial limits, and is public domain. Although_
there is no set global definition, the generally accepted lower limit is 100 kilometres
above the earth’s surface.

- _Sustainability. Military capacities that are launched into space can then be used_
operationally for prolonged periods, sometimes for years at a time.

- _Worldwide coverage. Depending on the satellite orbit and the number of satellites_
within a system, the earth’s surface can be permanently covered.

- _Versatility of use. Satellites can usually support different objectives in several areas at_
the same time. A combination of military and civil uses within one system is also
possible.

The military use of space (space operations) can be divided into four areas:

- _Space control. These operations are designed to atain and maintain superiority in_
respect of the enemy’s use of space capabilities. This requires situational awareness,
such as knowledge of friendly and enemy capabilities as well as of space weather and
space debris that could affect friendly space systems. Defensive and offensive operati
ons can be conducted to secure superiority.

- _Space force enhancement. By making use of systems and satellites stationed in space,_
effective support can be provided for military operations on land, at sea and in the air.
These space capacities are thus a force multiplier. The function of these capacities is to
support for the intelligence process, provide early information and warn of tactical
threats and atacks. The monitoring of environmental developments (pollution),
climate and other geological developments, and the support and provision of
telecommunication and navigation systems also fall under this function.

- _Space support. These operations focus mainly on the launch, operation and main_
tenance of space capacities, including the command and control network.


**85**


-----

networks.
The main reason for protecting military and civil information is to ensure the availability of
accurate, current and reliable information. It needs to be protected against thef, manipulation, damage or destruction and all other activities undertaken by the enemy in the
information domain.


unaffected by the boundaries that apply in the other domains. Information is the only
non-physical domain.

Information exists in three main forms:

- text on paper (e.g., books and newspapers, leaflets and posters) and in digital form
(internet);

- audiovisual information in images and sound (e.g., radio and television, video
addresses, film, symbols, signals) and information that is actually seen and heard first
hand;

- data (such as digital control data, in- and output data relevant for the proper functio
ning of information, communication, weapon or security systems and applications).

**4.11.2. Types of activity**
Information operations do not form a separate category of military operations, but have the
function of coordinating all activities in the information domain (information activities).[61 ]


To ensure that information and communication remain effective, the most vital informa-      - audiovisual information in images and sound (e.g., radio and television, video
tion must be protected first. Vital information is information which, if it is destroyed, addresses, film, symbols, signals) and information that is actually seen and heard first
blocked or rendered unusable, will seriously endanger national interests. Access to this vital hand;
information by any unauthorised party must be denied. Defensive operations in the      - data (such as digital control data, in- and output data relevant for the proper functio
information domain are designed to counter external influence and internal misuse or ning of information, communication, weapon or security systems and applications).
corruption of vital friendly information systems. Offensive operations in the information
domain focus on the acquisition of information and intelligence, and the deliberate release **4.11.2. Types of activity**
of information in order to influence a situation in support of the national interest. Information operations do not form a separate category of military operations, but have the
Activities in this domain are conducted in intelligence, information or cyber operations or a function of coordinating all activities in the information domain (information activities).[61 ]
combination of these. Given that armed forces can only operate with correct, complete and A distinction is made between defensive and offensive information activities. The activities

**86** up-to-date information, all capacities that provide or support it are regarded as integrated may also focus on prevention, such as diplomacy and security sector development. The **87**

enablers for bringing fighting power to bear in the different domains. purpose of defensive activities is to protect friendly data and information supply (informa
tion security, particular forms of electronic warfare). Offensive information activities make

The following forms of military activity occur in the information domain. use of information as a ‘weapon’, for example by means of deception, use of the media

        - _exploitation: acquisition of data, information and intelligence for situational awareness;_ (psychological operations), electronic and digital warfare (cyber warfare).

        - _defence: protection of friendly data, information and communication systems, and the_
protection of friendly morale and public support; _Strategic communications. The concept of strategic communications is a new one.[62] Like info_

        - _atack: information as a weapon. The use of various types of data to influence under_ ops, strategic communications are a coordination mechanism, but at strategic level. The
standing. The purpose of this is to defeat opponents (deceive, confuse, morally purpose of strategic communications is to achieve consistency and coherence in word and
undermine and remove support), convince sceptics (boost support) and support allies deed between political and diplomatic statements, public information and military
(provide moral support, maintain and increase public support). information activities. Strategic communications therefore belong in the comprehensive

approach: the coordinated deployment of a state’s instruments of power.

The state can only deploy diplomatic, economic and military means of power effectively if it
has ensured sufficient protection of the production, storage, transportation and delivery of _Electronic warfare. Military use of the electromagnetic spectrum is known as electronic_
information and if the content of the information is satisfactory. Furthermore, the warfare. This type of warfare is made up of three parts:
protection of information, communication within and between the services and the      - _electronic surveillance: the use of received electromagnetic signals for situational_
targeted distribution of information are vitally important for fighting power to be able to awareness;
function effectively.      - _electronic defence: the protection of friendly use of the electromagnetic spectrum_

against the negative effects of enemy electronic warfare;

**4.11.1. Characteristics**      - _electronic atack: denying other actors effective use of parts of the electromagnetic_
Although the actors in the information domain are ofen dependent on physical means in spectrum, for example by jamming and spoofing.


-----

**88**


_Acoustic warfare. Military use of the sound spectrum, both in the air and under water, is_
known as acoustic warfare (AW). This type of warfare has the same sub-sections as electronic
warfare (surveillance, defence and atack). Underwater acoustic warfare is conducted with
the use of active and passive sonar.

_Operations security is designed to deny the enemy any information about dispositions,_
capabilities and intentions of friendly forces.[63] It thus focuses specifically on protecting the
exclusivity of data, particularly data which are vitally important for the success of the
mission (essential elements of friendly information). Operations security measures help to
leave opponents in the dark in respect of the location of friendly forces (counter-detection)
and what the plans are (counterintelligence).

_Deception. Deception is the creation of an erroneous representation of reality by the targeted_
dissemination of misleading information or the deliberate emission of a false signal. The
aim is to induce the enemy to react in a manner that is prejudicial to his interests, without
his awareness of what is happening. This will only be successful if the enemy does not
recognise the misleading information as such, but regards it as reliable, accurate and
relevant. Deceiving an opponent is no simple task, however; it requires thorough preparation, a high level of secrecy and an understanding of the way the enemy thinks. There is a
direct relationship between operations security and deception. Operations security denies
the enemy the correct information about dispositions, capabilities and intentions;
deception fills that information deficit with targeted, misleading information.

_Psychological operations (PSYOPS) are activities used to spread messages directed at a particular_
target audience.
The desired effect of these messages depends on the target audience:

- to weaken the will of the enemy or of potentially hostile target groups;

- to boost support among target audiences that are favourably disposed;

- to obtain support and cooperation from target audiences which are (still) taking a
wait-and-see approach.

61 Defnition of information operations according to AJP-3.10, Allied Joint Doctrine for Information Operations is:
“Info Ops is a military function to provide advice and coordination of military information activities in order to
create desired efects on the will, understanding and capability of adversaries, potential adversaries and other
NAC approved parties in support of Alliance mission objectives.”

62 NATO defnes strategic communications as: “The coordinated and appropriate use of NATO communications activities and capabilities – Public Diplomacy,

Public Afairs (PA), Military Public Afairs, Information Operations (Info Ops) and Psychological Operations (PSYOPS), as appropriate – in support of the

Alliance policies, operations and activities, and in order to advance NATO’s aims.”


In psychological operations, use is made of all the familiar, everyday methods of communication to convey the message. These methods need to meet a few conditions in order to be
effective.

- The message must be specific to the target audience. This means that a good under
standing of the target audience is essential: culture, language, motivations and
philosophies, as well as sensitivities. The skills of the target group also need to be
considered. Distribution of text-bearing leaflets among small children or a largely
illiterate population would, of course, be pointless.

- The message needs to be truthful, but must not compromise operations security.

- The source of the message must be clear.[64]

There is a clear distinction between PSYOPS and public affairs (PA). PSYOPS focus on specific
target audiences in the mission area and use friendly means to convey the message. The
purpose of PA is to supply general information to the public, both at home and elsewhere,
by way of the media, press conferences, press releases and website messages.

Key leader engagement. As the name suggests, key leader engagement (KLE) entails the
involvement of influential individuals in the military operation. Key leaders are people
who, because of their position, status, power and influence, must be regarded as capable of
affecting the situation in the mission area. Examples of key leaders are local authorities,
leaders of local ethnic or religious groups and powerful businessmen. The purpose of KLE is
to induce these local leaders to use their influence for the benefit of the mission and the
objectives of the military operation. KLE is diplomacy at local level, based on personal
contact. In principle, therefore, it is an activity that the military commander himself will
perform in his diplomatic role. KLE can thus be regarded as a psychological operation at the
personal level.

_Cyber warfare (computer network operations). A trend that is rapidly gaining momentum and_
atracting more and more atention – and which is part of the information domain – is the
one that is playing out in cyberspace. This digital environment contains all forms of
transmission and storage of digital data: internet, telephone networks, business networks,
servers, databases and digital operating systems. In the digital environment, advances in
technology, which can nearly always be implemented immediately, are rapid. All kinds of
civil and military actors with malicious intentions are active on the internet, on government, banking and business networks, for the purpose of gaining unauthorised access to


**89**


63 For further explanation about the application of operations security: JDP-2 Intelligence, CHOD, paragraph 1.5.1. 64 These are known as white psychological operations. NATO policy does not allow the use of PSYOPS without


-----

information, testing access security and seeking out weak spots, or of changing or inputing
(dis)information. The resulting damage can be immense: national security can also be
compromised if, for example, highly sensitive information is stolen and emergency services
or security systems no longer function. For the armed forces specifically, military operations
will be jeopardised if digital systems for command and control, logistics or sensor and
weapon systems no longer function properly.


## 5. Militaire doctrine

### 5.1. Introduction
Military doctrine is the expression of military thinking and defines fundamentals, principles
and conditions for military operations. It is thus directed at all sections of the armed forces,
both vertically (services) and horizontally (organisational levels). To guide this diversity of
doctrine, the Netherlands Defence Doctrine sets out some generic fundamentals and
principles on the basis of which the doctrine is then differentiated for the various sections.
This chapter thus forms the basis for Dutch military doctrine and the starting point for
further doctrine development.
The chapter describes the levels of operation, the fundamentals of military operations and
the joint functions of military operations as conceptual instruments. It will close by
highlighting a number of aspects deemed, through national experience, to be of particular
importance.


Defensive, offensive and intelligence operations are conducted in cyberspace too. further doctrine development.

        - Defensive digital operations are designed to protect the availability, integrity and The chapter describes the levels of operation, the fundamentals of military operations and
exclusivity of friendly digital information and systems. the joint functions of military operations as conceptual instruments. It will close by

        - Digital intelligence operations focus on the enemy’s digital systems in order to identify highlighting a number of aspects deemed, through national experience, to be of particular
vulnerable areas. Intelligence operations may also be conducted to obtain infor- importance.
mation, in addition to other forms of intelligence collection.

        - Offensive digital operations target the enemy’s digital systems and information. They **Military doctrine in a historical context**
may also be used to support the effects that need to be achieved in other domains.
Offensive digital capacities differ from other military assets on a number of points. A Doctrine is general in nature and identifes fundamentals, principles and conditions for

**90** digital atack can only be launched once, for instance, as aferwards the capacity of the military operations. Up until the Napoleonic era, there was practically no established **91**

‘cyber weapon’ will be known and the weakness in the affected system will have been doctrine in existence. It was usually about technical and tactical principles and necessary
addressed. Furthermore, the effectiveness of a cyber atack is unpredictable, as the skills. During that period, a distinction was made for the frst time between tactics and
enemy might already have taken countermeasures. strategy. Tactics encompassed all activities on the batlefeld; strategy was more about

the choices about the manner and rhythm in which diferent batles were to be prepared
and conducted. Afer the First World War, the operational level – the level between
strategy and tactics – was designated and incorporated into national doctrine for the
frst time. It was the Russian and German armies in particular that gave this level a place
in military activities.


Afer the Second World War, the following fve levels of operating were eventually
identifed and defned: the political-strategic, the military-strategic, the operational, the
tactical and the technical level. Until the end of the Cold War, the overlap between the
levels was small. More so than in the case of the naval and air forces, the levels within
the land forces were linked to the size of the units. The military-strategic level was the
domain of the theatre commander, known in today’s terminology as the commander of
the combined joint task force. Army groups and armies were active at operational level
and army corps at tactical level. Because of the diminishing size of the deployed units
and the expansion of command and control capabilities, interaction between the
various levels increased signifcantly. The demarcation between the levels became
considerably more vague as a result.


-----

Over the years, the amount and detail of doctrine has increased enormously. Whereas at
the beginning of the 20th century there was usually just one general book describing the
strategic, tactical and even part of the technical level, nowadays the Dutch armed forces
have a large number of books in which military activities are described in great detail.
Since 2005, the keystone document has been the Netherlands Defence Doctrine, of
which this book is the second edition. The domain-specifc doctrines (naval, air, army)
are separate publications: these are, respectively, the Grondslagen Maritiem Optreden
(“Fundamentals of Maritime Operations”) (GMO), the Doctrinepublicatie Landoptreden (“Doctrine
_Publication for Land Operations”) (DPLO) and the Airpower & Space Doctrine (APSD). These_
books are refned further in general and function-based manuals, handbooks and
instruction cards.



- the operational level;

- the tactical level, which includes the technical level.

**5.2.1. The strategic level**
The strategic level is sub-divided into the political strategic level and the military-strategic
level.
_The political-strategic level is responsible for the coordinated, systematic development and use_
of all instruments of power (grand strategy) of a state, alliance or coalition to promote
national, allied or coalition interests. It is at the political-strategic level that the politically
desired end state is formulated. The task of formulating this strategy is the exclusive
responsibility of the government, regardless of whether it is acting alone or in collaboration
with other governments in international organisations or in an ad-hoc coalition. The
political-strategic level decides which means of power are necessary to achieve the
objectives. Finally, it will draw up additional guidelines for the use of the instruments of
power, such as size, duration and mandate, but without describing the mission in detail.
The table below shows examples of actors at the political-strategic level.


Until the end of the Cold War, the development of doctrine for land operations was political-strategic level decides which means of power are necessary to achieve the
largely a national responsibility. That was relatively straightforward, as at the time the objectives. Finally, it will draw up additional guidelines for the use of the instruments of
defence of the North German Plain, although under NATO command, was to be power, such as size, duration and mandate, but without describing the mission in detail.
conducted by national formations. The maritime and air doctrines were much more The table below shows examples of actors at the political-strategic level.

**92** multinational (previously called ‘combined’) in nature. From the 1990s, however, the **93**

nature of military operations changed considerably as a result of the rapidly increasing
number of expeditionary operations at that time. Nationally and internationally, (parts The political-strategic level translated according to the Netherlands, NATO
of) the services were deployed jointly, and if they were deployed with those from other and the EU actors:
countries, they were known as combined joint operations. NATO switched deliberately Government

##### �

to combined joint command and control in the 1991 Strategic Concept, and in ad hoc controlled by parliament
coalition groups, too, this form of collaboration, planning and direction increased. North Atlantic Council
Nationally and internationally, there was a growing need to understand each other’s with ambassadors from member states
work methods and to improve and refne coordination; this trend has led to a situation Political and Security Commitee (PSC)
in which it is increasingly common for joint doctrine to be developed and for synchroni- with European External Action Service (EEAS) for Foreign & Security Afairs policy areas
sation to be sought in the development of domain-specifc doctrine.

|The political-strategic level translated according to the Netherlands, NATO and the EU actors:|Col2|
|---|---|
|!|Government controlled by parliament|
||North Atlantic Council with ambassadors from member states|
||Political and Security Commitee (PSC) with European External Action Service (EEAS) for Foreign & Security Afairs policy areas|


### 5.2. Levels of military activity
There are a number of distinct hierarchical levels in the activities in military operations and
each of these levels has its own characteristics. This distinction has implications for the
thinking behind the application of the military instrument. Particular tasks, powers and
responsibilities are assigned to each level and the activities stemming from these tasks are
so different that they result in specific theories and in some cases even to specific terminology. There are three different levels in the planning and execution of military operations:[65]

- the strategic level, which is sub-divided into the political-strategic level and the


The military-strategic level. Military strategy is the coordinated, systematic development and
use of the military means of a state, alliance or coalition, integrated with other means of
power if possible, with a view to achieving the objectives set by the political-strategic level.
The military-strategic level is thus closely involved in the deliberations at the political-strategic level. In consultation with relevant actors from other ministries, the military-strategic

65 In AJP-01, Allied Joint Doctrine, NATO defnes three levels, namely the military-strategic level (the level at which
armed forces are deployed and employed within an overarching political framework as part of a collective
strategy), the operational level (the level at which campaigns and major operations are planned, conducted and
sustained) and the tactical level (at which forces are employed to conduct military tasks and gain military


-----

commander in his strategic directive. The operational level thus provides the link between
the military-strategic objectives and the tactical deployment of troops. The commander of
the joint, multinational force (Joint (Task) Force Commander) will, as the commander at the
operational level, design, plan, execute and complete his campaign within the joint
operations area (JOA). This not only requires extensive knowledge of the doctrine for the
joint force and its structure and cohesion, but also of the grand strategy and the mission
statement of all the nations involved in the coalition. The operations conducted as part of
the campaign cover all operational themes (combat, security, peace support and peacetime
military engagement). The table shows examples of actors at the operational level. 5.2.3.
The tactical level

Political-strategic

Political-strategic
Military-strategic

Military-strategic

Operational Operational

Tactical

|The military-strategic level translated according to the Netherlands, NATO and the EU actors:|Col2|
|---|---|
|!|Chief of Defence assisted by the Defence Staf, representatives of other ministries and NGOs|
||Supreme Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR) assisted by Allied Command Operations and other representatives and advisers|
||EU Military Staf The EU has no permanent military structure|


66 SACEUR is a title that (still) exists for reasons of tradition. Immediately afer the Second World War and during
the Cold War, this command was responsible for the defence of Europe. It has now grown to become NATO’s
military-strategic command responsible for operations all over the world.

67 According to AAP-6, NATO Glossary: A set of military operations planned and conducted to achieve a strategic
objective within a given time and geographical area, which normally involve maritime, land and air forces.

68 In AJP-3, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Conduct of Operations, NATO recognises the four listed operational
themes. They are intended to guide opinion about the type of operation that is being launched. This does not
mean that it is possible to apply a strict separation between the types of operation, as operational themes can
overlap or become part of one another.

69 This phenomenon is also referred to with the metaphor of the ‘strategic corporal’ in reference to an article by US Marines General Charles C Krulak; ‘The


**94**


authority formulates in its strategic guidances or strategic directives a general mission
statement on the basis of the military-strategic objectives. The aim is to coordinate with
representatives of (other) international and non-governmental organisations and departments as early as possible in the preparation phase. This level will then assign objectives
and means to operational commanders and establish any restrictions on their use, without
geting involved in the detail of the execution. National, multinational and allied militarystrategic authorities are also tasked with seting the requirements and allocating military
means for a particular operation.

The military-strategic level translated according to the Netherlands, NATO
and the EU actors:
Chief of Defence

##### �

assisted by the Defence Staf, representatives of other ministries and NGOs
Supreme Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR)

assisted by Allied Command Operations and other representatives and advisers
EU Military Staf
The EU has no permanent military structure

As explained in Chapter 3, the decision to use military force if necessary falls under the
primacy of politics. The selected military strategy must conform to the political strategy and
the frameworks of international law. The aim of this strategy is to advance the realisation of
political objectives and it must be synchronised with the employment of other means of
power at the government’s disposal. It is the responsibility of the military-strategic
authority and the operational commanders to translate the political objectives and
guidelines into achievable military objectives down to the tactical level. The military
objectives must be specific, measurable, feasible, realistic and timed. The definition of the
political and military strategies and the military objectives can never be the result of a
one-way process. There needs to be close collaboration between political and military
leaders and with all relevant departments. In reality, there is ofen virtually no clear dividing
line between the political-strategic and the military-strategic levels. There is in effect an
overlap, whereby top civil servants and military officials need to collaborate intensively to
develop and prepare decisions to deploy the military instrument of power.

**5.2.2. The operational level**
The operational level is responsible for planning, directing and executing joint and/or


**95**


Tactical

Technical


Technical


-----

Tactics are the employment of and actions by formations and units in order to conduct ground also has other expertise that is necessary to complete the picture of reality.[70 ] The
military activities in a certain cohesion and sequence. At the tactical level, forces perform one carrying out the orders at tactical level can also see - sometimes immediately - the direct
actions to complete tactical assignments. In contrast to the operational level, the tactical consequences of his actions on his surroundings and he alone will personally experience
level employs forces directly to conduct military activities, thus contributing to the the repercussions of the decision that was made. But above all, he is the only one who is
accomplishment of the campaign’s operational objective. There are also examples of cases familiar with the physical environment and all the actors at work within it. Intervention by
in which forces operating at the tactical level can make a direct contribution to a military- higher commanders, who have much less insight into this tactical picture, must, therefore,
strategic objective. That applies, for example, to the use of special operations forces. Other be executed with extreme caution.
examples are the deployment of a submarine for the collection of strategic intelligence or
the execution of strategic bombing. **5.2.5. Uniform approach to planning and execution of operations**
The technical level completes the levels structure. At the technical level, small units operate All operations conducted by the armed forces are in principle approached in the same way.
according to an established patern, the units being individuals and (weapon) systems. At In the past, a distinction was made between combat, peace support and national operatithis level, the (tactical) objective of a military activity is achieved by means of a specific ons. Practice has shown that this distinction has a compartmentalising effect and that in
sequence of actions. The technical level is concerned with performing combat techniques reality there are no partitions between combat and peace support operations or the force
(skills and drills), with one or more specific (weapon) systems. The actual execution of tasks levels that exist within them. All operations are, therefore, fundamentally approached in
in support of combat actions - in the broadest sense - also belongs at the technical level. the same way. During each operation, forces must be able to perform a wide range of
Examples of such tasks are repairing materiel, installing and operating radio stations, military activities simultaneously. This ranges from offensive and defensive activities to

**96** replenishment at sea and air-to-air refuelling. Typical at this level are fixed procedures and those designed to establish the necessary conditions and to stabilise. The circumstances will **97**

the absence of an extensive decision-making process. dictate the relationship between and the priority of these various activities. A unit could

thus have a stabilisation task, while one of its sub-units is engaging an enemy in combat

5.2.4. Interweaving of the levels and another sub-unit is performing a humanitarian task. All military operational functions
The need for (near) real-time information about military deployment in mission areas must always be taken into consideration in the planning and execution of each operation. A
grows as the technical capabilities increase. Nowadays, the media as well as senior staffs and uniform approach to operations is, therefore, essential for unity of opinion, while
political leaders can closely monitor the execution of tactical missions. This effect is preconditions such as authority, mandate, legal basis, restrictions and the accents in the
intensified by the fact that actions by units or individuals at the technical and tactical levels commander’s analysis, may differ.[71]
can have far-reaching repercussions at the operational and strategic levels, both in and
outside the military domain. Commanders must therefore take account of the fact that the **5.3. Basic principles of military operations**
political-strategic level will, in certain circumstances, wish to exert influence down to the The basic principles of military operations form an important part of the conceptual
tactical and technical levels. Because of the transparent environment, this political component. These are rules of a fundamental nature for the use of military means. They
interweaving of military activities, even at low levels, is extensive. have been formed by years of military experience and are thus an excellent guide for military

operations. In many cases, they can serve as evaluation criteria for the completeness and

This ability of political-military leaders to intervene during the conduct of an operation feasibility of an operational concept. The correct application of these principles requires
carries significant risks. As well as having an actual view of the situation, the man on the common sense and professional judgement, and can thus contribute to the success of a

military operation.

70 The picture of reality starts with the build-up of a unit’s own or shared operational picture (who is where, what is he doing and what are his intentions). This leads to some form of awareness of the actual situation. Together with other information, this should ideally lead to some form of understanding of the The basic principles of military operations must always be considered in relation to each

situation.

71 Reference works are available for this uniform approach, such as CDS Leidraad nr. 2, Operationeel Planningsproces
_(CHOD Field Manual 2 Operational Planning Process) document MC-0133/4 ‘NATO’s Operations Planning’ and_ 72 See for example JDP-01 British Defence Doctrine November 2011 AJP-01 Allied Joint Doctrine and CFJP-01


-----

other. On the basis of the situation, the commander will determine which basic principles
are the deciding factors at any given time. Full adherence to one principle may make it
difficult or even impossible to apply another. In their decision making, therefore, commanders will always weigh up the relative importance of each. In this evaluation, the commander takes into account the higher commander’s intent, his own mission and objective, the
actions of other parties involved in the conflict and the factors of time and space. One
exception here is the principle of legitimacy, which must be applied at all times.

Not all countries and alliances have the same principles. They make a choice, and the
Netherlands is no different in that respect.[72] The Netherlands armed forces adhere to the
following principles, shown in alphabetical order.


to exploit the chaos which ofen accompanies a crisis or combat action. The operation plans
must also allow for a response to unforeseen developments and provide commanders with
the greatest possible freedom of action.

**c. Freedom of movement[74 ]**

To be able to act efficiently and with flexibility and to be able to take the initiative when
necessary, freedom of movement is crucial. A military unit which cannot move to or within
a mission area will fail in the execution of its tasks. In that case, that unit will not be able to
contribute to the realisation of the set objectives. This does not simply refer to the physical
freedom of action that is ensured by having control of areas and infrastructure. The freedom
to make one’s own choices, independently of others, is needed to ensure flexibility and is
thus the key to success in the implementation phase.


**a. Concentration of force**
In order to force a decision, a point of main effort has to be established at the right time **d. Initiative …. and daring!**
and in the right place by means of a concentration of effects. This should ensure that the Commanders should constantly strive to achieve and maintain freedom of action. This can
local effect is such that the set objective can be achieved. It is not only numbers that be achieved by gaining the initiative and by acting sooner and faster than other parties. This

**98** determine the outcome, but also combat skills, cohesion, morale, timing, choice of will deliver an edge and allow situations to be turned to one’s own advantage. This principle **99**

objectives and the exploitation of any technological advantage. The capacity to concentrate used to be regarded as an offensive action as well. It requires a style of leadership which
effects quickly depends on an effective and efficient command and control system and the encourages initiative and allows calculated risks to be taken. Sometimes it requires nerve
ability to displace rapidly. Concentration of effects normally means acceptance of relative and an atitude of ‘who dares wins’! This show of daring is stimulated by a style of leaderweakness elsewhere. ship under which actions shown to require daring are appreciated – as long as the inherent

risk is not unacceptably high. This principle does not, however, preclude the fact that

**b. Flexibility** patience is required in some cases.
A commander must have the adaptability to adjust his plans. The actual situation may differ
from what was envisaged beforehand. Situations can change quickly, as a result of which **e. Legitimacy[75 ]**
adjustments could be needed. There may sometimes be unexpected opportunities to be Legitimacy has a legal and an ethical side. Legal legitimacy primarily requires a legal basis
exploited. Flexibility has a conceptual component in the thinking behind operations, a for the mission. Secondly, legitimacy is based on the observance of rules that apply during
mental component (the ability of the commander and his staff to empathise and adapt) and the mission (laws and jurisdiction), for example, international humanitarian law, status of
a physical component in the choice of available assets. Flexibility requires the right mental forces agreements[76] and the rules of engagement. Legal legitimacy is an absolute fundaatitude and an organisation trained to adapt rapidly to changing circumstances. This in mental and cannot be discounted in favour of other fundamentals. Legal legitimacy
turn depends on a command style that gives commanders the necessary leeway, such as contributes to ethical legitimacy. This focuses on maintaining acceptance and support
mission command.[73] A commander must use his own mental flexibility and that of his unit among the local population, the home population and public opinion; it is an important

condition for the successful progression and completion of military operations. When
choosing his delivery means in a particular action, for example, the commander will need

73 Mission command is a command style and is discussed further in paragraph 5.5.3.

74 NATO regards this principle as an additional consideration and not as a generally applicable fundamental, as it to ensure that he keeps any collateral damage to an absolute minimum.
only applies in certain types of operation.

75 NATO regards this principle as an additional consideration and not as a generally applicable fundamental, as it
only applies in certain types of operation (see AJP 01 Allied Joint Doctrine)


-----

**f. Maintenance of morale**
Morale is an important factor for fighting power and thus for the success of a military
operation. The commander plays a highly important role in this respect. Successful actions
generate a certain form of self-respect which, in many situations, produces a vital contribution to the maintenance of morale in difficult circumstances. Long-term deployment a long
way from home, in an environment in which politics also play an important role, can have a
huge effect on morale. Personnel are also affected by the fact that the media are constantly
looking over their shoulder.


**j. Surprise**
Surprise is achieved by performing an action at an unforeseen place and time or in an
unexpected way. A surprise operation could decide an action, combat or otherwise, in
favour of friendly forces. Surprise operations can also compensate for the quantitative
disadvantage of an unfavourable power ratio. The aim of surprise is to unbalance the
enemy, thus ensuring that the initiative falls into friendly hands. This can be achieved
through speed in thought and deed, secrecy and deception, variation in the method of
operating and the use of unexpected assets. It may, however, be necessary to be completely
open about the motive, mission and intentions in an operation. This transparency could
then prevent a situation in which other parties or the local population misinterpret the
force’s action.


**g. Security** then prevent a situation in which other parties or the local population misinterpret the
Security is a vital condition for the preservation of friendly assets, freedom of action, force’s action.
concentration of the force and for taking risks outside the point of main effort. Security is
not, however, an objective in itself; the execution of the mission remains the key issue. A **k. Sustainability**
certain level of security can be achieved by physical protection and by keeping information Once an operation has begun, the deployed force must be able to sustain it as long as is
from outsiders, and this is done by taking active and passive measures. Active measures are necessary to achieve the desired effect. To guarantee the sustainability of an operation, all
designed to prevent surprise by the enemy or other parties and take the form of, for the required conditions must have been met. These include the political will and involve
**100** example, the physical protection of bases, securing a favourable situation in the airspace, ment, the availability and deployability of materiel, enough trained and fully-staffed units, **101**

defending the friendly fleet, protecting the flanks or keeping a sufficient reserve on standby. resilience and a fully functioning logistics system. Logistics deliver a vital contribution to
A passive measure could be to ensure that information regarding friendly assets and plans sustainability. The logistics systems need to be geared towards providing the commander
does not fall into the hands of other parties. with as much freedom of action as possible to implement his plan. Although logistics play a

supportive role to operations, they are vitally important for the execution of the operation

**h. Selection and maintenance of the aim** as a whole. Logistics preparation must, therefore, be included from the start of the
Every military operation must be designed to realise or achieve an objective which is clearly planning process.
defined and atainable. If a military unit lacks a clear objective or loses sight of what has to
be achieved, the military operation will in many cases fail as a result. At higher levels, the **l. Unity of efort**
objective can be expressed in a guideline or directive seting out the desired end state. At the In order to deploy the available military capacity effectively and achieve the objective, a
tactical level, commanders derive their objective from the higher commander’s intent. This commander needs to synchronise his assets and activities. Given that many assets from
intent is stated explicitly in the orders they receive, and is key in the planning, preparation different national and international units have effects on the same objective, modern
and execution of the operation and enables goal-oriented actions at all levels. military operations place heavy demands on the interplay of military operational functions.
execution of the operation and enables goal-oriented actions at all levels. Unity of effort is an essential condition for success. Unity of effort between military units is

supported by joint doctrine, coordinated procedures, single command, synchronisation

**i. Simplicity** and prioritisation. In the mental sphere, team spirit, goodwill and understanding of each
Because of the rapid succession of events, the complexity of military operations and the other’s capabilities and limitations are indispensable. Single command is the most solid
constant stream of information, it is inevitable that chaos, stress and friction will arise. basis for unity of effort. Where other actors are not part of the command structure – such as
Unambiguous, clear and proven procedures, straightforward plans and clear orders all
increase the chances of success in an operation. 77 As well as the joint functions listed here, in AJP-01, Allied Joint Doctrine, NATO also regards information
operations and civil-military cooperation (CIMIC) as separate joint functions.

78 A detailed description of command and control can be found in the Netherlands doctrine publication JDP-5


-----

**102**


**103**


**102**


non-military actors – it is vital to strive for as much synchronisation and coordination as
possible to achieve optimum unity of effort.

#### 5.4. Joint functions in military operations
The functions in military operations are a conceptual aid for the commander and his staff in
the integration, synchronisation and direction of capabilities and activities in operations.
An analysis of the role and form of the operational functions ensures that commanders and
staffs consider all aspects of an operation. The results of the analysis will appear in an
operation concept and a plan for the deployment of forces. The strength of the functions
lies in their integration; together they deliver a unit’s fighting power. The operational
functions must, therefore, always be considered in relation to each other. Only a mission in
which the functions are synchronised with each other will have any chance of success. The
relative importance of a function also varies in accordance with the operational objective.
Furthermore, it is not the case that a particular operational function can be traced back to a
particular functionality or service. More than one functionality and service are usually
involved in performing a function. On the other hand, one functionality or unit can
contribute to more than one function.
The operational functions apply to all levels of military action. In the case of joint
operations, the following joint functions[77] apply:



- intelligence

- force protection

- sustainability

**5.4.1. Command and control**
The function of command and control is about leading and managing a military organisation to achieve its objectives. Command and control is made up of the elements of
leadership, decision making and control, and integrates the other operational functions to
form a single concept. Planning, direction, coordination and control guarantee the vertical
and horizontal integration of (military) units and assigned assets. As soon as this integration produces more synergy in the operation, command and control will form a force
multiplier for fighting power.[78 ]

**5.4.2. Manoeuvre and fres[79]**
Manoeuvre and fires are inextricably linked; they are used to bring about desired effects and
to avoid undesired effects, and it is with the combination of manoeuvre and fires that
operational objectives are achieved. The primary purpose of manoeuvre is to gain the most
advantageous position possible in respect of the enemy or other actor. Manoeuvre is much
more than the displacement of weapon systems and platforms. The manoeuvre function
directs the process in which fighting power is focused on achieving a decisive effect. It also
includes the mobility of friendly assets and the physical control of areas that deliver an
operational advantage. Effects can be achieved in both the physical and the psychological
sphere. Manoeuvre in the traditional sense entails directing fighting power wherever it will
have the greatest effect, and is primarily concerned with the enemy’s physical component in
a positional or geographic sense. His strong points will be avoided and his weak points
exploited. Manoeuvre in a broad sense also influences ‘the enemy’s will’ or ‘the actor’s
understanding’. This does not occur solely in a positional or geographic sense, but through
a combination of a quantitative, physical superiority and the capability for influencing
actors’ understanding. This change in perception is designed to impact on morale by
causing uncertainty, confusion or even paralysis on the part of the enemy. The local
population can also be won in this way, as they will feel that they are being protected and
supported. The preventive deployment of units in the immediate vicinity of a developing
conflict can also influence understanding.
Fires are the means of influencing one or more actors. Every action in a military operation

79 The word fres suggests that efect can only be achieved with frearms; these days, fres also includes the use of
other efectors i e those delivering efect without the use of armed force


-----

has a certain effect and thus influences an actor. Units must be given sufficient qualitative
and quantitative capacities to bring about the desired effects. It is not only the employment
of armed force that produces these effects; influencing opponents by damaging their
information and information infrastructure, their financial sources and their support base
is a broader application. Other forms of fires are the targeted employment of assets to
support favourably disposed actors and the provision of measured support to the local
population. Fires are thus produced by bringing effectors to bear in the physical and
psychological spheres. They are divided into firepower, which is used to achieve physical
and psychological effects, and the capability of influencing the understanding of target
groups or individuals. This influencing of understanding takes the form of information
activities (key leader engagement, psychological operations, deception, electronic warfare,
etc) and the development or restoration of government functions (e.g., training of police
and military capacities as part of security sector development), thus enabling the local
population to provide its own security. Public affairs and other methods of enhancing the
security situation can also contribute to this effect.


environment. Information about historical, cultural, social and religious backgrounds to a
crisis and place as well as the role and significance of all other actors are at least as important. Using this information and the information from lessons learned in the past for future
action completes the ‘circle of knowledge’, and this is referred to as the knowledge
development process. Modern communication methods, the media and growing
globalisation make it possible for actors to bring their influence to bear or to influence
understanding over great distances, which means that it is vital to look beyond the physical
boundaries of the mission area itself.


groups or individuals. This influencing of understanding takes the form of information **5.4.4. Force protection**
activities (key leader engagement, psychological operations, deception, electronic warfare, For a commander, it is of the utmost importance that his fighting power be protected in all
etc) and the development or restoration of government functions (e.g., training of police stages of an operation. The primary purpose of force protection is to maintain freedom of
and military capacities as part of security sector development), thus enabling the local action so that it is and will remain possible to conduct the mission successfully. The
population to provide its own security. Public affairs and other methods of enhancing the protection function comprises all activities that are geared towards preventing undesired
security situation can also contribute to this effect. effects on friendly forces, and minimising or, if possible, eliminating risk. This means that

protection needs to be considered at all times and at all levels in the planning and execution

**104** **5.4.3. Intelligence[80 ]** of operations. There are several different aspects to force protection: active and passive, **105**

Intelligence is the result of knowledge and understanding of the activities, capabilities and physical and mental.
intentions of all relevant actors and factors. The intelligence function thus comprises more
than the traditional focus on geographic features and climatic conditions in the mission Full force protection could get in the way of the execution of a mission. It is, therefore,
area and on the (potential) enemy. Intelligence provides as complete and up-to-date a necessary to find a responsible balance between full force protection on the one hand and
picture of the situation as possible (situational awareness) and is an essential condition for the execution of the task on the other. Ultimately, it is about achieving the assigned
success in any operation. objective, not protecting the unit. The chosen protection measures will depend on the

threat and the associated risks for the execution of the mission. The threat is determined on

Intelligence is formed by the targeted collection and analysis of information. Units have the basis of the behaviour of any opponents, the effect of terrain and weather conditions,
many sensors, ranging from electronic sensors to individual personnel. Furthermore, a unit the friendly operation and that of all other actors and factors in the operational environwill normally have a specific organisational element that is responsible for the collection ment. Furthermore, the threat is not only directed at the physical component of fighting
and processing of information into intelligence. This organisational element is dependent power, but also – or maybe even specifically – against the mental component.
on other staffs or (foreign) intelligence agencies for this task. Also, all staff officials are
responsible, from within their specialist area, for contributing to situational awareness. **5.4.5. Sustainability**

The sustainability function entails support with the materiel, personnel and financial

By translating the intelligence requirement of authorities and commanders into effective means required to build up and maintain fighting power. Once built up, the sustainment of
and concrete core questions for collecting agencies, the scarce intelligence capability can be fighting power is vital for maintaining and continuing operations until the mission is
deployed in the right way. Intelligence officers thus receive the necessary guidance and completed. A logistics plan based on the operation is also essential for the realisation of the
instructions for their part in the operation. The different levels need to have their own objectives. Any deployment without a logistics plan based on manoeuvre, fires and force
intelligence capability to cover their specific intelligence requirement. Guiding the protection is doomed to failure. Properly thought-out and executed combat service support
intelligence process is the commander’s responsibility. His interest should not merely focus creates the required conditions. Logistic capabilities and constraints dictate the capabilities


-----

Direct


### 5.5. National accents
As described earlier, the Netherlands armed forces observe and implement doctrine that has
been developed and ratified in an allied context. They will normally have been involved in
its development, and any doctrine which they did not help develop will have been approved
by the Netherlands. Any diverging Dutch doctrine would not conform to the basic principles
of ‘unity of effort’ and ‘simplicity’. This keystone Netherlands Defence Doctrine is therefore
in line with the doctrine developed under the NATO umbrella. National accents have been
laid by describing the fundamentals that guide Dutch military operations on the one hand
and, on the other, by describing the aspects of the manoeuvrist approach, network-based
operations and mission command in the following paragraphs. The chapter will close by
looking at how military personnel cope with expectations and at the special responsibility
of the armed forces and individual service personnel.


Figure 5.2 Manoeuvrist approach in a broader sense


**5.5.1. Manoeuvrist approach** A selective and physical elimination of capacities (people and means) is in keeping with the
The possession of sufficient fighting power is no guarantee of success. The realisation of the manoeuvrist approach. The manoeuvrist approach can be characterised by pre-emptive

**106** desired effects and the avoidance of undesired effects are brought about by the combina- action, by outmanoeuvring and by disrupting the enemy. To be able to identify and exploit **107**

tion of manoeuvre and fires. An approach in which power is mainly deployed against weaknesses, it is not only good intelligence that is required, but also a high operational
identified weaknesses of other actors and in which it targets the mental component is tempo and multiple simultaneous activities.
known as the manoeuvrist approach. The aim of this approach is to influence other actors’
perception of reality, their behaviour and their actions. Important aspects here are A high operational tempo can be reached by rapid decision making, speed of execution and
momentum, tempo and mental agility, which in combination produce a shock effect and a fast-paced change of activities. This high tempo will allow penetration of the enemy’s
the element of surprise on other actors. The manoeuvrist approach requires a mental decision-making cycle which will hinder his response; his will, cohesion and understanding
atitude that centres on creativity, the willingness to take risks, and perseverance. will thus be damaged.

The traditional manoeuvrist approach is designed to break the will of the enemy and his Despite the emphasis on the mental component, the manoeuvrist approach in combat
willingness to carry on fighting. The emphasis is thus on his mental component and not on always involves elements of physical mobility, firepower and control of maritime areas,
the destruction of his physical component; direct confrontation is avoided as much as ground or airspace. This approach also involves the need to bind the enemy, to deny routes,
possible. spaces and areas and to preserve vital friendly areas and key points. Defensive measures like

these are, however, always a means to a higher end, namely the defeat of the enemy.

The purpose of the manoeuvrist approach is to:

         - gain and retain the initiative and exert constant pressure at times and places that the It is not always possible to break an enemy’s will to act. In the case of ideologically driven
enemy least expects it, thus undermining his will and his willingness to sustain the groups, other instruments will have to be sought to achieve the desired effect. This can be
fighting; achieved within the philosophy of the manoeuvrist approach, by seeking the support of all

         - direct the effects of precision weapons against identified enemy weaknesses, thus actors for the operation, and also by denying external support to the enemy, as his sustainabreaking his cohesion; bility could be partly dependent on this form of support. In this way, the enemy can be

         - restricting the enemy’s ability to obtain situational awareness, thus adversely affecting deprived of the initiative.


-----

##### THE CAPACITY FOR INTERAGENCY The manoeuvrist approach in a broader sense. PREPARATION, PLANNING AND EXECUTION OF Today’s conflicts and crises involve a OPERATIONS - AND THUS THE ACTIVE DESIRE higher number of actors. This is further TO USE A COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH – intensified by our ‘open’ world, in which MEANS THAT NON-MILITARY ACTORS everyone can keep abreast of each military (INTERAGENCY, IO/NGOS) MUST BE ADMITTED operation. As a result, military influence TO (PART OF) THE NETWORK. extends further than it used to and it is not

only the activities in the mission area that
are important. The opinion of population groups, parties, countries and organisations with
which there is no physical interaction is now also a determining factor in the success of an
operation.


network-based operations. Despite all the modern technology, the deployment of liaison
officers and personnel at multinational headquarters is a vital addition to network-enabled
capabilities. Direct personal contact will never be replaced by the exchange of digital
images, sound and text.

As part of an integrated approach, network-based operations are not confined purely to [the
reinforcement of] fighting power. To bring about the effective and efficient deployment of
all assets in this broad context too, it is vital that, apart from the social networks referred to
above, non-military actors also form part of the network. The structures and procedures
therefore need to be set up in such a way as to make this possible. This means that particular consideration is needed when deciding what information should be available to whom.
From the point of view of operations security or the national interest, it may be necessary to
shield part of the information from some actors in the network.


Effective operations are determined by the approach towards all actors, not only by the way shield part of the information from some actors in the network.
in which the enemy is approached. By extension, the ‘will of the enemy’ in the traditional
manoeuvrist approach can therefore be regarded as the ‘actor’s opinion’. The opinion **5.5.3. Mission command**
translates into support and thus into cohesion. Support for the friendly operation must be In the Netherlands armed forces, mission command[81] is the primary style of command.

**108** maintained and increased. Support for the enemy should be reduced, so that he eventually Under mission command, establishing and communicating the commander’s intent is key, **109**

gives up. Tailoring friendly activities carefully to the will, understanding and cohesion of all as full freedom of action is given to the lower executing levels. The intent focuses on the
actors puts into practice the effects-based approach and the manoeuvrist approach in a context in which the task has to be performed and on the desired results and effects, and
broader sense. not on the way in which they are achieved. Authority for the execution is thus decentralised.

In other words, authority is delegated to the lowest appropriate level for the most effective

**5.5.2. Network-based operations** and efficient deployment of equipment and capacities. The scarcity of assets and capabiliA condition for the effective, efficient and integrated deployment of fighting power is the ties, as in the case of airpower, for example, may mean that the possibility of delegating this
linking of effectors, sensors, C2 elements and communications and information systems in authority is limited. The Dutch doctrine publication entitled ‘Command and control’
a single network. Along with the interoperability of these means, this network allows the (JDP-5) discusses mission command in more detail, along with the conditions needed to
friendly decision-making cycle to be accelerated and enhanced in terms of quality. The use it successfully.
increased technological capabilities of communications and information systems
contribute to the reinforcing effect of networks on fighting power. As well as the use of **5.6. Coping with expectations**
technology, network enhancement also involves aspects concerning process, personnel, Military personnel have to deal with the expectations of a variety of actors. They have to
culture and organisation. All this enables fast and targeted information flows in order to ensure that each relevant actor is given the right idea of where the military operation should
gain greater speed of action and decision making than the enemy. The reinforced fighting lead and why certain activities are being deployed. And whatever is announced must
power through faster and beter processing and dissemination of information is referred to actually take place. Coping with expectations means first of all identifying and analysing the
as network-enabled capabilities. prevailing views. Expectations are ofen wrong, too high or even contradictory.

It is, therefore, vital to create the right impression of what a force should, can and wants to

Just as relevant as the technical network is the social network. Social networks serve to build do. This requires constant assessment and communication, as well as visible deeds and
trust between their members. Familiarity with and trust in people thus remain the basis for results. The force must say what it is doing and must do what it says. If that does not

happen, the force will lose credibility and the chances of success will diminish. The right


-----

goal is, for example that the local population provides its own security. The population will
then be expected to deliver the required effort itself, and responsibility for security, law and
order will eventually be lef to the local authorities.

Coping with expectations involves more than just creating clarity. If expectations are wrong
or contradictory, it may be important to steer them, for example by persuading various local
actors to collaborate. The same applies to opponents; it can also be made clear to them
what the response will be if they do not comply. That response must actually follow in that
case. The expectations of the local

##### DUTCH MILITARY PERSONNEL TAKE ACCOUNT population – for example, that the OF THE VALUES, WORK METHODS AND military presence is temporary and that CONVICTIONS OF OTHER ACTORS the purpose of military activities is to

enable the population to look afer its
own security – must be met by deploying only those activities that correspond to these
expectations.


instrument of the Netherlands government in the

##### IT IS THE PEOPLE IN THE ARMED protection and defence of national interests, the FORCES WHO MAKE THEM promotion of the international rule of law and the RELIABLE AND EFFECTIVE fulfilment of the tasks embedded in the Constitution.

An organisation alone cannot give meaning to this
value; it is the people who make the organisation
reliable and effective. It is, therefore, the duty of each individual serviceman and woman to
make every effort to ensure that the armed forces are seen as such: reliable and effective.

The authority vested in military personnel to use force on behalf of the government
demands a strong awareness of their subordination to the democratic regime and thus the
serving nature of the armed forces.

**_We honour our dead, care for our wounded and support our veterans._**


**110** The essential characteristic of military operations as far as Western nations are concerned is **111**

that military personnel are authorised to use armed force; the military organisation belongs
to the government’s monopoly of force. In mission areas, however, the law of the jungle
applies in many cases. In preparation for this potential combat, Dutch military personnel
learn, train for and drill the use of all possible means and capabilities to defeat the enemy,
ideally without any friendly losses and preferably without even having to fight themselves.
In certain circumstances, this can be achieved by outsmarting the enemy or by operating in
such a way that the enemy decides against an armed confrontation.

By no means the least critical success factor is a demonstration by the Dutch military that it
is a force to be reckoned with. Besides a show of force and a mere presence, this can also be
achieved by demonstrating military professionalism, resolve and visible capacity for
escalation domination. It is therefore not only weapons that can bring about the success of
a mission. But this is only possible if Dutch military personnel take account of the values,
work methods and convictions of other actors.

Disseminating the message established prior to the mission, portraying the desired image
and acting accordingly will give the force authority and evoke respect among all the relevant
actors.

### 5.7. Special responsibility


-----

-----

