# Defence  Assessment 

## july 2010 


-----

### Contents

Page

##### Executive Summary vi

 Chapter 1: Defence Assessment 2010

Introduction 1
The Evolving Strategic Environment 2
Capability Requirements of the NZDF 2
Funding Challenges 3
Organisational Capability 3
Terms of Reference 4
Process 5
Recommendations 6

##### Chapter 2 Defence Within a National Security Framework

New Zealand’s National Security Interests 7
The Whole of Government Approach to Promoting 10
National Security
Recommendations 12

##### Chapter 3 New Zealand’s Strategic Context and Outlook to 2035

The Nature of Conflict 13
New Zealand, the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), and 14
the Realm
Australia 14
The South Pacific 15
United States 16
The Asian Region 17
The Wider World 19
The Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction 20
Terrorism 20
Demographic Changes and Natural Hazards 21
Discontinuities, Disjunctions or Major Shifts 21
Recommendations 22

##### Chapter 4 Principal Roles and Tasks for the NZDF

Principal Tasks for the NZDF 24
Defend New Zealand’s Sovereignty 24
Our Alliance with Australia 25
Contribute to Peace and Stability in the South Pacific 25
Support Peace and Security in the Asia-Pacific Region 26
Contribute to International Peace and Security 27


-----

Contribute to Whole of Government Security Efforts at 28

Home

Whole of Government Efforts to Monitor the Strategic 29

Environment

The NZDF’s Military Characteristics 29

Operations in New Zealand’s Maritime Zone and the 30

South Pacific as the Starting Point for Choosing Military
Capabilities

Capabilities and Conflict 30

Risk Mitigation and the Response to Major Shifts and 31

Other Disjunctions

Recommendations 32

##### Chapter 5 Military Capability Choices

The Value of Military Capabilities 34

Tasks and Capabilities 35

NZDF Contribution to Whole of Government Tasks 37

Building on Strong Foundations 38

Capability Choices 39

Pathways for the Future NZDF 39

The Three Pathways 40

Assessment of Pathways 45

Conclusion 48

Recommendations 49

##### Chapter 6 The Total Defence Workforce

Strategic Objectives for the Defence Workforce 51

Demand 54

Low Pathway 57

Middle Pathway 58

High Pathway 59

Supply 63

Retention 65

Training 66

Career Development 67

Research 68

Conclusion 68

Recommendations 69

##### Chapter 7 Financial Context and Costs of Capability Pathways

Financial Context 71

Offsetting Efficiencies 73

Current Financial Position 74

Characteristics of Costs Estimates 75

Fiscal Strategy and Indicative Funding Parameters 75


-----

Costs of Capability Pathways 76

How Costs Might Change? 80

Conclusion 82

##### Chapter 8 Funding and Financial Management

The Defence Decisions Environment 85

Capital Expenditure 86

Operating Expenditure 88

Cost Escalation 91

Military Inflation 91

Asset Revaluations 92

Conclusion 92

Recommendations 93

##### Chapter 9 Defence Real Estate and Infrastructure

Introduction 94

Current Issues 95

Derivation of Principles and Criteria 96

Constraints and Opportunities 96

Public Private Partnerships 97

Scenarios for Recovery 98

The Way Ahead 99

Flexibility for Future Changes 100

Conclusion 100

Recommendations 101

##### Chapter 10 Procurement and Organisational Reform

Introduction 102

Scope and Background 102

The Wintringham Report 103

The Aurecon Report 104

Procurement as a Continuous, Joined-up Process 105

Setting the Guidelines for Reform 106

Options for Structural Reform 107

Proposal to Establish a Joint Management Option 108

Revised Sole and Joint Functions in the Context of a 108

Joint Management Board
Audit and Evaluation 111

Defence Science and Technology 112

Independent Advice to the Minister of Defence 113

Next Steps 115

Recommendations 115

##### Chapter 11 Summary of Recommendations  118

 Glossary 127


-----

##### Annex A Terms of Reference 131
 Annex B The Three Capability Pathways 137
 Annex C Personnel Characteristics And Trends 143


-----

### Executive Summary

In March 2009 Cabinet directed that the Secretary of Defence undertake a
Defence Assessment, in consultation with the Chief of Defence Force and
other stakeholders, as prescribed by Section 24(2)(c) of the Defence Act
1990. The Terms of Reference provided for an Assessment that addressed
the following major issues:

- How does the present and potential future strategic environment impact
on the security of New Zealand?

- How does Defence contribute, and may in future contribute, to the
security of New Zealand, Australia, the South Pacific, the Asia-Pacific
region and globally?

- How does Defence advance New Zealand’s foreign policy and the
relationship between Defence and other government agencies to
enhance a ‘whole of government’ approach?

- How well do current New Zealand Defence Force (NZDF) outputs meet
the actual needs now and in the near future, and how are the actual
capabilities, including those under consideration or development, aligned
to those outputs?

- Looking to the medium and longer term, what are the capabilities needed
against requirements in the future and what are the implications arising
from that analysis?

- What are the key issues around Defence personnel, including training,
retention, recruitment and the role of Reserves?

- What is the best organisational structure for the Ministry of Defence and
the NZDF?

- When and how should military capabilities be used for non-military
purposes to support the work of other (civilian) government agencies?

- How best can procurement, defence infrastructure and real estate be
managed?

- What are the best financial management procedures to meet the long
term defence funding requirements?

##### The Strategic Outlook

The strategic outlook set out in this Assessment reaffirms that a direct military
threat to New Zealand remains unlikely. The nation’s interests, however,
extend well beyond our borders. New Zealand benefits from being an active
participant in global affairs and from maintaining close connections with likeminded nations, particularly Australia. But the benefits we derive from these


-----

connections are not without obligations. These include being willing to use
armed force in preventing or resolving conflict, and in upholding the
international rule of law.

Beyond our shores, the strategic outlook is for more instability. The island
states of the South Pacific face a number of tensions. In the past two decades
these have given rise to emergencies which have led to requests for military
support from New Zealand, usually working alongside Australia. Such
interventions bring increased obligations and greater expectations, including
from Australia, that New Zealand will take an active role in addressing
regional security issues.

The international outlook more generally is uncertain. Asia is an area where
the major powers are closely engaged. The nature of that engagement will
impact on New Zealand’s economic and security interests. Key relationships
in Asia are currently stable. But the strategic balance is changing.
International and regional institutions will need to adjust.

The strategic outlook is further complicated by a number of non-conventional
challenges, including rising global demographic pressures leading to
increased resource competition and illegal migration flows, the continuing
terrorist threat, the challenges posed by ungoverned spaces, and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Governments cannot, however, cover every conceivable risk. Deliberate
decisions must therefore be made about what risks to cover. These decisions
in turn determine investment priorities. New Zealand, with Australia, needs to
be able to deal with any reasonably foreseeable contingency in the South
Pacific. The ability to perform core military tasks in our immediate
neighbourhood should therefore be the principal determinant of future NZDF
capability development, and a priority over other areas for the actual conduct
of military operations. It also means optimising the NZDF for intra-state
conflict.

But this must not preclude the NZDF from deploying further afield. As
mentioned above, New Zealand benefits from a stable international order
which is sympathetic to our values and is based on the rule of international
law. It is in our interest to contribute alongside friends and partners to the
maintenance of such an order, including by contributing combat-capable
forces when necessary.

This latter requirement need not drive capability decisions. We can structure
our capabilities within a Pacific-centric framework, while at the same time not
losing sight of the need to contribute to stability elsewhere. This will ensure
that we have the resources needed to meet New Zealand’s overall security
requirements, to add weight to Australia, and to support our regional and
international obligations as required by the Government.


-----

##### Military Capability

Building a Defence Force that is both broadly consistent with the forecast
strategic environment set out above, and which fits within the Government’s
fiscal framework, does not require a radical departure from the _status quo._
The Assessment concludes that the NZDF’s current capability mix and force
structure provides a minimum capability to support government policy. But it
is a floor not a ceiling. Given the expected strategic outlook, some rebuilding
of the NZDF is recommended. A number of major platforms will need to be
replaced and/or upgraded in the next 25 years, and there are capability gaps
which need to be addressed.

The Assessment identifies three pathways for the future shape of the NZDF –
Low, Middle and High. Each pathway represents a different gradient of
capability. They are not exclusive, but rather provide pathways between
which the Government can move over time. Indeed, Ministers are able, if they
wish, to choose within and between the three pathways.

The Assessment concludes that the Middle pathway would best align
capability with the expected strategic environment, although current fiscal
constraints may necessitate a period of consolidation under the Low pathway.
The Middle pathway would see modest improvement in some of the NZDF’s
capabilities, in particular an increase in the ability of the Army to sustain
operations, as well as building greater depth in Intelligence, Surveillance and
Reconnaissance. Other capabilities would remain at around existing levels.

The Middle pathway would not mitigate all the weaknesses of the existing
NZDF. There would continue, for example, to be some risk to the ability of the
NZDF to conduct larger-scale and longer-duration operations, especially in
high-intensity environments, where we would continue to rely on Australia or
other partners for support.

The more limited Low pathway would enable the Government to respond to
short-term fiscal pressures, but at a risk. While broadly retaining the same
structure and platforms as the Middle pathway, it would do so at declining
levels of effectiveness. The Low pathway would result in an NZDF which is
combat-capable in the Pacific, but limitations in size and flexibility, particularly
in the Army, would mean a reliance on partners or a need to undertake
smaller and shorter operations.

The High pathway would see targeted enhancements to maintain and improve
NZDF capabilities. It would provide the Government with a greater degree of
risk mitigation, and would be welcomed by our partners. But it is not currently
consistent with the fiscal restraint being applied by the Government across the
board. The High pathway is nonetheless the direction the NZDF should take if
the strategic outlook were to deteriorate.

Based on the Middle pathway, the Assessment recommends some new
capabilities, the replacement of some major platforms as they reach the end


-----

of their life and some targeted enhancements. It recommends that a new
capital plan should be developed that reflects the following priority areas:

- increased Army strength;

- enhanced Special Forces;

- eight NH90 and eight A109 helicopters (of which five A109 are to be
upgraded and possibly armed);

- the acquisition of a new shorter range maritime air patrol capability;

- the acquisition of an imagery satellite capability;

- upgrade of the ANZAC frigates and replacement at the end of their life
with an equivalent capability;

- a replacement for HMNZS Canterbury at the end of her life;

- replacements for the C130 and B757 fleets at the end of their life;

- a more versatile replacement for HMNZS Endeavour;

- P3 Orion fleet enhanced and replaced at the end of the aircraft’s life; and

- replacement of the Inshore and Offshore patrol vessels at the end of
their life.

These refinements would address the most pressing deficiencies in those
capabilities most likely to be deployed on operations, both at home and
abroad: ground forces, self protection, air transport, air and surface maritime
surveillance, and naval combat. They would also add greater depth to the
NZDF.

Robust business cases for each capability enhancement and/or acquisition
will need to be put to Cabinet before any upgrade or purchase decisions are
made.

##### Affordability

Expressed in 2009 dollars, the average annual increases needed to fund
these Middle pathway refinements for the periods 2010/11 – 2014/15,
2015/16 – 2019/20 and 2020/21 – 2035/36 are $70 million, $32 million and
$11 million in operating expenditure respectively; and $91 million, $56 million
and $177 million in capital expenditure respectively.

The Government can afford to retain the Defence Force it currently has, even
if it chooses to adopt the Middle pathway for up to the next ten years, but
difficult choices could arise in the period after 2020 as core capabilities come
up for replacement. The commitment to conduct a Defence Assessment
every five years will provide an opportunity to review this fiscal trajectory.

##### Defence Funding

Budget 2010 provided a baseline adjustment of $35 million in operating
expenditure to help cover the cost of the additional depreciation and other
increased operating costs associated with bringing new capabilities into


-----

service. This, coupled with a reprioritisation exercise, will enable the NZDF to
remain within its appropriations for the 2010/11 fiscal year. This does not fully
resolve the significant funding pressures facing Defence.

An operating deficit of around $90 million is forecast for 2011/12, increasing in
the out-years. Notwithstanding the increases in operating funding approved
for 2010/11, the funding available for personnel and other operating
expenditure will therefore be approximately $45 million less in 2010/11, and
approximately $133 million less in 2011/12, than was available in 2009/10.

In the course of this Assessment, Ministers directed that an external and
independent Value for Money Review of the NZDF be conducted which
identifies options for narrowing this deficit by improving efficiency, cost
effectiveness and sustainability. That review is well-advanced. Its findings
will inform Government decisions on this Assessment and the content of the
final Defence White Paper. Any remaining deficit, however, may require
additional funding or a willingness on the part of the Government to accept a
greater level of strategic risk. Where appropriate and possible, this
Assessment cross-references the work of the Value for Money Review.

Improved decision-making will help avoid inefficiencies. The Assessment
recommends a new funding and financial management regime for Defence,
based on annual capex and opex re-forecasts and the use of rolling ten-year
capital and operating expenditure planning profiles. It recommends a
pragmatic scenario for the management of the Defence Estate for the five
years to 2014/15, moving to a progressive scenario thereafter as soon as
funding allows. This will provide an opportunity to complete changes and
initiatives currently underway, while also allowing time to develop the planning
and business case analyses needed to move to a more aggressive scenario
from 2015/16 onwards, subject to available funding.

##### Defence Organisation

The Assessment also recommends the reform of existing defence
procurement and governance arrangements. The proposed Joint
Management Board comprising the Defence Chief Executives and at least two
independent non-executive directors will oversee a continuous defence
capability life-cycle that encompasses policy, capability definition, business
case consideration, Cabinet approval, acquisition, through-life operation,
disposal and replacement.

The creation of the Board is intended to reconcile the apparent contradiction
of retaining two defence organisations but operating certain functions as a
joint activity. It would see the merger of some aspects of policy with capability
development, acquisition and through-life support. The challenge is to create
a new body within the defence organisations, with appropriate authority and
accountability for such joint activities, yet retaining the singular accountability
of each of the Defence Chief Executives.

The effectiveness of the NZDF depends on the quality of its people, military
and civilian. Personnel are a key component of capability. To ensure that the


-----

NZDF has enough of the right people, it must adopt a strategic approach to
the management of its human resource requirements. The Assessment
identifies a number of areas where the NZDF’s ability to access the personnel
it needs can be improved. These include better career development
practices, changing traditional career paths and better utilising the Reserve
Force.

##### Conclusion

The conclusion reached by this Assessment is that the NZDF is a strong
institution of national value – a disciplined, professional, well-trained and
constitutionally-aware defence force is a rare and valuable asset. An NZDF
like the one we currently have offers the Government the best minimum mix of
effectiveness, value for money, value to our friends and partners, force
projection and sustainment. The fiscal outlook might make it possible to
enhance various features of the NZDF, or it might force a reduction in the
existing level of capability, depending on affordability, particularly after 2020.
But these decisions can be deferred until the next Defence Assessments in
2015 and 2020. For the moment we can afford to keep what we have, with
some modest enhancements. This is the recommended approach. In an
uncertain strategic environment it is important that the Government keep its
options open.


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

##### Chapter 1
### Defence Assessment 2010

##### Introduction 

1.1 The Defence Act 1990 provides that one function of the Secretary of Defence is
to prepare a Defence Assessment from time to time in consultation with the
Chief of Defence Force.[1] A Defence Assessment is a comprehensive review of
defence policy, military capability, and resources. It tests current policy settings
in the context of New Zealand’s wider national security interests. It ensures
that strategies and structures remain appropriate for our needs. Defence
Assessments are forward-looking, considering New Zealand’s interests over
the decades to come.

1.2 Regular Defence Assessments are important. They form part of our response
to uncertainty, helping to mitigate the possibility of a misalignment between
preparedness and risk. They also provide assurance that the Ministry of
Defence and the New Zealand Defence Force (NZDF) are providing
government and taxpayers with value for their investment in defence.

1.3 The last formal defence assessment was completed in 1997, and published as
the White Paper, The Shape of New Zealand’s Defence. In 1999, the Foreign
Affairs, Defence, and Trade Select Committee of Parliament published an
alternative approach to defence, the _Inquiry into Defence Beyond 2000. That_
report substantially informed defence policy for the next ten years. But it is time
to look afresh at the issues. There is also a strong case for undertaking
assessments at more regular intervals.

1.4 This current Assessment links New Zealand’s enduring security interests and
the evolving strategic environment to the roles which the NZDF and the Ministry
of Defence are expected to perform. It then identifies the range of military and
other capabilities needed to undertake those roles, and the management
structures which best deliver high quality and cost-effective defence outcomes.

1.5 The Assessment has been driven by four principal factors:

    - the evolving strategic environment;

    - the need to plan the future equipment requirements of the NZDF;

    - funding challenges; and

    - shortcomings in organisational capacity.

1
Defence Act 1990, s24(2)(c)

1
Chapter 1: Defence Assessment 2010


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

##### The Evolving Strategic Environment 

1.6 The years since 1999 have seen a number of significant changes in the
international security environment, including:

    - weakness in security, governance and overall stability in the South Pacific;

    - shifts in the balance of power in the Asia-Pacific region;

    - the weakening of core international institutions;

    - the impact of Islamist terrorism and associated consequences, including
the war in Afghanistan;

    - the growing risk that terrorist groups could acquire and use weapons of
mass destruction;

    - increasing pressures on scarce natural resources, and growing concerns
over climate change; and

    - attempts to enter illegally Australia and New Zealand.

1.7 The Assessment’s terms of reference reflect the complexities of defence
planning in this environment. Defence policymakers must peer into an uncertain
future.[2] They must then form judgements about the foreign and security
challenges New Zealand may face in the coming decades, and consider the
range of tasks which New Zealand’s armed forces may need to perform in
meeting these challenges.

##### Capability Requirements of the NZDF

1.8 High level considerations regarding the strategic environment must be
converted into decisions about military capabilities.

1.9 Ensuring that the NZDF is appropriately equipped to perform the tasks required
of it involves the acquisition of major items of equipment such as military ships,
aircraft, vehicles, and IT systems. These then need to be integrated with other
components of military capability, especially personnel and infrastructure. Major
items of equipment may cost hundreds of millions, or billions, of dollars. They
may employ leading edge technologies. They may also take many years to
acquire and may remain in service over many decades. The process of
acquiring new capability is therefore a major activity for Defence.

1.10 People are the key component in delivering defence capability. Underpinning
military operations, the introduction into service and through-life management
of new platforms, is the equally essential job of raising, training, sustaining and
managing a regular force of around 10,000.

1.11 It is becoming increasingly difficult for countries such as New Zealand to meet
the cost of defence. The NZDF has traditionally bridged the resulting deficit by
using a narrow range of capabilities to perform a wide range of security roles.
But our capabilities, including our people, are under pressure. They need to

2
‘Defence’ refers to both the NZDF and the Ministry of Defence.

2
Chapter 1: Defence Assessment 2010


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

deploy within New Zealand, within our Exclusive Economic Zone, in the near
region, and in the wider world. Operations may be launched with little notice in
response to sudden or unpredictable events. They may need to be sustained
for years or even decades.

1.12 The capabilities we adopt therefore need to sustain a utility throughout varying
strategic and fiscal contexts, over very long periods. Our major capability
choices have an enduring impact, and New Zealand must get these choices
right.

##### Funding Challenges

1.13 The operating expenditure of the NZDF is under significant pressure. This is
partly a result of equipment revaluation and the increasing cost of depreciation.
Operational commitments and the need to maintain personnel numbers, and to
remunerate appropriately, are also factors. The higher operating costs of
equipment currently being introduced into service will lead to further demands
on operating expenditure.

1.14 Capital expenditure is also under pressure. Not only is the cost of military
equipment high and inflating but New Zealand faces the encroaching
obsolescence of a number of major platforms. The twenty years following 2012
will see the C130 Hercules, the P3 Orions, and the ANZAC frigates all going
out of service. Replacing these capabilities will require significant levels of
capital expenditure.

1.15 Unless fiscal conditions improve unexpectedly, or a marked deterioration in the
security environment demands that we commit greater resources to defence,
financial constraints will remain a fact of life. Like all government agencies, the
NZDF and the Ministry of Defence must make a clear case for their spending
requirements, keeping a sharp focus on the Government’s strategic objectives
and priorities.

1.16 The NZDF will also have to manage its budget to deliver efficiencies and
effectiveness. Where a capability gap in skills, equipment, or infrastructure is
identified, the Government should be presented with a range of options on how
the associated risks might be managed.

1.17 Alongside this Assessment, an external team is conducting a Value for Money
analysis of the NZDF. This exercise seeks to identify savings within existing
NZDF baselines, to help off-set expenditure on military capabilities. The Value
for Money analysis is intended to provide assurance that all reasonable steps
are being taken to make the NZDF as efficient and effective as possible. It will
also identify any significant changes to the NZDF’s business model that could
improve financial sustainability and narrow the funding gap.

##### Organisational Capability

1.18 The structure and functions of the two defence organisations (the Ministry of
Defence and the NZDF) were established by the Defence Act 1990. Further
reforms were recommended in a review by Don Hunn in 2002, only some of

3
Chapter 1: Defence Assessment 2010


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

which were implemented. Further reviews, such as the Defence Capability and
Resourcing Review of 2005, suggested that elements of the restructuring had
produced some perverse incentives and that some reforms remained to be
implemented.

1.19 Several recent reports have highlighted issues concerning major defence
acquisition projects. In June 2008, the Controller and Auditor General reported
to the Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Select Committee on time and cost
issues with defence projects. This was followed in September 2008 by the
Coles Report on Project Protector which resulted in mediation and a financial
settlement. More recently there have been delays in the upgrading of the C130
Hercules and the P3 Orion aircraft. The new NH90 medium utility helicopters
have been delayed slightly.

1.20 The Government has placed a high priority on procurement reform. It is
seeking assurance that Defence’s processes for procuring major platforms are
robust. This is connected to the wider question of what is the most appropriate
higher management structure for Defence.

##### Terms of Reference

1.21 Cabinet approved the Terms of Reference for Defence Review 2009 on 30
March 2009. They require the Secretary of Defence, in consultation with the
Chief of Defence Force and other stakeholders, to undertake a defence
assessment as prescribed by Section 24(2)(c) of the Defence Act 1990 and to
review and report on other specified matters. The Terms of Reference are at
Annex A.

1.22 The Assessment is to report to the Government its analysis and conclusions
and the outcome of the consultation processes required by the Terms of
Reference. Upon receipt of the Assessment, the Government will finalise its
defence policy. That policy will be published in the form of a Defence White
Paper in 2010.

1.23 As directed by the Terms of Reference, the major issues addressed in this
Assessment are as follows:

_Defence within a national security framework_

    - How does Defence contribute to New Zealand’s overall national security?
What is the relationship between Defence and other government agencies
to enhance a ‘whole of Government’ approach towards achieving security?

_New Zealand’s Strategic Context and Outlook to 2035_

    - How does the present and potential future strategic environment impact on
the security of New Zealand?

_Principal Tasks for the New Zealand Defence Force_

    - How does the NZDF contribute, and how may it contribute in the future, to
the security of New Zealand, Australia, the South Pacific, the Asia-Pacific
region and globally?

4
Chapter 1: Defence Assessment 2010


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

    - When and how should military capabilities be used for non-military
purposes to support the work of other government agencies?

_Capability options allowing us to implement policy_

    - How well do the current NZDF outputs meet the actual needs of policy
now and in the near future, and how well are actual capabilities, including
those under consideration or development, aligned to those outputs?

    - Looking to the medium and longer term, what are the options that will
allow us to achieve policy requirements in the future and what implications
arise from the preferred capability mix?

_Future Development of the NZDF_

    - What are the key issues around NZDF personnel, including training,
retention, recruitment and the role of Reserves?

_Organisational and Management Issues_

    - What is the best organisational structure for the Ministry of Defence and
the NZDF?

    - How can procurement, defence infrastructure and real estate best be
managed?

    - What are the best financial management practices to meet the long term
defence funding requirements?

1.24 Additionally, the Terms of Reference provide that the Associate Minister of
Defence will lead three concurrent companion studies concerning:

    - New Zealand’s Defence Industry, examining options for economic
improvement in the sector;

    - The role of the NZDF in Youth Programmes and the New Zealand Cadet
Force; and

    - Voluntary National Service, including examining future options for a whole
of government strategy.

##### Process

1.25 This Assessment has been largely completed by staff from the Ministry of
Defence and the NZDF operating within eight workstreams:

1. Policy, Objectives and Strategy
2. Military Capability Options
3. Human Resource Issues
4. Real Estate and Infrastructure
5. Defence Organisational Structure (undertaken by a contracted reviewer)

6. Procurement (undertaken by an independent reviewer)
7. Funding and Financial Management (undertaken by a contracted
reviewer)

8. Cost and Personnel Modelling (undertaken by a contracted reviewer).

5
Chapter 1: Defence Assessment 2010


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

1.26 The Assessment team has consulted closely with other government
departments. These include the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the
Treasury, the State Services Commission, the Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet, and a range of ‘customer agencies’ such as NZ Police
and the NZ Customs Service. To ensure that ‘whole of government’
considerations are kept in focus, the Officials' Committee for Domestic and
External Security Coordination (ODESC) has been the principal interdepartmental body considering the Assessment.

1.27 Independent expertise has been incorporated at several levels. The Minister of
Defence, the Associate Minister of Defence and the Secretary of Defence have
been advised on Assessment matters by a Panel of three independent
advisers, selected for their experience in international relations, military
matters, commercial affairs, and management and organisational change. The
Panel comprised:

    - Simon Murdoch, former Secretary of Foreign Affairs and Trade

    - Martyn Dunne, Comptroller, New Zealand Customs Service, and former
Commander Joint Forces New Zealand

    - Robert McLeod, Managing Partner, Ernst & Young, New Zealand.

1.28 The Minister of Defence and the Associate Minister of Defence have briefed
and conferred with the Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Select Committee of
Parliament. The Assessment team has also consulted with New Zealand’s
security partners, particularly Australia.

1.29 A public consultation process generated over 600 written submissions and oral
submissions at 16 meetings around New Zealand. The submissions were
independently evaluated and have informed this Assessment. As well,
discussions were held with leading New Zealand and international academics,
and submissions from within the Defence organisations were sought and
considered as a part of the Assessment process.

##### Recommendations

1.30 That a Defence Assessment be undertaken at regular intervals of at least
every five years which:

    - tests current policy settings;

    - updates New Zealand’s international strategic context and outlook;

    - establishes a clear logic linking New Zealand’s strategic environment with
the roles and tasks of the NZDF and the capabilities required to undertake
them; and

    - provides government with advice on any funding and operational
implications.

6
Chapter 1: Defence Assessment 2010


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

##### Chapter 2
### Defence Within A National Security Framework

##### New Zealand’s National Security Interests

2.1 In order to thrive as an independent and prosperous nation, New Zealand must
be secure. In the widest sense, a secure New Zealand means:

    - that New Zealand – our land, maritime environs and airspace – is not
threatened by hostile forces, and that our resources are protected;

    - having a domestic environment in which citizens and residents can
conduct their lives confidently;

    - sustaining our capacity to promote better standards of living for New
Zealand; and

    - extending our influence and securing recognition of our values
internationally.

2.2 New Zealand’s physical isolation is our principal source of protection from direct
military threats from another state. It also offers some protection from nonstate challenges. We do, however, see our security in terms broader than the
defence of New Zealand’s territory. New Zealand has benefited from being an
active member of the wider international community and maintaining close
connections with like-minded states. But there are obligations associated with
these connections, including being willing to play a constructive role in
preventing or resolving conflict.

2.3 New Zealand does not have a formal national security policy, and it is not the
purpose of this Assessment to construct one. We do, however, suggest that a
national policy framework would be desirable. Defence is an important part in
the whole of government approach to national security. Acting in a leading or
supporting role, Defence contributes to the following national security interests:

    - a secure border and approaches to New Zealand;

    - a rules-based international order which respects national sovereignty;

    - a network of strong international partnerships; and

    - a sound global economy under-pinned by the freedom of commerce and
navigation.

7
Chapter 2: Defence Within a National Framework


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

2.4 These national security interests are enduring. They reflect New Zealand’s
geography, our values, and our aspirations in the international community.
What varies are the circumstances in which we pursue them, and the means by
which we do so.

_A secure border and approaches to New Zealand_

2.5 We need to ensure that entry to, and exit from, New Zealand is by legal means
only. This means having the knowledge and ability to interdict any suspicious or
unwelcome presence in our waters.

2.6 New Zealand has the world’s fifth largest exclusive economic zone. It contains
rich marine resources, and further valuable resources may be contained in the
seabed. The pressure these offshore resources are already under is likely to
increase in the coming years as the world’s population swells, and food and
other resources become increasingly scarce.

2.7 The NZDF contributes to the security of New Zealand’s borders and
approaches through its surveillance efforts and interdiction capabilities in our
maritime zone. It shares these duties with a range of agencies in a whole of
government effort. Coordination between these agencies, in managing our air
and maritime approaches, are tasks in which the NZDF shares (see paragraph
2.26).

_A rules-based international order_

2.8 New Zealand has long promoted a rules-based international order as the most
sustainable and equitable basis for international stability. This is the best
foundation from which to pursue the development of New Zealand and its
people. New Zealand benefits from an international order which disciplines the
exercise of power through law, custom, and convention, and which accords to
all nations, large and small, the same rights. That the current international order
reflects many of the values and principles embedded in New Zealand’s own
constitutional and legal heritage is helpful to us. But there are contrary
pressures.

2.9 It is in New Zealand’s interests that the current international order continues to
underpin inter-state relations. War between states, while uncommon, remains
an element of the international strategic environment. New Zealand therefore
supports the institutions and arrangements which bring states together to
resolve conflict peacefully, especially the United Nations.

2.10 The existing international order can be challenged by hostile non-state actors,
of which terrorists who owe no allegiance to a state are the prime example.
Other challenges to the international order include weak or fragile states;
potentially aggressive strong states; and other states that choose to ignore the
generally accepted rules and norms of international society.

2.11 Weak or fragile states are prone to internal anarchy which can lead to regional
and international disorder. The absence of an effective government in Somalia
enables pirates to operate off the Horn of Africa, disrupting global trade and
endangering lives. Equally, without effective government in Afghanistan, that

8
Chapter 2: Defence Within a National Framework


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

state would remain a safe haven for terrorists, and the international community
would continue to be plagued by regional and wider disorder.

2.12 Possession of nuclear weapons by rogue states and non-state entities outside
the nuclear non-proliferation regime represents a serious threat. Such states or
entities may not wish to overturn the international order, or be capable of doing
so, but the risk posed to regional and global stability is such that coordinated
counter-proliferation and disarmament initiatives need to be intensified.

2.13 New Zealand’s defence contributions to the international order range from the
participation of forces in peacekeeping and other forms of stabilisation activity,
to active support for international regimes and other practical forms of collective
security, such as the Proliferation Security Initiative, to ensure that there is
robust support for international rules.

_A network of strong international partnerships_

2.14 As well as relying on a rules-based international order, New Zealand has
always sought security in partnership with others who share our interests,
values and concerns. All such partnerships carry expectations that we will
sustain and use our defence force for a collective good.

2.15 New Zealand's closest security relationship is with Australia. New Zealand also
has longstanding and close security relationships with the United States, the
United Kingdom and Canada.[1] These relationships are grounded in common
traditions, experiences and values. They are strengthened through defence
force exchanges, training, exercises, technology transfer, intelligence sharing
and the application of military doctrine. These links amplify and draw on the
capabilities of the NZDF, and will be of value to New Zealand for the
foreseeable future.

2.16 The strength of these links does not prevent New Zealand from determining for
itself when, where, and under what circumstances to deploy the NZDF. Nor do
these links prescribe particular policies.

2.17 In the South Pacific, regional institutions and bilateral relationships are the
means whereby we assist our neighbours and safeguard our interests.
Instruments such as the Biketawa Declaration demonstrate that regional
governments are willing to act collectively in responding to crises in the region.
Such initiatives, however, bring increased obligations and greater expectations
of a leadership role by New Zealand.

2.18 Our international security partnerships have expanded as our security
environment has changed. In particular, fostering close relationships with the
countries of East, Southeast, and South Asia has become important for New
Zealand. Our bilateral and multilateral security relationships in the region are
valuable in themselves but they also support and complement an evolving
security architecture. That architecture has to be able to accommodate the
diverse interests of the states of the region, adjust to any changes in the

1
Only the relationship with Australia is embodied in a formal security alliance. The US suspended its
obligations to New Zealand under that alliance in 1986.

9
Chapter 2: Defence Within a National Framework


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

balance of power, build confidence between defence forces, and thereby
reduce the risks of miscalculation, including between the major powers.

2.19 Active participation by New Zealand in the Five Power Defence Arrangements
(FPDA) with Malaysia, Singapore, Australia and the United Kingdom is a key
component of this approach to regional engagement. In addition to its focus on
the defence of Malaysia and Singapore, the FPDA’s role in supporting
confidence-building and stability in Southeast Asia, and encouraging
interoperability between the five defence forces, means it is now an integral
part of the regional security architecture. As New Zealand’s most significant
operational security link to Southeast Asia, the FPDA provides a valuable
anchor for the presence of our defence assets in the region.

2.20 We have developed a functional relationship with NATO and its member
countries where our security concerns overlap. Currently, the focus of the
relationship is on our contribution to the NATO-led International Security
Assistance Force in Afghanistan (ISAF).

2.21 International relationships require attention. It is important for New Zealand to
recognise and understand our partners’ interests and perspectives. It is also
important that we are prepared to contribute to the protection and advancement
of shared interests.

2.22 International defence relationships also contribute to New Zealand’s security by
enhancing our wider knowledge of trends and events, and by strengthening our
ability to help shape security responses as they are being formulated.

_Sound global economy and open and safe trade routes_

2.23 New Zealand has a strong interest in the international trade in goods and
services. A key focus for both the Government and business is on improving
market access and reducing regulatory barriers to trade. Our success,
however, is predicated on a stable international order. New Zealand’s
economic position would be affected by any physical disruption to the security
of international trade, whether through civil disorder, piracy, or inter-state
conflict. So would any event which affected the New Zealand ‘brand’, including
our reputation as a safe and clean place to visit.

2.24 We therefore have a national interest, as well as an interest as a good regional
and international citizen, in supporting multilateral efforts to safeguard freedom
of commerce and navigation. This is particularly the case in Southeast Asia,
but also in the Middle East and the Horn of Africa, where sea lines of
communication are vulnerable.

##### The Whole of Government Approach to Promoting National Security

2.25 Responsibility for promoting and defending national security rests individually
and collectively with a range of agencies, including the NZDF and the Ministry
of Defence. These agencies work closely together in a whole of government
effort to achieve optimal outcomes for New Zealand, both at home and abroad.
In the future, as in the recent past, it will be rare for the NZDF to undertake any
operation without partnering another agency in some way.

10
Chapter 2: Defence Within a National Framework


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

2.26 The broad utility of the NZDF’s core capabilities in supporting the work of other
government agencies at home and abroad is highlighted in the green shaded
boxes below.

**Tasking support to other**
**government agencies**

Support to police operations (ground
and air support, maritime and land
surveillance)
Short notice land, sea and air search
and rescue
Short notice logistics,
communications, and transport
support during natural disasters and
emergencies
Support to the Department of
Conservation
Provision of assistance to the civil
power (i.e. prison management)[2 ]

Environmental Risk Management
Authority
Ground and air support to National
Rural Fire Authority
Fisheries surveillance (air and
surface)
Support to New Zealand’s foreign and
security policies
Medical rescue, hospital assistance,
and hyperbaric treatment
Ceremonial and logistics support to
events of national significance (i.e.
ANZAC day)
Contribute to New Zealand’s
intelligence awareness
Maritime air, surface and sub-surface
surveillance
Explosive Ordnance Disposal
Air, personnel, and logistics support to
Antarctic New Zealand
Counter-terrorism

2
All military platforms and personnel may be used in support of the civil power in the provision of any public
service or in times of emergency.

|Tasking support to other government agencies|Naval Combat Force|Replenishment|Sealift|Navy Dive Team|Naval Patrol Forces|Hydrography|Land Combat Force|Land Service Spt|Special Operations|Naval Helicopter|P3 Orion|Fixed Wing transport|Helicopter|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Support to police operations (ground and air support, maritime and land surveillance)||||||||||||||
|Short notice land, sea and air search and rescue||||||||||||||
|Short notice logistics, communications, and transport support during natural disasters and emergencies||||||||||||||
|Support to the Department of Conservation||||||||||||||
|Provision of assistance to the civil power (i.e. prison management)2||||||||||||||
|Environmental Risk Management Authority||||||||||||||
|Ground and air support to National Rural Fire Authority||||||||||||||
|Fisheries surveillance (air and surface)||||||||||||||
|Support to New Zealand’s foreign and security policies||||||||||||||
|Medical rescue, hospital assistance, and hyperbaric treatment||||||||||||||
|Ceremonial and logistics support to events of national significance (i.e. ANZAC day)||||||||||||||
|Contribute to New Zealand’s intelligence awareness||||||||||||||
|Maritime air, surface and sub-surface surveillance||||||||||||||
|Explosive Ordnance Disposal||||||||||||||
|Air, personnel, and logistics support to Antarctic New Zealand||||||||||||||
|Counter-terrorism||||||||||||||


11
Chapter 2: Defence Within a National Framework


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

Support for youth development (i.e.
Limited Service Volunteer)
Support to New Zealand’s overseas
development programme

2.27 In the international environment, there is a close partnership between Defence
and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT). Defence and MFAT,
along with partners such as the New Zealand Police, work closely in
stabilisation and reconstruction activities in the Pacific, Afghanistan and
elsewhere. Defence is also a partner with MFAT in advancing New Zealand’s
diplomatic objectives and in supporting the effective delivery of development
assistance, particularly in post-conflict and/or post-disaster environments.

2.28 This Assessment has not analysed in any detail the shape of the NZDF
defence attaché network. Nor was this issue addressed by the Review of New
Zealand’s Offshore Network, led by MFAT and recently agreed by Cabinet, as
the focus of that Review was predominantly trade and economic. But the
shape of the defence attaché network has recently been evaluated as part of a
broader internal examination of Defence’s international engagements. Such
evaluations will in future be conducted regularly. They will include an
examination of the location and value of the defence attaché network.

2.29 The national security outcomes identified in this chapter are enduring. They will
continue to remain vital to New Zealand irrespective of any change to the
international security environment. But they do not exist in isolation from
international events. It is only by viewing these outcomes in the context of the
world as it is and might become that future tasks and capabilities of the NZDF
can be determined. The next chapter outlines the regional and global security
context in which our national security outcomes need to be considered.

##### Recommendations

2.30 That an overarching national security policy for protecting New Zealand, our
people, and our interests be developed which:

    - reflects New Zealand’s core values;

    - responds to the major security challenges and drivers of instability; and

    - brings together the objectives of all ministries, agencies, and forces
involved in protecting our national security.

12
Chapter 2: Defence Within a National Framework

|Support for youth development (i.e. Limited Service Volunteer)|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|Col11|Col12|Col13|Col14|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Support to New Zealand’s overseas development programme||||||||||||||


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

##### Chapter 3
### New Zealand’s Strategic Context and Outlook to 2035

3.1 How much we invest in defence is in part determined by the level of strategic
risk we are willing to accept. For this reason we need a clear view of our
strategic environment now and in the years to come.

3.2 This chapter initially reviews the nature of conflict, before assessing the
strategic outlook by geographic region, and then by cross-border themes.
Mindful that unexpected events do occur, it concentrates more on the coming
fifteen years, than the subsequent ten. The chapter describes New Zealand’s
strategic context. The policy and operational consequences of this context are
discussed in Chapter Four.

##### The Nature of Conflict

3.3 Conflict within state borders will remain the most common form of conflict in the
period out to 2035. But the risk of inter-state war or conflict short of war
remains. Conflict between states, although increasingly uncommon, will thus
continue to be a feature of the strategic environment.

3.4 While the distinction between inter-state and intra-state conflict is useful, it can
be overdrawn. In reality, the categories of conflict are blurring. The regular
forces of hostile states may operate alongside irregular forces; and irregular
forces may, from time to time, use conventional tactics.

3.5 Under-estimating the scale and intensity of intra-state warfare would also be a
mistake. This type of conflict can and does affect neighbouring states and the
international system. Interventions in an intra-state conflict, such as the war in
Afghanistan, can also cover the full spectrum of intensity short of major conflict
between large-scale conventional armed forces. The skill sets, weapon
systems, and combat support required for interventions within states can be
similar to those required for warfare between states. While all parts of the
NZDF should be capable of playing some role in an inter-state war, we do have
(and should retain) some particular high-end capabilities.

3.6 The application of military force may stabilise a conflict situation. Finding an
enduring solution, however, will also need to involve the rule of law, good
governance, restoring economic activity, capacity development, and confidence
building. Military engagement will remain a significant component in stability
and reconstruction efforts. As we have seen in operations in Timor Leste and
Solomon Islands, the timeframe to rebuild a community is often long and
frequently underestimated.


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

##### New Zealand, the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), and the Realm[1 ]

3.7 New Zealand, the Cook Islands, Niue and Tokelau, and their respective EEZs,
are highly unlikely to face any direct military threat within the period of this
Assessment.

3.8 More likely are increasing instances of illegal fishing and other illegal resource
extraction in the EEZs. The most serious incident we could face in this context
would be illegal resource exploitation undertaken by, or supported by, another
state. At worst this would involve a military presence by another state in or
near our EEZ, although on current trends this is unlikely.

3.9 The unregulated movement of people into New Zealand, whether asylum
seekers, criminal elements or terrorists, is of security concern. Because of our
geographic isolation and sea border, the potential for a terrorist attack on New
Zealand is lower than in other western states. But the potential is not zero and
we still need to meet our international obligations in this area. New Zealand
could also be used as a base for terrorist activities directed outside the country.
The same geographic factors reduce, but do not eliminate, the likelihood of
asylum seekers or illegal migrants reaching our shores by sea.

3.10 Remote attacks on the national infrastructure, for example through cyber
attack, are likely to increase in the future. It is important that this risk is
managed effectively. Modern defence forces and intelligence services are
increasingly reliant on web-based information and communication networks for
their effective operation. It is also a key area in which the technological gap
between our key partners and potential adversaries is not so great that it might
not be bridged. New Zealand must guard against becoming a weak link in the
shared effort to deter hostile cyber intrusions.

3.11 Maintenance of the Antarctic Treaty System is important for New Zealand. The
Antarctic Treaty, which seeks to ensure that Antarctica shall not become the
‘scene or object of international discord’, applies to the area below 60 degrees
south latitude. The Treaty serves to protect our national interests in the Ross
Dependency. It prohibits military activity in Antarctica, although military
personnel and equipment may be used in support of scientific research or other
peaceful purposes.

3.12 The Antarctic Treaty System is in good order. But there is heightened interest
in Antarctica’s resources, and also in the fisheries in the adjacent Southern
Ocean where competition is increasing. This is likely to intensify.

##### Australia

3.13 Our closest security relationship is with Australia. The relationship is founded
not only on proximity, but also on shared values, history, and strong democratic
traditions. New Zealand could have no closer friend and no better ally.


1


There was a very high degree of consensus amongst the submitters to the public consultation process
that the defence of New Zealand and its people was paramount, and that this included protection of our
land, EEZ, and self-governing territories.


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

3.14 Through its size, its location and its strategic reach, Australia makes a major
contribution to New Zealand’s security. It shares with us common interests in
the peaceful development of the South Pacific and in the stability of the AsiaPacific region, to which end New Zealand and Australia regularly work together.
Our security relationship is anchored in a formal agreement, and is given effect
through training, combined exercises, logistic support, intelligence sharing, and
capability development.

3.15 There are significant differences in the capabilities of our Defence Forces.
Despite this, Australia values the contribution which New Zealand makes to
combined operations in such places as Timor Leste and Solomon Islands, and
the overall addition to Australia’s own capability that the NZDF provides.
Australia will continue to hold expectations of New Zealand in regard to these.

##### The South Pacific

3.16 New Zealand has close political, cultural and constitutional connections with the
island states of the South Pacific.[2] New Zealand, along with Australia, currently
plays a leadership role in the region. We contribute to stability, capacity
strengthening and economic development, regional maritime surveillance,
search and rescue, humanitarian aid, and disaster relief when required. In
pursuing these objectives, we also work with France in the context of FRANZ;[3 ]

with the United States, Australia, and France in the context of the
Quadrilaterals; with the countries of the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) in the
context of the PIF Pacific Plan; and with a range of development partners.

3.17 This Assessment assumes that for the foreseeable future New Zealand will
continue to fill a leadership role. It is in our interests to do so: a weak or
unstable South Pacific region poses demographic, economic, criminal, and
reputational risks to New Zealand. Active and stabilising involvement by New
Zealand in the region is also something which New Zealanders, as well as the
wider international community, expect.

3.18 Many Pacific Island states face chronic social, economic, environmental, and
governance stresses:

    - Economic challenges: economic stagnation, dwindling resources, land
disputes, unchecked exploitation of resources, risks to tourism, food
insecurity;

    - Weak governance: corruption, undisciplined police and defence forces,
porous borders;

    - Social tensions: unplanned urbanisation; large youthful populations and
high youth unemployment, HIV/AIDS, ethnic rivalries;

    - Environmental challenges: resource exploitation, poor waste management,
severe weather events, rising sea levels; and

2
Ninety-one public submissions to the public consultation process saw the South Pacific as our second
international defence relations priority, after Australia.

3
Signed by representatives of the Governments of France, Australia and New Zealand in December 1992,
the FRANZ Statement commits its signatories to ‘exchange information to ensure the best use of their
assets and other resources for relief operations … in the [South Pacific] region’.


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

    - Crime: arising from weak employment opportunities, openness to
international crime syndicates.

3.19 The cumulative nature of these stresses means that the outlook for the South
Pacific is one of increasing fragility.

3.20 Past and current military interventions in the region have been at the invitation
of the host government or the conflicting parties. In the future, the operating
context may become more complex. Although assistance will not necessarily
be limited to military assistance, the NZDF will continue to play a role in
responding to a range of events, from natural disasters to the support of
sovereignty and internal stability.

3.21 Many more external countries and non-governmental organisations are
involved in the Pacific than previously, and this trend is likely to continue. Much
of this involvement is constructive and cooperative.

3.22 If South Pacific governments were to become resentful or opposed to
Australian and New Zealand influence this could change the consent
environment in the South Pacific during the period covered by this Assessment.
This places a premium on maintaining our presence and profile in the region,
including through the NZDF, so that New Zealand remains a trusted friend to
Pacific Island states.

3.23 The stresses found in the South Pacific are more acute in Timor Leste. The
Government of Timor Leste is likely to continue to require substantial foreign
assistance in the coming decades to establish itself as a viable state.

##### United States

3.24 The United States is the pre-eminent military power in the world and is likely to
remain so in absolute terms for the duration of the period covered by this
Assessment. The United States will continue to lead most major international
coalitions and will remain a source of innovation and development in defence
doctrine and capability. It anchors NATO and a host of other bilateral and
regional security arrangements. When it puts its weight behind multilateral
institutions and the international rule of law, it gives both an immense impetus.

3.25 The United States’ position as the most powerful and influential actor in the
Asia-Pacific region is unlikely to change over the period of this Assessment.
The US contribution to regional stability will be welcomed by most of the
region’s governments. Strategic rivalry between China and the US is not
inevitable, but a wariness of each other’s intentions could manifest itself in their
decisions on force structure and capabilities.

3.26 New Zealand is an engaged, active and stalwart friend of the United States.
Consistent with the many shared interests and values between New Zealand
and the United States, there has been a welcome increase in military contact
and cooperation between us. Greater New Zealand participation in multilateral
defence activities in which the US is involved will be welcomed by our security
partners in the region, especially Australia and Singapore.


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

##### The Asian Region

3.27 New Zealand’s economic prosperity is increasingly tied to the continued
stability and prosperity of Asia. Our interests are best served by a region in
which the major actors are generally in accord on key issues and share a
common understanding of how they should be managed. Such regional accord
cannot be taken for granted.

3.28 The establishment of a well-grounded architecture for the security of the region
is a work in progress. There are a variety of regional institutions centred on the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) – the ASEAN Post-Ministerial
Conference (PMC), ASEAN Plus 3, the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), the
ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting, and the East Asia Summit. The security
agenda of these groupings is diverse and useful insofar as they bring together
the armed forces and security establishments of the region to address common
concerns or to act together in times of crisis. We would welcome a more robust
regional security architecture, but recognise that achieving this will be a gradual
process.

3.29 The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) brings together all the major
economies of the region on an equal footing, but for a number of reasons is not
security focused. The path to an inclusive and comprehensive regional security
community is not straightforward, but the impetus towards it will continue.

_North Asia_

3.30 Security in North Asia rests largely on the state of the relationships between the
major powers. Of these by far and away the most important is that between
China and the United States, followed by the China-Japan and United StatesJapan relationships.

3.31 In recent decades major power relations in the region have been more or less
stable. China in particular, has been focused on being a responsible
international citizen. The more integrated the major powers, including China,
are into international and regional systems, the less likely it is that they will
adopt zero-sum approaches in their international relations. But the pace of
China’s military modernisation programme, the response this could prompt from
the neighbouring states, may test the relationships of the major powers.
Conversely, tensions in the relationship between China and Japan may be
eased by moves to develop the regional political and security architecture.

3.32 Japan’s continued close relationship with the United States and its commitment
to multilateralism adds to its strategic weight in North Asia. But there is no
doubt that the strategic balance is becoming more diffused.

3.33 This is generating increased nervousness in Japan, and the Japanese SelfDefence Force is likely therefore to remain a formidable force. Japan will also
seek to accommodate any shift in the strategic balance within regional and
multilateral structures and moves, albeit tentatively, to develop security
relationships in North Asia.


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

3.34 There is an outside possibility of conflict in North Asia in the timeframe of this
Assessment. This could be precipitated by a dispute in China’s maritime
periphery. Conflict is only likely to occur as the culmination of a period of
tension. It would have a devastating effect on security and confidence in the
region.

3.35 The Korean peninsula will continue to be a source of regional instability. There
is some prospect that the Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea (DPRK) may
collapse in the timeframe of this Assessment.

_Southeast Asia_

3.36 Economic growth in recent years has enabled substantial military
modernisation programmes in Southeast Asia, including naval and submarine
fleets. But there is no immediate prospect of significant or long-lasting interstate conflict in the region. ASEAN states generally recognise that their
interests in economic growth are best served by continued peace. Security
challenges include Islamist and other forms of terrorism, piracy, weapons
proliferation, and state fragility.

3.37 There are tensions within and between ASEAN countries which regional
structures can help ameliorate but not remove. The outlook for mainland
Southeast Asia in particular does have some fragility. Myanmar is under
military control. Any reform will likely be incremental and within existing military
structures.

3.38 Thailand, which shares a 2,400 kilometre porous land border with Myanmar,
may face further instability. Vietnam will continue its strong economic growth,
and on the back of this could look to reclaim its historical role as a regional
leader. Cambodia will continue to be forthright in advancing its interests vis-àvis its neighbours.

3.39 None of this is to suggest that serious conflict on mainland Southeast Asia is
likely. Economic growth, economic integration, ASEAN ties, and unity based
on shared concerns over the strategic balance in the region, will help to
underwrite regional stability. But there are nonetheless points of tension and
abrasion.

3.40 The situation in maritime Southeast Asia is ostensibly more stable. Partly
because Indonesia is going through a period of sustained economic growth and
democratisation. And partly because external powers are not challenging the
status quo. But none of these factors can be guaranteed. There remain a
number of enduring and unresolved territorial disputes in maritime Southeast
Asia.

3.41 Our security relationships with Singapore and Malaysia, founded on the four
decades old FPDA, are our most enduring in the region. So long as both
countries support the FPDA, we should continue to do so.

_South Asia_

3.42 India’s growing economic and military power is giving it a stronger voice both in
the region and internationally. India’s growth is more an opportunity for New


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

Zealand than a threat. This is likely to be reflected in greater military
engagement.

3.43 The possibility of conflict between Pakistan and India will remain a major
concern, and the risk of an escalation to nuclear confrontation cannot be ruled
out. The possibility of miscalculation leading to military conflict is heightened by
the presence of violent non-state actors in both countries. Conflict between
India and Pakistan would have a serious impact on security and confidence in
the region. Confidence-building measures being pursued by both countries
should be supported.

##### The Wider World

3.44 New Zealand’s strategic interests extend beyond the Asia-Pacific region. The
Middle East provides a persistent challenge. Its fractured politics, the risks of
nuclear proliferation, the prevalence of Islamist terrorism, and the presence of
the world’s largest reserves of hydrocarbons, mean that the international
community is regularly engaged in preventing conflict or dealing with the
consequences of conflict in this region. We expect that New Zealand, whether
under the United Nations flag, or in international coalitions, will be asked to
make further contributions to regional stability operations, as we have over
many years.

3.45 Sub-Saharan Africa does not have the same strategic significance as the
Middle East. But weak governments, civil strife and ethnic conflicts have
regularly called for an international response. Currently, Africa is the largest
single theatre of United Nations peacekeeping operations. This is likely to
continue.

3.46 NATO is a benchmark for military doctrine, has been redefining its mission
since the end of the Cold War, and is currently carrying the mandate of the
international community in Afghanistan. NATO has reached out to like-minded
countries in the Asia-Pacific region: Japan, Korea, Australia, and New Zealand.
It is unlikely that NATO will retreat from this expanded role in international
peace and security. We expect that New Zealand will continue gradually to
develop its relationship with the Alliance.

3.47 The United Nations has cemented its position as the principal source of
legitimacy for the use of force in international affairs, either through UN-led
operations or through operations authorised by the United Nations but not UNled. The balance of New Zealand’s military commitments is currently weighted
in favour of the latter. This may not always be the case. Since the end of the
Cold War, the number of UN-led interventions has increased substantially. This
trend will continue. As at February 2010, the United Nations led 16
peacekeeping operations, involving 124,000 military personnel. This
represents a nine-fold increase in UN peacekeepers since 1999.[4 ]

3.48 Building a UN force can take time. There will be occasions, such as in Timor
Leste in 1999, where the initial effort to stabilise a situation might be more

4 _United Nations Peacekeeping Fact Sheet, February 2010._


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

effectively led by nation states or under other collective security arrangements,
including regional arrangements, albeit approved by the United Nations.

##### The Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD)

3.49 The proliferation of WMD and their delivery systems will increase over the
period of this Assessment. The proliferation of dual-use technology will also
increase the number of states with a latent WMD capability. These issues are
important both because they can affect New Zealand directly and will affect the
stability of the international system. The possible nuclearisation of space is
also a latent future risk.

3.50 The international nuclear non-proliferation regime, based on the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty (NPT), is under strain. Non-proliferation efforts involving
like-minded states acting within the framework of international law but outside
the NPT, such as the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI), are therefore likely to
continue.

3.51 New Zealand has a long history of active participation in international
disarmament efforts. As nuclear, biological and chemical technologies come
within reach of more state and non-state actors, nuclear security and counter
proliferation initiatives, such as the PSI, will become more important.

##### Terrorism

3.52 Terrorism and extremism will remain an enduring feature of the international
landscape. As members of the global workforce and as travellers, New
Zealanders will continue to be affected by terrorism.

3.53 Specific mass attacks remain a possibility. Were an attack to involve the use of
nuclear material, the consequences would be potentially devastating and farreaching. Countering the risk of nuclear terrorism will involve continuing
initiatives to secure nuclear materials and limit proliferation.

3.54 The more immediate cost of terrorism, however, will be its disruption to the
freedom of movement, safe passage, and community life. The way states
choose to respond to the threat of terrorism will also have an impact on New
Zealand, not only in terms of the movement of people, goods, and capital, but
also in terms of complying with strict international standards.

3.55 Terrorist activities in Southeast Asia are expected to remain a source of risk
where the underlying factors leading to extremism remain a cause of concern.

##### Demographic Changes and Natural Hazards

3.56 With the world’s population projected to reach 9.3 billion by 2050 (up from 6.8
billion currently) there are likely to be increased social tensions and resource
pressures in the urbanised developing world, where population growth will be
concentrated and in which there will be an increasing number of young people,
many of them unemployed.


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

3.57 Meanwhile, in the developed world, populations are both declining and aging
when the effects of immigration are removed, and in some cases even when
immigration is included. This trend will diminish governments’ revenue bases,
add to health care expenses, and increase competition for labour. These
trends may have implications for defence expenditure and recruitment.

3.58 There is a global consensus that climate change is occurring. Extreme weather
events may become more common. In the South Pacific, the possibility of
more intense cyclones, coupled with rising sea levels, could have serious
consequences. Natural hazards more generally pose a disproportionate
danger to the people of the South Pacific, who live in high-risk areas and have
limited national infrastructure to fall back on.

3.59 As the world’s population increases, and perhaps as climate change becomes
more manifest, resources (water, food, energy and minerals) are likely to
become scarce in some regions, leading to increased competition for their
allocation. The world as a whole is expected to have enough food and water to
supply the growing population, but the uneven distribution of these key
resources and others is likely to generate strategic tensions. Protection of the
resources in New Zealand’s maritime region is already a priority and may
become more so. The need for us to manage the risks of illegal migration and
people-smuggling is likely to intensify.

3.60 Collectively climate change and resource scarcity could exacerbate existing
tensions and pressures, increasing the risk of conflict both within states and
between them. These tensions and pressures might most acutely be felt in
countries sharing land borders, but New Zealand itself will not automatically be
immune.

##### Discontinuities, Disjunctions or Major Shifts 

3.61 The analysis of the strategic environment in this Chapter has focused on the
foreseeable environment. Events not yet observed could be just as important
in shaping the future as those identified. Major shifts are sometimes difficult to
predict. Yet they have the ability rapidly to alter the strategic framework. This
could be by a single event, such as the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks on
the United States, or by gradual accretion leading to change, such as the
events leading to the collapse of the Berlin Wall in 1989. Events that could
cause a paradigm shift in New Zealand’s defence posture, depending on how
they manifest, include:

    - a large state acting against New Zealand with little warning;

    - the emergence of a new hegemonic power;

    - simultaneous widespread conflict in the South Pacific;

    - a state using military force to assert a claim in Antarctica; and/or

    - a sudden acceleration of global climate change.

3.62 Risk mitigation strategies to avoid missing the early signs of a possible
paradigm shift will remain an important aspect of the New Zealand security and
intelligence environment. They will buy time for reorientation, decision and
action. Key risk mitigation strategies for defence planners include scanning the


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

strategic environment, the ability to process information in an accurate and
useable manner, and a willingness to challenge existing strategic paradigms.

##### Recommendations

3.63 The Assessment recommends that future decisions around defence capability
should be guided by the following judgements:

    - New Zealand continues to face no direct military threat;

    - the international strategic outlook is for more instability, including in the
South Pacific;

    - the strategic balance in Asia is shifting;

    - international military operations will continue to be more common than
unilateral action;

    - conflict within states is more probable than war between states;

    - inter-state warfare will remain a feature of the international security
environment; and

    - New Zealand’s security interests are best served by strong partnerships
with friendly countries, and an international environment in which the rules
and norms of international behaviour align with those of New Zealand and
are widely accepted.


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

##### Chapter 4
### Principal Tasks for the New Zealand Defence Force

4.1 This Chapter discusses the principal tasks required of the NZDF and is a link
between the policy and the environmental circumstances underpinning the use
of the armed forces, discussed in Chapters Two and Three, and the force
structure and capability options for the NZDF, discussed in Chapters 5 and 6.

4.2 The NZDF is a disciplined national asset of considerable utility. Its purpose is
to provide military capability options which enable the Government to promote
and protect New Zealand’s national security interests. These interests include,
but go beyond, conflict situations, and will normally involve domestic or
international partnerships.

4.3 In an uncertain and sometimes violent world there will be occasions when the
deployment of military force is appropriate. Although circumstances and
requests would be assessed on their merits, it is likely that New Zealand would
consider the possible use of military force, particularly in the following
circumstances,

    - in response to a direct threat to New Zealand and its territories;

    - in response to a direct external threat to Australia;

    - as part of collective action in support of a member of the Pacific Islands
Forum facing a direct threat;

    - as part of collective action in support of a member of ASEAN facing a
direct external threat, and specifically in support of the FPDA; or

    - if requested or mandated by the United Nations Security Council.

4.4 It seems likely that ad hoc ‘coalitions of the willing’ will arise in the future, and
that New Zealand might be asked to contribute. The possible scale and nature
of such a contribution would depend on our assessment of the merits; the
extent to which New Zealand’s interests were directly involved; the international
legality; the conditions on the ground; and whether we would be acting in the
company of like-minded states.

4.5 By virtue of its current set of military capabilities, the NZDF is able to perform a
wide range of national security roles. The NZDF maintains disciplined forces
which are available for operations at short notice. It also operates integrated
fleets of vehicles, ships, and aircraft. As such, the NZDF is operationally selfsufficient and is able to sustain commitments over extended periods. It can
undertake or support such tasks as search and rescue, disaster relief, and
other roles as directed by civil authorities.

23
Chapter 4: Principal Tasks for the New Zealand Defence Force


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

##### Principal Tasks for the NZDF

4.6 Flowing from our national security interests, and the broad role described for
Defence, the principal tasks proposed by this Assessment for the NZDF are:

    - to defend New Zealand’s sovereignty by having a credible, professional,
versatile, and appropriately equipped Defence Force which is able to
respond to threats to New Zealand’s territory;

    - to discharge our obligations as an ally of Australia in support of shared
values and common interests;

    - to contribute to peace and stability in the South Pacific, including by being
able to take an independent leadership role when necessary;

    - to make a credible contribution in support of peace and security in the
Asia-Pacific region;

    - to protect New Zealand’s interests by contributing to international peace
and security, and the international rule of law;

    - to contribute to whole of government efforts at home and abroad in
resource protection, disaster relief and humanitarian assistance;

    - to participate in whole of government efforts to monitor the international
strategic environment; and

    - to be prepared to respond to sudden shifts and other disjunctions in the
strategic environment.

4.7 The order of these tasks is significant. New Zealand would necessarily respond
to any direct threat to its territory and seas by a hostile state or terrorist group.
A direct threat to Australia would elicit the same response. Looking further
afield, we have to be able to respond to security challenges in the South
Pacific. This would usually be in partnership with Australia, but there may be
times when we will choose to act independently.

4.8 Beyond the South Pacific, we have more discretion over the shape and location
of our contributions. Nonetheless, New Zealand will continue to uphold its
obligations to collective security under the authority of the Charter of the United
Nations. We will also continue, where appropriate, to work with like-minded
states to uphold and promote international rules and norms of conduct between
states, and to restore order in states that may have suffered from civil disorder,
internal conflict or natural disaster.

##### Defend New Zealand’s Sovereignty

4.9 In the highly unlikely event of a direct conventional military threat to New
Zealand, the NZDF would be called upon to respond. The NZDF needs to
maintain a military capability in the maritime approaches to New Zealand, and
land forces necessary to deter an aggressor. Depending on the intensity of the
threat, international assistance might be sought.

4.10 New Zealand will also benefit from continuing to have military forces with
sufficient utility to conduct a range of surveillance and patrol tasks within its
maritime zone.

24
Chapter 4: Principal Tasks for the New Zealand Defence Force


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

4.11 New Zealand’s interests extend to the Southern Ocean and Antarctica. These
interests are upheld, in part, by our continuous presence at Scott Base.
Sustaining our presence in this difficult and resource intensive environment is
dependent on our ability to access critical support through the joint logistics
pool with the United States, to which New Zealand contributes military airlift and
other services. It is important that our contribution to the pool remains credible.

##### Our Alliance with Australia

4.12 Australia is our principal defence and security partner. We benefit from the
investment which Australia has made in its national defence. We therefore
need to share the burden of our common security.[1] It is inconceivable that we
would not respond were there to be a direct attack on Australia.

4.13 Australia has military capabilities that we do not have, but which are essential
for higher-end contingencies. The ANZAC relationship therefore adds to the
overall depth and reach of the NZDF. New Zealand will work closely with
Australia to identify areas of common interest in ensuring international peace
and stability beyond our region. At times this might mean that New Zealand will
combine with Australia in an extra-regional intervention. Alternatively, New
Zealand may operate with other partners.

4.14 As signalled by political leaders in 2009, New Zealand and Australia will work
closely together to give the ANZAC spirit greater contemporary relevance. The
first major step towards realising this vision is the commitment to investigate
options for a Pacific-focused Ready Response Force to respond to short-notice
security events, including stabilisation operations, humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief.

4.15 Continued and close interaction with the Australian Defence Force (ADF), at all
levels, is important to ensure that the NZDF remains interoperable with the
ADF. Much is already done in this area through the mechanism of Closer
Defence Relations (CDR). New Zealand remains firmly committed to CDR by:

    - promoting military interoperability;

    - interacting with the Department of Defence/ADF at every level;

    - determining areas where equivalent capabilities are sensible and areas
where supplementation might be necessary;

    - undertaking coordinated responses to regional issues; and

    - actively pursuing opportunities for new ways of working with Australia.

##### Contribute to Peace and Stability in the South Pacific

4.16 New Zealanders will continue to expect the Government to play a significant
and sometimes leading security and assistance role in the South Pacific.
These expectations are matched in the region itself, and shared by our principal
security partner, Australia. In those parts of the region where other states might

1
This is consistent with the views of many New Zealanders. Eighty-nine submissions to the public
consultation process saw a closer defence relationship with Australia, based on greater interoperability, as
important.

25
Chapter 4: Principal Tasks for the New Zealand Defence Force


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

be expected to take the lead (the US in the case of Micronesia, and France in
New Caledonia and French Polynesia), New Zealand should be ready to assist.
In Timor Leste, New Zealand and Australia are likely to remain at the forefront
in terms of providing security.

4.17 New Zealand, with Australia, needs to be able to deal with any reasonably
foreseeable contingency in the South Pacific. This makes operations in the
region the principal determinant of New Zealand’s military capability
requirements, and a priority over other areas for the actual conduct of military
operations.

4.18 There are a variety of means whereby the NZDF can support peace and
stability in the South Pacific:

    - contributing to military operations (as in Solomon Islands, Timor Leste, and
elsewhere as required);

    - contributing to whole of government efforts to support peace and security;

    - providing humanitarian assistance and disaster relief;

    - assisting with maritime surveillance, and search and rescue; and

    - supporting the professional development of indigenous defence and
security forces.

4.19 There may be circumstances in the future, whether for our own reasons or
because our partners are pressed elsewhere, where we would want the NZDF
to lead an operation in the South Pacific or to operate without needing to rely
on others. This would be difficult at the moment, but our assessment of the
strategic prospects for the region over the next 25 years suggests strongly that
this is a capability which New Zealand governments should seek to develop.

4.20 Contributing to the national security of Pacific countries is also likely to figure
prominently in the work of other New Zealand government agencies. Defence
will work with these agencies as part of a whole of government response to
regional challenges. We also need to maintain a clear, whole of government
view of our security interests and commitments in the South Pacific.

##### Support Peace and Security in the Asia-Pacific Region

4.21 New Zealand’s political and economic linkages with the Asia-Pacific region are
significant and growing. A peaceful and secure region is a vital national
interest. In addition, we have specific commitments to Malaysia and Singapore
through the FPDA; we are a dialogue partner of ASEAN; and we have a longstanding interest in peace on the Korean peninsula.

4.22 The significant benefits New Zealand derives from a peaceful and stable Asia
bring with them the requirement to support and contribute to that favourable
environment. There are a variety of defence and diplomatic activities which
enable us to do this, including:

    - supporting open and inclusive regional security and defence
arrangements, for their own sake and as a means of building confidence
amongst the defence forces of the region;

26
Chapter 4: Principal Tasks for the New Zealand Defence Force


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

    - maintaining our commitment to the security of Malaysia and Singapore
through the FPDA, including through exercises;

    - developing good bilateral defence relations with Brunei, China, Indonesia,
Japan, Korea, Philippines, Thailand, and Viet Nam, encouraging them to
operate constructively in the region;

    - supporting a continuing US security presence as a contribution to regional
stability;

    - exercising and training with regional armed forces;

    - maintaining a naval and air presence in support of freedom of commerce
and navigation;

    - supporting efforts to prevent the proliferation of WMD and related delivery
systems and achieve nuclear disarmament in the region;

    - supporting regional efforts to deal with terrorism and other transnational
security threats;

    - making an appropriate contribution in support of peace and security in the
Asia-Pacific region; and

    - being willing and able to assist at times of natural or humanitarian
disasters.

4.23 Some of these activities are region-wide and collective in nature. Others are
geared towards bilateral links or particular relationships, such as the FPDA.

4.24 New Zealand’s interests would be affected by a deterioration in the security of
the region, such as through the eruption of a flash point, or through a clash
between major powers. This is a contingency, however remote, which the US
and its allies are taking into account as they plan their force capabilities.

4.25 Given New Zealand’s current and historic ties with the Republic of Korea we
would almost certainly wish to support any internationally mandated operation
to monitor or staff a new peace agreement. This would likely be on the same
basis that we support other similar agreements.

##### Contribute to International Peace and Security

_Combat, peace support, and other security operations_

4.26 New Zealand has a record over several decades of contributing to international
efforts to resolve conflict. Participation in combat, peace support and other
international security operations will almost always be as a partner in a coalition
operation, mandated or endorsed by the United Nations or by a regional
organisation. Our contribution could vary widely from peacekeeping and peace
enforcement, to disaster relief and humanitarian assistance, to demining, to
maritime security operations, through to state building.

4.27 There is no necessary size or shape to international military contributions. The
NZDF, however, is a small force. There will be limits to what we can provide
and sustain, but within those limits there is some flexibility. What we commit
will be determined by a range of factors, such as availability, location, tasks,
risk, and international expectations. It may extend to taking on a robust combat

27
Chapter 4: Principal Tasks for the New Zealand Defence Force


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

role. Our willingness to assume such a role, when appropriate, is valued by our
partners. These capabilities are all part of the inventory we require in the South
Pacific.

_Defence diplomacy and security partnerships_

4.28 New Zealand will also contribute to regional and international peace and
security by building defence and security partnerships. Partnerships can be
promoted through interactions ranging from the assignment of defence
attachés, through to formal military-to-military talks and participation in bilateral
and multilateral exercises.

4.29 Defence partnerships add value by:

    - building influence with security partners so that our interests are taken into
account, including support for New Zealand in extremis;

    - helping to keep us informed of security issues through dialogue and
intelligence exchange;

    - providing professional development for the NZDF through exercises,
exchanges and other interaction;

    - enabling the NZDF to be well-informed about state-of-the-art defence
technology and military doctrinal developments; and

    - adding another strand of engagement to our bilateral relationships,
especially where partner countries place a particular value on defence
relations.

##### Contribute to Whole of Government Security Efforts at Home

4.30 In the domestic environment, the NZDF partners a number of agencies to
promote economic, security, environmental, and social objectives. The defining
characteristic of these partnerships is the use of military forces to perform
essentially non-military roles.[2 ]

4.31 Specific tasks include:

    - a range of counter-terrorism roles from cordon and search operations to
direct action (in support of New Zealand Police);

    - search and rescue;

    - disaster relief;

    - support to the Antarctic programme;

    - EEZ resource protection;

    - maritime border security;

    - evacuating New Zealand and approved foreign nationals from high risk
environments;


2


One hundred and thirty-four submissions to the public consultation process saw a significant role for the
NZDF in non-military tasks.

28
Chapter 4: Principal Tasks for the New Zealand Defence Force


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

    - ensuring that NZDF information and communication networks are
protected, and contributing, where appropriate, to any whole of
government response to the threat of cyber attack;

    - providing logistic support to events of national significance; and

    - providing infrastructure for activities such as the Limited Service
Volunteers Scheme.

##### Whole of Government Efforts to Monitor the Strategic Environment

4.32 Strategic awareness helps to ensure that military capabilities remain aligned
with established defence policy goals. In particular, we need to discern any
serious deterioration in the strategic environment in time to adjust our posture
(although this does not mean that New Zealand will be able to foresee sudden
and paradigm changing events).

4.33 An awareness of the strategic environment also informs operational decisionmaking. Analysis indicating a potential security event in the region, for example,
may lead the Government to bring forces to a higher state of readiness in
response, or to forgo commitments beyond the region in order to be in a
position to respond to the regional event.

4.34 The collection and assessment of intelligence are important mechanisms
through which New Zealand builds its understanding of the strategic
environment.

4.35 New Zealand’s ability to assess the strategic environment is not solely, or even
primarily, a role for Defence. Other agencies within the whole of government
context have assessment as an important component of their activities.

##### The NZDF’s Military Characteristics

4.36 The greatest asset of our armed forces is, and will remain, the quality of our
people. The NZDF is a valued partner in New Zealand and throughout the
world because its personnel are honest, impartial, culturally respectful, and
accountable to civil authorities. They are also disciplined, well-trained, and
understand their constitutional and legal obligations. These attributes are more
rare than many might think.

4.37 We require personnel and capabilities that can undertake a wide range of
tasks. Our forces will never be large, but the range of demands we make of
them will be. These demands will reflect the range of our national security
interests. This versatility also enhances our ability to add strategic weight to the
forces of our international partners.

4.38 Since the end of the Cold War, the NZDF has been continuously engaged
around the world in a diverse range of operations. In recent years the number
of deployed personnel has been up to 2,000 in a single year. This high demand
for defence deployments is likely to continue, implying a need for depth in New
Zealand’s forces, and demonstrates that the NZDF is seen by others as a
useful contributor in the pursuit of common goals.

29
Chapter 4: Principal Tasks for the New Zealand Defence Force


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

4.39 The NZDF needs to be interoperable with our principal partners for the tasks
we are likely to undertake with them. This especially means the capability to
operate with Australia in support of shared security objectives in the South
Pacific, but also to work with Australia and other partners in more distant
theatres.

4.40 Operating in the South Pacific, as we often will, requires the capability to deploy
over thousands of kilometres of ocean. Operations further afield also require
this capability. More broadly, it is impossible to predict where the NZDF will
deploy. But history suggests we may find our forces deployed as far away as
West Africa, Europe, the Middle East, and Central Asia. Within operational
areas any deployed force must be mobile.

4.41 Our deployed forces will continue to be sufficiently self-reliant so we do not
need to ask partners for basic forms of operating support. The NZDF will have
reliable and high quality equipment so the forces are both effective and safe,
and are not a liability to our partners.

##### Operations in New Zealand’s Maritime Zone and the South Pacific as the Starting Point for Choosing Military Capabilities

4.42 The Assessment concludes that the ability to meet our security objectives in our
maritime zone and the South Pacific should be the principal basis for selecting
New Zealand’s military capabilities. Structuring our capabilities in this way will
ensure we have the resources needed to meet New Zealand’s overall security
requirements, to add weight to Australia where it is most likely to be required,
and to support our regional and international obligations as required.

4.43 The challenges of deployment, operating and sustainment in the South Pacific
are considerable today and could be more so within the time frame of this
Assessment. The NZDF will need to be equipped for situations which
potentially include armed conflict against a range of adversaries and scenarios.

4.44 The capabilities required for the range of possible operations in the near region
will also allow us to make a credible contribution to stability in Asia, as well as
further afield. Some enhancements may be needed to ensure that we retain
options to contribute beyond the region. These are discussed in the next
chapter.

##### Capabilities and Conflict

4.45 Should war between states occur outside the region, New Zealand is likely to
have an element of choice as to whether or how it contributes forces. The cost
of the capabilities required to contribute to high-end combat between large,
sophisticated military forces is increasingly beyond New Zealand’s means.
Even middle powers struggle to maintain such capabilities. New Zealand could
devote considerable resources trying to maintain advanced warfare capabilities,
and fall short. The opportunity cost would be the loss of resources for
contributing meaningfully to intra-state conflicts.

4.46 But the possibility of inter-state war cannot be excluded. Nor can the possibility

that a New Zealand government may want to contribute militarily to such a
30
Chapter 4: Principal Tasks for the New Zealand Defence Force


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

conflict. Although all parts of the NZDF should be capable of playing some role
in an inter-state war, we do have (and should retain) some particular high-end
capabilities.

4.47 Intra-state conflict in fragile, failing or failed states will nonetheless remain the
most common form of conflict in the period covered by this Assessment.
Operations in Solomon Islands, Timor Leste, Afghanistan and the Gulf region
are contemporary examples. Our forces should largely be optimised for the
conduct of such operations.

4.48 But as noted in Chapter Three, this distinction between intra-state and interstate warfare should not be exaggerated. The risks to personnel serving in
intra-state operations can be high, as the war in Afghanistan illustrates.
Moreover, we cannot exclude the possibility of hostile regular forces working
alongside insurgents and other irregular forces in a ‘hybrid’ intra-state/interstate scenario. To contribute in such environments, New Zealand requires a
combat-capable force.

##### Risk Mitigation and the Response to Major Shifts and Other Disjunctions

4.49 New Zealand’s assessment of the strategic environment suggests there will be
further instability in the future. As an ultimate expression of uncertainty, major
shifts have been, and will continue to be, a feature of the security landscape. A
paradigm-shifting event will almost certainly lead to a more dangerous security
situation for which, by definition, we will not be fully prepared. The extent to
which we are willing to hedge against major shifts is a cost-benefit argument.
Even for some major military powers, maintaining the ability to respond to all
contingencies is becoming increasingly problematic. The critical question,
therefore, is how much risk mitigation is considered affordable.

4.50 Appropriate risk mitigation strategies for Defence include:

    - participation in whole of government measures to increase the chance of
early warning of major shifts;

    - ensuring existing systems are robust in their structures and flexible in their
processes. This allows the systems to absorb the shock, reorient their
thinking and respond to it;

    - ensuring that vital components of the defence infrastructure are protected.
This means that in the immediate aftermath of any shock thought can be
given to response rather than protection;

    - maintaining a commitment to combat capable forces so that if a response
is required at short notice it is available; and

    - ensuring that the NZDF can be enlarged at relatively short notice if
necessary.

4.51 Although it might be seen by some as a failure of imagination, any
consideration of the NZDF’s future force structure needs to be linked to the
force we currently have. Not only is that a fiscal reality – we cannot afford to
build a defence force from scratch – it is also a useful strategic benchmark.
Recent deployments and activities suggest that the existing NZDF does provide
the Government with a range of useful choices.

31
Chapter 4: Principal Tasks for the New Zealand Defence Force


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

##### Recommendations

4.52 In order of priority, and based on the strategic outlook in Chapter Three, this
Assessment recommends that the principal roles and tasks of the NZDF should
be:

    - the protection of New Zealand, our people, land, territorial waters, natural
resources and critical infrastructure;

    - honouring our alliance obligations to Australia;

    - contributing to peace and stability in the South Pacific, including by being
able to take an independent leadership role when necessary;

    - making an appropriate contribution in support of peace and security in the
Asia-Pacific region;

    - protecting New Zealand’s global interests and core values by contributing
to international peace and security, and the international rule of law; and

    - being prepared to respond to sudden shifts and other disjunctions in the
strategic environment.

4.53 In the protection of New Zealand, the NZDF should:

    - ensure the sovereignty of New Zealand’s EEZ and territorial waters;

    - provide an appropriate counter-terrorist response capability;

    - provide support to civil agencies in a range of tasks, including disaster
relief and search and rescue;

    - contribute to whole of government efforts to promote the economic,
security, environmental, scientific, health, and social objectives of New
Zealand;

    - contribute to whole of government efforts to monitor the strategic
environment; and

    - provide a limited capability to protect our maritime approaches and territory
in the unlikely event of a conventional military threat.

4.54 In meeting our alliance commitments with Australia, the NZDF should:

    - operate with the ADF to protect Australia’s territorial sovereignty;

    - work with the ADF in support of a safe and secure South Pacific;

    - examine options for enhancing CDR, including the formation of a Pacificfocused Ready Response Force; and

    - remain interoperable with the ADF.

4.55 In contributing to peace and security in the South Pacific, the NZDF should:

    - together with Australia, meet any reasonable foreseeable contingency,
including by:
        - contributing to, or possibly leading, military operations;

        - responding to humanitarian and/or natural disasters;

        - assisting with maritime surveillance and search and rescue;

        - exercising regularly in the region; and

32
Chapter 4: Principal Tasks for the New Zealand Defence Force


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

        - supporting the professional development of regional defence and
security forces.

4.56 In the Asia-Pacific region, the NZDF should:

    - make an appropriate contribution in support of peace and security;

    - support regional institutions and process, such as the ARF;

    - continue to play an active role in FPDA activities;

    - continue to develop good bilateral defence relationships;

    - support a continuing US security presence;

    - exercise and train with regional armed forces;

    - support freedom of commerce;

    - support regional efforts to counter terrorism, the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, and transnational crime; and

    - provide an appropriate response to humanitarian and natural disasters.

4.57 Globally, the NZDF should:

    - contribute to international security operations, whether led by the United
Nations, UN sanctioned, or in support of other collective security
arrangements; and

    - provide an appropriate response to humanitarian emergencies and natural
disasters.

4.58 Ten principles should guide Defence in ensuring that the NZDF is able to
perform the roles and task listed above. They are that the NZDF should:

    - be equipped and trained for combat;

    - be deployable (this includes having strategic projection capabilities, and
being self-reliant and flexible once deployed);

    - be interoperable with our principal partners, especially Australia;

    - be held at appropriate levels of readiness;

    - have sufficient depth to sustain force elements for long enough to achieve
the Government’s objectives;

    - be up-to-date in doctrine and technology (this includes emphasising
‘jointness’ and being ‘networked enabled’);

    - be optimised for intra-state conflict;

    - retain some capabilities capable of contributing to mid- to high-intensity
inter-state warfare;

    - base capability decisions on what is essential to meet the Government’s
defence and security objectives in New Zealand’s maritime zone and the
South Pacific, from which military contributions in Asia and further afield
can be drawn; and

    - have cost-effective capabilities.

33
Chapter 4: Principal Tasks for the New Zealand Defence Force


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

##### Chapter 5

### Military Capability Choices

5.1 The previous chapters have set out the larger context for this
Assessment – the global environment within which New Zealand has
to make its way in the world, the challenges and uncertainties we face,
and the range of tasks which accordingly will be required of the
Defence Force. On the basis of that analysis we can make informed
decisions as to the capabilities the Defence Force needs over the next
25 years; the correlation between those requirements and existing
capabilities; and how any gaps might be bridged.

##### The Value of Military Capabilities

5.2 To many observers ‘capability’ means ‘equipment’. Indeed, the two
words are often used synonymously. Yet that fundamentally
misrepresents the term. Capability covers the spectrum of personnel,
doctrine, training, dedicated logistic support, and equipment required to
create a particular result or effect.

5.3 The value of a defence force lies both in what it does and how it does
it. In terms of what it does, a defence force applies disciplined lethal
force in circumstances where peace and security are challenged. That
capability, the combat capability, sits at one end of a spectrum of
graduated responses to security events, many of which might involve
the use of either a defence force or some other organisation. Within
the context of national security, it is combat capability that distinguishes
a defence force from other organisations. It is the essence of a
defence force. It provides the ultimate expression of national
sovereignty. It is also a means by which, in extremis, the international
community collectively maintains peace in the world.

5.4 There are always uncertainties about the nature, frequency, timing and
severity of security events. These uncertainties are unavoidable and
there are limits to the extent to which they can be reduced by better
strategic intelligence. Defence investments can therefore be regarded
as a hedge against security risks. Different sets of capabilities cover
different risks. Governments cannot cover every conceivable risk.
Deliberate decisions must therefore be made about which risks to
cover, through which agency, and what capabilities to acquire and
maintain in order to do that.

5.5 When viewed as a hedge against security risks, New Zealand’s military
capabilities have value only if they are available to be used when
needed. Availability is determined by operational readiness. It is
unnecessary and inefficient to maintain all capabilities in a state of

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 34


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

immediate readiness. However, it is also inefficient to hold capabilities
in such a depleted state of readiness that they could not be deployed in
any realistic time frame. In those circumstances, the capabilities would
not be available but would still be incurring a high proportion of their
full-readiness cost.

5.6 There is one important qualification. Many capabilities take a good
deal of time to develop from scratch. If it seems unlikely that a
capability might be needed in the immediate future, but likely that it
might be needed at a more distant point in time, a judgement has to be
made between the cost of maintaining the capability at minimal
readiness and the risk of not being able to generate it in good time
when needed.

5.7 Defence operations generally require particular capabilities to be used
in combination with other capabilities. The usefulness of any individual
capability must therefore be judged not only on its own merits but in the
context of its impact on the usefulness of others.

5.8 Defence capabilities deliver best value when they are useful in as
many situations as possible. There is some need for specialist
capabilities (such as bomb disposal), but capabilities which are
adaptable and provide broader utility will ordinarily be preferred. In
New Zealand, this consideration is taken outside a strictly military
context. The Government also requires that NZDF capabilities be used
on non-military tasks such as border protection, the surveillance of
fisheries, and disaster relief. These requirements have implications for
the capability mix that will be needed.

##### Tasks and Capabilities

5.9 New Zealand’s defence circumstances are unique. No other country of
comparable size and political and economic standing has at a minimum
to be able to deploy defence assets and personnel from the equator to
Antarctica. This is a low threat environment but a vast space.
Together with our long-standing sense of obligation and responsibility
to our region and the international community, it is clear that
determining the optimal mix of capabilities for the Defence Force is
complex.

5.10 The previous chapters set out the circumstances in which New Zealand
governments might wish to deploy the NZDF’s capabilities. In sum,
they are two-fold:

    - restoring and sustaining peace and stability in our immediate region

– defined as the South Pacific; and

    - contributing to operations further afield when the international rule
of law is challenged.

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 35


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

5.11 To conduct the tasks detailed in Chapter Four, the Assessment
concludes that the NZDF over the next 25 years needs:

    - deployable ground forces – suitably equipped and in sufficient
numbers – including supporting elements such as engineers and
medics;

    - strategic projection and logistic capacity to get the force to where it
is needed and sustain itself once there;

    - intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) capabilities to
understand and interpret the operational environment (including
maritime patrol tasks); and

    - capabilities able to fulfil a credible combat role in support of
Australia and in other operations as part of a coalition.

5.12 These mutually-reinforcing capabilities must be embedded in networkenabled command and control structures which support:

    - joint activity between the services;

    - independent action by New Zealand in certain circumstances;

    - interoperability with security partners; and

    - responsiveness to whole of government requirements.

5.13 In our immediate region the critical component is to be able to deploy
forces across distant shores into unstable, potentially hostile but not
high-intensity environments,[1] and sustain them there until the task of
restoring peace, security and stability has been accomplished. NZDF
assets will also be used for tasks such as humanitarian assistance,
disaster relief, or the evacuation of nationals. The circumstances in
which New Zealand would have to lead such operations or undertake
them alone will not be frequent, but our ability to do so will be at a
premium when that occurs.

5.14 Many of the NZDF’s capabilities are also valuable in the wider
international arena, whether in Asia or further afield, where the
challenges we face in the South Pacific are replicated, albeit on a much
larger scale. There are two differences. First, while New Zealand
governments do see themselves as under an obligation to contribute in
this broader international space, there is more discretion as to how and
when to do so. Second, our size means New Zealand’s contributions
will never be numerically significant. Rather, their operational and
diplomatic value will be geared to where they sit on the scale of military
credibility.

5.15 New Zealand delivers its most effective support to international
partners, who in turn most greatly value that contribution, when working
with them in higher-risk environments. The importance of the combat

1
See glossary under ‘intensity of conflict’ for a definition of high, mid and low intensity.

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 36


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

capabilities of the NZDF, in our own region and further afield, cannot
be understated. It is these capabilities which underpin the overall
utility, depth, and effectiveness of the NZDF, and thus its value to the
New Zealand Government and partners. The NZDF must have the
combination of personnel, equipment, training and experience of
working with other forces to allow the New Zealand Government to
make a credible, valued contribution when it needs or wishes to do so.

5.16 New Zealand’s extensive maritime domain means that we have elected
to have capabilities for maritime patrol by sea and air. Those
capabilities are also valued by both our international partners and by
our many South Pacific neighbours with extensive EEZs. Maritime
Patrol thus needs to be supported by the necessary sensors and
reach.

##### NZDF Contribution to Whole of Government Tasks

5.17 Making effective use of Defence Force resources for non-military
purposes was one of the strongest themes which came through the
public consultation. This is already an area of significant activity. It is
characteristic of deployments that the Defence Force will very often be
operating in advance of or alongside other New Zealand government
agencies (and probably their international counterparts). This often
means that the NZDF will undertake or support non-military tasks. This
is a developing area of research, policy and doctrine.[2 ]

5.18 In and around New Zealand, the Defence Force regularly acts for other
government agencies such as supporting the Ministry of Fisheries or
the New Zealand Customs Service. At times of national or local
emergencies such as a natural disaster, Defence Force personnel and
assets are available to be tasked by the Government. Planning for
such events takes account of that possibility.

5.19 The equipment which the NZDF deploys, and the skills of its personnel,
are national assets and it makes sense to use them for non-Defence
purposes in certain circumstances. But in doing so, it is important to
keep in mind that the NZDF is a military organisation and its core
functions are military. Using the NZDF for non-military purposes
should not be undertaken in such a way that prevents the NZDF from
discharging its military tasks and role.

5.20 The corollary is that decisions on the acquisition and use of defence
capabilities should take into account broader national requirements.
This already happens. The Project Protector vessels, as tasked by the
National Maritime Coordination Centre in respect of maritime patrols,
are an example. This Assessment recommends that all future major

2 The Asia-Pacific Civil-Military Centre of Excellence in Australia, supported by New Zealand, is
at the forefront of this activity regionally. Its findings, and that of other similar organisations, will
be of value given the view in this assessment that this form of intervention is more likely to be
the norm than not.

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 37


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

defence acquisitions take national requirements into account as a
matter of course. We also recommend that whole of government use
of defence assets be part of future national security arrangements.

5.21 An integrated force to undertake a range of functions (search and
rescue, police, fisheries, emergency management) has been
suggested as an addition or alternative to the Defence Force. We are
not recommending this as a way forward for New Zealand. In the
terms set out above, the Defence Force is able to undertake a range of
non-military tasks. But a non-military force could not do the reverse.

##### Building on Strong Foundations

5.22 With the capabilities it has at hand, the NZDF has served the
Government well. Over the last 20 years, it has successfully
discharged a wide range of missions both near to home and far
abroad, with significant numbers of personnel deployed on operations
(see below).

###### Bar graph of NZDF Operationally Deployed Personn

9.

8-200

198

el

5.23 The NZDF has maintained its extensive operational commitments
whilst simultaneously becoming leaner – over the past 20 years, there
has been a reduction of over 2,000 regular Defence Force personnel
and a parallel fall in its share of both national wealth and government
expenditure.[3] Its personnel have always performed well, but at times
the quality and quantity of equipment have restricted pathways for
governments or have necessitated a high level of dependence on
partners. Sustainability has always been a problem.

5.24 Sustaining operations is a challenge. The view set out here is that
without a commitment to building the Defence Force, future New

3
From 1.7% (1990) to 1% (2009) of GDP. From 4.6% (1990) to 3.4% (2009) of government
expenditure

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 38


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

Zealand governments will find themselves with an asset which costs
much but delivers little. To avoid that, governments have to be willing
to invest and the Defence Force has to be prepared to work more
efficiently.

##### Capability Choices

5.25 To ensure that the capabilities recommended for the future NZDF are
not simply an extrapolation from the present or past, a range of specific
military tasks were examined systematically through military capability
workshops. Military and civilian personnel looked at a range of potential
security events that the NZDF might be expected to undertake over the
period of the Assessment. Although encompassing the globe,
particular emphasis was placed on the South Pacific and New
Zealand’s EEZ. The likely performance of different force configurations
was tested in these scenarios, to help determine the most appropriate
choices.

5.26 This chapter does not consider every capability that might be used by
the NZDF to perform its roles. For example, heavy armour and
offensive air support do not feature. This is because the strategic
context identified by the Assessment suggests that such capabilities
are unlikely to be used over the timeframe of this Assessment. Were
the strategic environment to deteriorate, these decisions should be
reviewed.

##### Pathways for the Future NZDF

5.27 There are numerous potential pathways which could be presented to
the Government. The Assessment takes into account the current and
future strategic environment, the tasks expected of the NZDF and the
capabilities of the NZDF we have today. On that basis, the
Assessment has identified three pathways for the future shape of the
NZDF: ‘low’; ‘middle’; and ‘high’.

5.28 The three pathways provide choices for Government in how, and how
quickly, to develop the existing NZDF. Indeed, the Government could
choose to retain one pathway as a longer term goal, whilst accepting a
more affordable choice in the interim. In that sense, the pathways do
not constitute differently constructed forces, but the same force,
differently geared.

5.29 The Low pathway retains the structure and platforms of the existing
NZDF but at a declining level of effectiveness. Projects currently in the
acquisition phase, such as the C130 upgrade, A109 and NH90
helicopters, and the Defence Command and Control System (DC2S)
would continue to be delivered. But personnel numbers would be
capped. It would see disinvestment, and a rising level of
obsolescence. This force would broadly fall within historical funding

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 39


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

levels but would, over time, provide the Government with a less
capable NZDF and fewer pathways to manage risk.

5.30 The Middle pathway would build on the platforms retained in the Low
pathway, but progressively address some of the risks inherent in it. It
would tackle key obsolescence issues and broadly enable the NZDF to
sustain its current range of tasking at around the current tempo of
operations.

5.31 The High pathway would see targeted enhancements beyond the
measures in the Middle pathway, and so would maintain and improve
NZDF capabilities. It would provide the Government with a greater
degree of risk mitigation.

##### The Three Pathways

5.32 This section sets out the most significant aspects of each pathway,
broken down into different categories for ease of comparison. It does
not seek to capture every aspect of each force, but focuses on the key
points. It starts with a brief description of current capability, and then
summarises the three pathways, followed by short commentary. A
more detailed explication of the pathways is provided at Annex B.

_Land forces_

5.33 At present, the deployment of land forces is limited by personnel
numbers,[4] and by some equipment shortages. Any decision to build
the Army needs to focus not only on numbers but also on sustaining
the large range of relatively small capital investments which are
required to ensure a well-equipped and capable force.

##### Summary of pathways

         - Army strength 4,900, excluding Reserves

         - Special Forces retained at present strength

Low

         - 8 NH90 and 5 A109 helicopters (mix to be reviewed

at mid-life and replacement)

Middle - Army strength 5,400, excluding Reserves

4 Army capability is to a large extent driven by its personnel, whereas the other
Services are much more platform-dependent. For this reason, this section focuses
specifically on the size of the Army. Some growth in Navy (+126) and Air Force
(+500) personnel numbers is also included in the middle pathway. All of these
numbers are preliminary only, pending the outcome of the value for money (VFM)
work currently underway. More detail on force personnel is set out in Chapter 6.

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 40

|Col1|Summary of pathways|
|---|---|
|Low|• Army strength 4,900, excluding Reserves • Special Forces retained at present strength • 8 NH90 and 5 A109 helicopters (mix to be reviewed at mid-life and replacement)|
|Middle|• Army strength 5,400, excluding Reserves|


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

         - Some enhancement of Special Forces

         - 8 NH90 and 8 A109 helicopters (5 upgraded and

possibly armed; mix to be reviewed at mid-life and
replacement)

         - Army strength 6,300, excluding Reserves

         - Some enhancement of Special Forces

High

         - 8 NH90 and 8 A109 helicopters (5 upgraded and

armed; mix to be reviewed at mid-life and
replacement)

5.34 The Low pathway would see the Army reconfigured for a focus on
lower-intensity tasks in the South Pacific. Maintaining a full-time force
of 4,900 would allow a maximum land forces deployment of two
rotations per year (each lasting six months) of 500-600 personnel for
up to 12 months. Special Forces would remain at their existing level.
Expenditure on digitisation of command, vehicle fleets (including the
Light Armoured Vehicles [LAVs] – which would be reduced in number
for all pathways) would be restricted. A small number of LAVs would
be upgraded. New helicopters would be brought into service.

5.35 The Middle pathway would see the Army increased by up to 360 fulltime personnel to around 5,400. Although still primarily configured for
the South Pacific, this pathway would give the Army sufficient depth to
sustain a maximum land forces deployment of 800 personnel with two
rotations per year (each lasting six months) for up to three years in a
mid-intensity environment. The Special Forces would be enhanced to
alleviate the strain caused by current operational demands. LAV
investment would be increased. Three additional commercial-off-theshelf (cheaper than the military standard) A109 helicopters would be
acquired for training; the five military standard A109s would be fitted
with self-protection, and possibly armed, to enhance their operational
role.

5.36 The High pathway would see the Army increased to 6,300. This would
provide sufficient depth to sustain a maximum land forces deployment
of 1,000 personnel of two rotations per year (each lasting six months)
for up to three years. The force would be configured to conduct the
lower intensity tasks in the South Pacific, but each rotation could
include within it a 250-strong contingent capable of higher intensity
operations. Taken together with additional investment in LAV systems
and protection, this pathway would see a step change improvement in
NZDF firepower and flexibility. In addition, the five military specification
A109s would be armed with rockets and guns to enhance their utility in
support of ground forces.

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 41

|Col1|• Some enhancement of Special Forces • 8 NH90 and 8 A109 helicopters (5 upgraded and possibly armed; mix to be reviewed at mid-life and replacement)|
|---|---|
|High|• Army strength 6,300, excluding Reserves • Some enhancement of Special Forces • 8 NH90 and 8 A109 helicopters (5 upgraded and armed; mix to be reviewed at mid-life and replacement)|


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

_Strategic Projection_

5.37 The NZDF today has only one sealift ship (CANTERBURY). As a
consequence, the NZDF must rely at least in part on commercial or
partner support. The NZDF will have sufficient airlift capability once the
C130 upgrade is complete, although having a small air transport fleet
will always require careful management.

##### Summary of pathways

         - ENDEAVOUR replaced with a like vessel

Low - CANTERBURY replaced at end of life

         - C130s and B757s replaced at end of life

         - ENDEAVOUR replaced with a more versatile vessel

Middle - CANTERBURY replaced at end of life

         - C130s and B757s replaced at end of life

         - ENDEAVOUR replaced with a multi-role sealift and

replenishment ship

High

         - CANTERBURY replaced at end of life

         - C130s and B757s replaced at end of life

5.38 The Low pathway would replace the replenishment ship
(ENDEAVOUR) with an equivalent. The sealift ship would be
upgraded at mid-life and eventually replaced with equivalent capability.
The current air transport fleet would be replaced with equivalent
capability.

5.39 The Middle pathway would do much the same but would explore more
versatile replacement options for ENDEAVOUR.

5.40 The High pathway would add to the Middle pathway through the
acquisition of a sea-lift capable replenishment ship to replace
ENDEAVOUR.

_Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (including maritime_
_patrol)_

5.41 Non-defence maritime patrol requirements cannot currently be met by
Defence. Existing platforms are used inefficiently because of the lack

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 42

|Col1|Summary of pathways|
|---|---|
|Low|• ENDEAVOUR replaced with a like vessel • CANTERBURY replaced at end of life • C130s and B757s replaced at end of life|
|Middle|• ENDEAVOUR replaced with a more versatile vessel • CANTERBURY replaced at end of life • C130s and B757s replaced at end of life|
|High|• ENDEAVOUR replaced with a multi-role sealift and replenishment ship • CANTERBURY replaced at end of life • C130s and B757s replaced at end of life|


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

of a wide area surveillance network and because the asset mix is
unbalanced.

##### Summary of pathways

         - P3 Orions replaced with equivalent at end of life

Low

         - OPVs and IPVs replaced at end of life

         - P3 Orions enhanced. Replaced at end of life

         - OPVs and IPVs possibly given enhanced sensors

and weapons. Replaced at end of life

Middle

         - Shorter range maritime air patrol capability

introduced

         - Imagery satellite capability acquired

         - P3 Orions enhanced, possibly armed, and replaced

at end of life. Additional platforms (possibly UAVs)
acquired in interim

         - OPVs and IPVs possibly given enhanced sensors

High and weapons. Replaced at end of life

         - Enhanced (dual-role) short-range maritime air patrol

and transport capability introduced

         - Imagery satellite capability acquired

5.42 The Low pathway would allow for the replacement of the OPVs and
IPVs at the appropriate date, and for P3 replacement with an
equivalent capability – which could include Unmanned Air Systems.

5.43 The Middle pathway would do the same as low for the OPVs and IPVs,
although the merits of enhancing the sensors and armaments of these
vessels would be further investigated. It would provide self-protection
and anti-submarine sensors on the P3 Orions. A satellite capability
would be acquired (possibly leased) to provide wide-area surveillance
and allow more effective tasking of the platforms. A short range
maritime air patrol capability (perhaps with a secondary transport role)
would also be introduced to give a more comprehensive mix of highand low-end capabilities. Any enhancement in maritime surveillance
would need a commensurate increase in the National Maritime Coordination Centre’s capacity to manage the material produced.

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 43

|Col1|Summary of pathways|
|---|---|
|Low|• P3 Orions replaced with equivalent at end of life • OPVs and IPVs replaced at end of life|
|Middle|• P3 Orions enhanced. Replaced at end of life • OPVs and IPVs possibly given enhanced sensors and weapons. Replaced at end of life • Shorter range maritime air patrol capability introduced • Imagery satellite capability acquired|
|High|• P3 Orions enhanced, possibly armed, and replaced at end of life. Additional platforms (possibly UAVs) acquired in interim • OPVs and IPVs possibly given enhanced sensors and weapons. Replaced at end of life • Enhanced (dual-role) short-range maritime air patrol and transport capability introduced • Imagery satellite capability acquired|


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

5.44 The High pathway would see further augmentation of the NZDF when
compared with middle, by investigating the possibility of arming the P3
Orions with air-to-surface missiles, purchasing additional longer range
surveillance platforms (either aircraft or UAVs), and introducing an
enhanced dual role short-range maritime air patrol and transport
capability. These enhancements would improve the NZDF’s ability to
support other government agencies.

_Combat Capability_

5.45 Army units, Special Forces, and ANZAC frigates currently provide
effective, credible combat capabilities which the Government can
deploy alongside partner forces if it so chooses. But the ANZAC
frigates, without a self-defence upgrade, will rapidly lose their combat
capability through obsolescence of sensors and systems. There are
also other non-combat capabilities (such as P3 Orions and C130s)
which the NZDF is able to deploy into combat zones.

5.46 The detailed descriptions of capability developments for many of the
combat-capable elements of the NZDF are covered in previous
sections. Descriptions of the planned profile of Army, Special Forces
P3 Orions and C130s under the different pathways are not replicated
here.

##### Summary of pathways

         - Frigates given minimal upgrade for major

obsolescence issues. Replaced at end of life with

Low

equivalent. Seasprite upgraded and replaced at end
of life.

         - Frigates given more effective upgrade. Replaced at

Middle end of life with equivalent. Seasprite upgraded and

replaced at end of life.

         - Frigates given more effective upgrade and replaced
at end of life with equivalent. Seasprite helicopter

High

replaced with more cost-effective helicopter at midlife.

5.47 Under the Low pathway, the ANZAC frigates would be given a limited
self-defence upgrade to address the most pressing obsolescence
issues. This naval combat capability would be replaced with an
equivalent capability at end of life. The Seasprites would be upgraded
and eventually replaced.

5.48 The Middle pathway would build on the Low pathway, but permit a
more effective frigate upgrade including some enhancements to the

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 44

|Col1|Summary of pathways|
|---|---|
|Low|• Frigates given minimal upgrade for major obsolescence issues. Replaced at end of life with equivalent. Seasprite upgraded and replaced at end of life.|
|Middle|• Frigates given more effective upgrade. Replaced at end of life with equivalent. Seasprite upgraded and replaced at end of life.|
|High|• Frigates given more effective upgrade and replaced at end of life with equivalent. Seasprite helicopter replaced with more cost-effective helicopter at mid- life.|


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

capability of the current ANZAC frigates. There would be an equivalent
(i.e. more capable) naval combat replacement at end of life.

5.49 The High pathway would build on the middle by replacing the naval
helicopter at the mid-life point. This would be instead of upgrading the
Seasprites, which are expensive to operate and support.

##### Assessment of Pathways 

_Low Pathway_

5.50 The Low pathway would retain the essential shape and capability mix
of the existing NZDF. Current personnel shortfalls would remain,
continuing the pressure of operations and limiting the NZDF’s ability to
make best use of assets. The capabilities of the NZDF would degrade
over time. It would be able to do less, for shorter durations. There
would be a reduction in the employability and interoperability of the
force, with it being more dependent on the support of partners. This
force would need to rely on support from Australia or other partners for
combat and conflict operations in all environments.

5.51 This pathway would therefore require the Government to accept a
higher level of strategic risk than it does at present. More specifically, it
would see a number of the weaknesses of the existing NZDF continue:

    - it would be combat-capable in the South Pacific region in
foreseeable operational scenarios, but limitations in size and
flexibility would mean a reliance on partners, or a focus on smaller
and shorter operations, to a degree which the Assessment’s
strategic analysis suggests would not be desirable;

    - the continued lack of wide-area surveillance and short-range
maritime air patrol capability would mean the P3 Orions would still
not be used in the most cost-effective manner;

    - personnel caps would limit the IPV and OPV availability for MultiAgency tasks;

    - the NZDF would have no permanent deployable command and
control capability;

    - the partially upgraded frigates would have sensors and modest
self-defence capabilities to operate in low-end contingencies with
minimal risk; and

    - a single sealift ship would fall short of required capacity as
determined in the Assessment.

5.52 In this pathway, the Army would become weaker than it is at present:

    - without a reduction in the scale of commitments, the strain of
operational tempo would see the combat capability of the Army
degrade over time; and

    - the Army would not have any independent land reconnaissance

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 45


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

and surveillance capability.

_Middle Pathway_

5.53 The Middle pathway, compared to the existing NZDF, would see an
increase in the sustainability of land forces and an improved depth of
ISR. These would be improvements over current force contributions.
Other capabilities would remain at around existing levels.

5.54 The NZDF would be combat-capable in the South Pacific region, to
perform tasks at a level consistent with the Assessment’s strategic
analysis. But it would continue to rely on Australia or other partners for
support in high-intensity operations at sea and on land. Time,
resources, and partner support would be required should the force
have to adapt to an unforeseen shift in the regional or global security
environment.

5.55 In a number of respects, the Middle pathway would be stronger than
the low:

    - increasing the Army and Special Forces would alleviate the
pressure of current operations and provide greater sustainability.
Two rotations per year of up to 800 personnel per rotation could
be sustained for up to 36 months;

    - the addition of surveillance satellite and short-range maritime air
patrol would improve ISR capability;

    - the establishment of a deployable command and control capability
would enhance the NZDF’s operational effectiveness, especially
at short notice;

    - the frigates would have upgraded sensors and self-defence
capabilities to make a meaningful contribution to mid-intensity
operations;

    - the anti-submarine sensors and self-protection on the P3 aircraft
would increase their utility;

    - all aircraft except the B757 and the commercial A109 helicopters
would have self-protection warning and counter-measures
systems; and

    - the addition of short range surveillance/ transport aircraft and
additional light utility helicopters would provide increased flexibility
and aircraft availability, including for other government agencies.

5.56 But the Middle pathway would not mitigate all the weaknesses of the
existing NZDF:

    - the NZDF could only provide a land force for higher intensity
operations of approximately 250 personnel. It would also remain
dependent on partner support for higher-end capabilities such as
additional offensive support (artillery and mortars), and offensive
air support; and

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 46


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

    - having only one sealift ship would continue to limit the strategic
sealift capability of the NZDF.

_High Pathway_

5.57 The High pathway would see a greater range of combat capabilities
and increased flexibility, providing a more effective contribution in the
South Pacific region for operations. Compared with the Middle
pathway, a number of elements could be deployed globally and in
higher-intensity conflict situations, although some support from
partners for higher-end capabilities may still be needed.

5.58 Increased ISR capabilities would mean the NZDF could provide greater
depth of maritime patrol and surveillance. A decision to arm the P3
Orions with air-to-surface missiles would increase combat capability,
although this would need to be weighed against any increased combatrelated risk to the aircraft and the complexity of integrating additional
systems.

5.59 This pathway would allow for the sustainment of up to two rotations per
year of up to 1,000 personnel per rotation for 36 months, and
enhanced firepower would allow it to continue to rotate up to 250
personnel into higher intensity conflict. New Zealand would be able to
deploy these personnel into the region by air with little or no reliance on
commercial or partner support. An additional sealift ship would
increase New Zealand’s ability to conduct independent operations and
would enable the deployment of a required land force in a single lift.
The tactical transport aircraft would increase self-reliance within the
region.

5.60 The increased utility and flexibility of the NZDF, through the
maintenance and enhancement of combat capabilities, the larger land
force, and the dual role surveillance/transport aircraft, would offer
significant utility in the South Pacific in particular. NZDF deployments
would be less reliant on partner support for mid-intensity or less
demanding, operations.

5.61 Increased capacity in ISR, air- and sea-lift, combined with incremental
improvement in land engineer and health capabilities, would increase
the NZDF’s utility for other government agencies.

5.62 The range and scale of capabilities in the High pathway would provide
a range of response choices and allow the NZDF to adapt more readily
to a changed threat environment.

5.63 It would significantly boost the whole-of-government capabilities of the
NZDF, enable it to sustain a considerable operational presence in the
South Pacific, and would provide greater resilience to shocks.
However, if there were a sudden deterioration in the strategic
environment, even the High pathway might be inadequate.

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 47


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

5.64 Without the full range of combat capabilities, the NZDF would still rely
on partner support for some aspects of high-intensity operations.

##### Conclusion

5.65 The Assessment’s view of the strategic environment does not suggest
that a force at the high level of capability is currently necessary. But it
is important to reiterate that the difference between the three pathways
is one of gradient and scale. The High pathway represents an
intensification and strengthening of capabilities, not a completely
differently structured defence force. As such it provides a target or
objective to be kept in mind, and can be reassessed during (and if
necessary between) the regular five yearly reviews of defence.

5.66 This Assessment recommends that the Middle pathway provides an
appropriate response to the strategic circumstances set out above. It
rebuilds the NZDF so that its utility nationally, regionally and globally is
assured, albeit still in some respects at a restricted level of capability.

5.67 Nevertheless, this Assessment has been constructed in a way which
allows the Government to choose different trajectories within and
between the various capability pathways. That choice will necessarily
be a balance between fiscal and strategic risk, taking into account the
outcome of the VFM work underway. Thus:

    - Government could choose the Middle pathway immediately, but
keeping alive the possibility of shifting either to the Low or High
pathway in the future if circumstances change;

    - Government could choose the Low pathway now, with a view to
moving to Middle (or ultimately High) in the future (mindful that the
NZDF could not sustain the Low pathway indefinitely without it
becoming entrenched); and

    - Government could choose to migrate to the High pathway as soon
as possible.

5.68 Whichever pathway the Government chooses, a detailed capability
plan will be needed to give effect to the outcomes presented in the
White Paper.

5.69 There are a variety of ways in which the recommended capabilities
could then be provided. Alternative ownership models (such as those
explored for real estate in Chapter Nine), and questions of timing,
performance effective asset management, and linkages to partner
capabilities (especially Australia) will need to be addressed. This
Assessment does not prejudge those matters. Case-by-case analysis
can only be done nearer a decision point. Business cases for different
capability pathways will draw on the scientific and technological
support of the Defence Technology Agency.

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 48


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

5.70 Chapter 7 reviews the fiscal environment in which Defence is operating
and the impact of that on the capability pathways contained in this
Assessment.

##### Recommendations

5.71 Defence should prioritise capabilities in the following four areas:

     - deployable ground forces in sufficient numbers, and including
supporting elements such as engineers and medics;

     - strategic projection and logistic capacity to get force elements to
where they are needed, and sustain them once there;

     - intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities to
understand and interpret the operational environment, including in
maritime patrol tasks; and

     - maintaining combat capabilities (including in the areas above)
which can meaningfully contribute to coalition operations.

5.72 Within the above priorities, the corresponding personnel and
equipment must be embedded in network-enabled command and
control structures which support:

     - joint activity between the Services;

     - independent action by New Zealand in certain circumstances;

     - interoperability with security partners; and

     - responsiveness to whole of government requirements.

5.73 New Zealand’s broader national security requirements should be taken
into account in the acquisition and use of defence capabilities.

5.74 The Defence Assessment has considered a range of capability
pathways. Based on the strategic context in this Assessment, three
pathways for addressing the future capability mix of the NZDF have
been identified:

     - the Low pathway would retain the personnel, structure and
platforms of the NZDF, but at declining levels of effectiveness;

     - the Middle pathway would increase personnel numbers in the
NZDF and tackle obsolescence issues inherent in the Low
pathway; and

     - the High pathway would build on Middle and allow targeted
enhancements of the NZDF’s capabilities.

5.75 The three pathways provide choices for Government in how, and how
quickly, the existing NZDF should be developed. They represent
different intensification and strengthening of capabilities, not a
differently structured force. Government could choose to retain one

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 49


-----

Defence Assessment 2010

pathway as a longer term goal, whilst accepting a different choice in
the interim.

5.76 This Assessment recommends that the Middle pathway provides an
appropriate response to the strategic circumstances set out above. It
rebuilds the NZDF so that its utility nationally, regionally and globally is
consistent with the forecast strategic environment.

5.77 Based on the Middle pathway, this Assessment recommends that a
capability plan should be developed that reflects the priority areas
identified above and includes:

     - Increased Army strength;

     - enhanced Special Forces;

     - eight NH90 and eight A109 helicopters (five upgraded and
possibly armed);

     - the acquisition of a new shorter range maritime air patrol
capability;

     - a more versatile replacement for ENDEAVOUR;

     - a replacement for CANTERBURY at the end of her life;

     - replacements for the C130 and B757 fleets at the end of their life;

     - a P3 Orion fleet enhanced and replaced at the end of the aircrafts
life;

     - replacement of the IPV and OPV fleets at the end of their life;

     - the acquisition of an imagery satellite capability; and

     - an upgrade of the ANZAC frigates, and replacement at the end of
their life with an equivalent capability.

5.78 Ministers will still have to consider and approve funding for specific
business cases, consistent with Crown-wide budget and capital asset
management approaches.

5.79 The High pathway should serve as a way forward for the NZDF should
fiscal circumstances allow or the strategic environment deteriorate.

Chapter 5: Military Capability Choices 50


-----

##### Chapter 6

### The Total Defence Workforce

6.1 The NZDF considers output delivery from the perspective of the total defence
workforce, the effectiveness of which depends on the number and quality of its
personnel, both uniformed and civilian. The overarching objective of personnel
management is to ensure that the NZDF has available the required number of
personnel with the right skills and the right readiness state to meet policy
objectives, now and in the future. Moreover, it needs to be able to do this on a
sustainable basis.

6.2 To ensure that it has enough of the right people, the NZDF must manage its
human resource requirements carefully from a strategic perspective, taking the
long view. For many of the military tasks that it must undertake, the NZDF
cannot readily recruit trained personnel directly from a general labour market. It
must train and develop those personnel itself, often at considerable expense
and over a long period. It must therefore forecast its requirements many years
in advance.

6.3 This consideration is particularly relevant when considering possible changes to
the composition of the NZDF. Chapter Five of this Assessment identified a
range of pathways - Low, Middle and High - for strengthening the NZDF into the
future. Implementing these capability enhancements will pose challenges for
the NZDF. Other challenges will be posed by changes to the demographic
profile of NZ society, such as an aging workforce, and the evolving
expectations of those recruited to the NZDF, for example, generational change.

6.4 In this chapter, challenges associated with meeting the NZDF’s personnel
requirements are examined in detail. These challenges involve successfully
forecasting and meeting changing requirements for both the number of
personnel and the skills they will need arising from the options, in the context of
a changing demographic base, and doing so in an efficient and effective
manner.

##### Strategic Objectives for the Defence Workforce

6.5 If the NZDF is to manage its workforce effectively, it must successfully pursue a
number of strategic objectives, which include the following:

_Aligning Legal Status with Current Usage_

6.6 The current legal classifications of personnel as Regular Force, Reserve Force
or Civilian reflect historical requirements rather better than current usage. In
today’s environment of managing with the total workforce, the relationship
between uniformed and civilian personnel, and between Regular Force and


-----

Reserve Force, should be as integrated and seamless as possible. It is
important to ensure that legislative provisions keep pace with changing
requirements and do not impose undesirable rigidities. This issue will be
explored further below in the section entitled _Regular Force and Reserve_
_Forces._

_Classification of Skills and Tasks_

6.7 Delivering the capabilities and outputs required by the Government requires the
use of skills that can be grouped into two general categories:

    - the specifically military skills needed to generate, deploy and sustain a
military force; and

    - the more generic skills needed to lead, manage and administer any large
organisation.

6.8 These two general categories are not mutually exclusive: they overlap, often to
a considerable degree. One important strategic objective therefore is the
furtherance of a total workforce concept, which is to ensure that the necessary
skills are available to the organisation and are brought to bear appropriately on
the military and management tasks that must be undertaken.

6.9 The requirements for most positions are that they are primarily military or nonmilitary, but some involve a mix of the two. It is important to achieve
configurations of work processes and position descriptions that match skills to
work requirements in the best mix. For example, unless a specific military
requirement exists, it is not generally cost efficient for uniformed personnel to
be tasked with work that can be performed equally well by lower-cost civilian
personnel. Similarly, civilian personnel should not be performing work that
requires military skills unless they also have those skills. There are occasions,
however, where positions need to remain military to support the personnel
required in uniform (PRU) who deploy. PRU is covered in more detail under
the section below entitled Determining and Managing Demand.

_Personal and Career Development_

6.10 It is a characteristic of military personnel that they may need to be placed
deliberately in harm’s way, and may need to perform complex tasks under very
difficult conditions. This has important implications for human resource
management. Personnel are developed during their careers through often
substantial investments in training and experience, so that they are able to
contribute to sustainable, long term capabilities. Their development has three
important aspects: technical and military knowledge and skills; personal career
development; and experience. The objective is not just to train, but to develop
the whole person in order to deliver the military operational effect.


-----

_Effectiveness, Efficiency and Value for Money_

6.11 Achieving value for money in a defence context means developing and using a
military force that is capable of effectively undertaking a range of tasks that
realise policy objectives, and doing so in a cost efficient manner. Military
capability is not developed rapidly. Value for money is consequently not a point
in time assessment. Rather, it needs to be determined across the life of a
capability. Likewise the people element of that capability is developed through
the continuous investment in training and experience to ensure there is
sustainable long term capability.

6.12 This involves some complex considerations and trade-offs.

    - _Ensuring that military capabilities are effective. People are a key_
component of military capability and their effectiveness is in turn an
essential element of effectiveness of military capability, which is the
primary and pre-emptive objective. A military force which is not effective
in discharging its core functions cannot represent value for money.

    - _Ensuring that military capabilities are operational and will remain_
_operational. Such capabilities can only deliver the desired effect when_
they are capable of being used. Any down time in raising, training and
sustaining capability due to the unavailability of personnel can represent
a significant loss of value for money, as most costs associated with
owning and maintaining the platforms, infrastructure and equipment are
still being incurred.

    - _Achieving the Right Number of Personnel in Uniform. The NZDF needs_
to determine and develop the right number of uniformed personnel, in
the right configuration and at the appropriate trained state. It must also
determine and achieve the best total workforce balance, especially
between Regular Force and Reserve Force personnel. This issue will be
explored further below in the section entitled Regular Force and Reserve
_Forces._

    - _Achieving relative certainty of supply._ Because of attrition or
unavailability for other reasons, there is always a risk that the necessary
personnel may not be available. This can be managed in part by
allowing for prudential margins in personnel numbers. However,
estimating the optimal number of personnel is difficult and there will be
cost inefficiencies if numbers are either too few or too many.

    - _Optimising attrition. Some attrition is inevitable (and even healthy) but_
most attrition represents a loss on investment in training and corporate
knowledge. While the reasons for attrition are varied, remuneration and
conditions of service can play an important part when out of step with
market. Determining optimal remuneration and employment conditions
in the context of market tends is also complex and difficult. There will be
cost inefficiencies if remuneration and employment conditions are either


-----

too restrained or too generous. The cost of retaining existing personnel
must be balanced against the cost of letting these people leave the
NZDF and training replacements.

    - _Recruiting the right people. Since the process of recruitment incurs_
costs, and since the NZDF will typically invest in the training and
development of those who are recruited, it is important to ensure that
selection criteria and processes are the right ones, and identify those
who will be most likely to stay and succeed.

    - _Maintaining the right individual training effort. It is generally more cost_
efficient to recruit personnel (whether uniformed or civilian) who already
have some or all of the required skills, since this reduces both the
training investment and time needed to achieve functional competence.
There are practical limits to the numbers of personnel who can be
recruited ‘laterally’ to fill positions directly. The majority of personnel
need to be recruited and then trained in combat skills and/or to operate
military equipment, and this is likely to continue. Moreover, it should
also be noted that, regardless of the level of professional skills held by a
lateral civilian recruit, the NZDF must carry the training overhead
required to impart the core values, resilience, and leadership qualities
necessary for service in an operational environment. For strategic and
supply reasons, the NZDF needs to have a sufficient training capability
to ensure the supply of the trained personnel it requires. It also needs to
avoid over-training, or training personnel who will not return a period of
service that justifies the NZDF’s investment in them.

    - _Maintaining the right level of collective training effort._ The NZDF’s
operational effectiveness whether as a lead nation or part of a coalition
is predicated on its collective training regime. As such the NZDF needs
to ensure that the collective training outcomes are based on operational
requirements.

##### Demand

_Classification_

6.13 NZDF personnel are legally categorised into three groups:

    - _Regular Force, who are those in full-time service in the Royal New_
Zealand Navy, the Regular Forces of the Army, or the Regular Air Force
(Section 13 of the Defence Act 1990);

    - _Reserve Forces, who are either:_
i _Territorials in the Royal New Zealand Naval Reserve, the Royal_
New Zealand Naval Volunteer Reserve, the Territorial Force of
the New Zealand Army, or the Territorial Air Force (Section 15 of
the Defence Act 1990); or


-----

ii _Reserves in service in the Naval Reserves, the Army Reserve, or_
the Air Force Reserve (Section 16 of the Defence Act 1990); and

    - _Civilians, employees who are neither members of the Regular Force nor_
of the Reserve Forces.

6.14 Although the wording of the Act may not make it clear, there is a simple but
important distinction between territorials and reserves[1 ].

    - _Territorials, which are defined within the NZDF as “Active Reserves”,_
have enlisted as part-time sailors, soldiers and airmen/airwomen and
undertake a certain number of days training and service each year.

    - _Reserves, which are defined within the NZDF as “Inactive Reserves”,_
are former members of the Regular Force who have left the service of
the NZDF but have a residual obligation to provide further service if
called upon.

_Determining and Managing Demand_

6.15 Personnel are both a key component of capability and a key driver of cost. It is
therefore critical that the NZDF analyses its requirements correctly. Since the
primary purpose of any defence force is to undertake military tasks, the first
step in determining the total number of personnel required is to establish the
number of personnel required in uniform (PRU), whether Regular Force or
Reserve Force, analysed by rank and trade to deliver the NZDF Mission. All
other positions can then in principle be filled by civilians or contractors,
analysed by skills requirements.

6.16 As a general principle, if non-operational tasks can be performed equally well
by either uniformed personnel or civilians, it is more cost effective to have them
performed by civilians (whether a civilian employee or an external contractor).
Uniformed personnel are typically more expensive to recruit and train and,
reflecting differences in their conditions of service, are generally remunerated
differently than civilian employees or contractors. This difference recognises the
flexibility that uniformed personnel provide when NZDF is directed to perform
short notice unscheduled tasks.

_Personnel Required in Uniform_

6.17 The NZDF currently uses a process known as the Personnel Capability
Planning Model (PCPM) in order to determine the PRU needed to meet
Government outputs.

6.18 Informed by an analysis of the overall strategic position, decisions also include
consideration of the nature and expected frequency of deployments, and the
length of time that any deployment may need to be sustained. Typically,
personnel are deployed for periods of not longer than six months and are then
relieved. If a deployment must be sustained for an indeterminate period, the

1
In the rest of this chapter, the terms ‘Reservists’ and ‘Reserve Force’ will refer only to Active Reserves,
(e.g. Territorials) and not ‘Inactive Reserves’.


-----

total number of personnel required is at least three times the number of
personnel actually deployed at any time. Such deployments are typically
managed in a cycle of three rotation groups, where the first group is actually
deployed, the second group is preparing to deploy to relieve the first group, and
the third group has returned from the last deployment and is being rested,
trained and reconstituted. This applies to Army, Air Force, and Joint Force
deployments (e.g the Provincial Reconstruction Team in Afghanistan).

6.19 Naval deployments are somewhat different. The time taken to build a cohesive,
effective ship’s company precludes a six monthly rotation cycle. Given that the
nature of naval service requires that ships are continuously deployed,
maintaining sufficient numbers of personnel in the Navy to sustain such a cycle
across the fleet would be impractical. Ship’s companies are maintained in a
state as near to the authorised establishment as personnel resources permit,
and people are posted in and out of ships to meet this demand, and for training
and respite ashore. The ratio between sea and shore postings is stipulated for
each rank level, and career managers are tasked to ensure that these ratios
are observed insofar as numbers of people in each rank and trade permit.
Naval personnel policy seeks to maintain sufficient numbers to allow these
ratios to be observed.

6.20 Whilst deployment cycles and processes differ across the three Services (e.g.
personnel rotate on and off ships that deploy) the base cycle of deploying,
returning, training and then preparing to deploy again is common to all three.

6.21 The method used to determine if a position that does not involve the prospect
of deployment should be uniformed rather than civilian uses an ‘exception’
principle. The PRU starts with the premise that any position not required to
support the rotation cycle should be non-uniformed (e.g. civilian or contractor)
unless it requires non-deployed uniformed personnel. Exceptions are based on
the assumptions that the position:

    - is needed for core military business where current military experience is
essential to achieve the organisation’s output, notwithstanding that the
personnel do not deploy on operations (for example, roles responsible
for directly supporting operations at HQJFNZ);

    - requires specialist skills not otherwise found outside the Armed Forces.
(for example, bomb disposal);

    - involves a representational role that necessitates the use of military
personnel (for example, a Defence Attaché);

    - relates to the higher management of the NZDF, where a background in
the military assists in forming policy (for example, military operational
planning);

    - involves delivering training of a kind where it is necessary to maintain a
core of current military skills and knowledge within the training
organisation (for example, providing pre-deployment training); or

    - provides a position into which an appropriately skilled uniformed person
can be posted to meet career requirements and/or provide respite from


-----

deployed or seagoing service in accordance with agreed personnel
tempo and sea shore ration limits.

6.22 Determinations of the total number of military personnel also need to take
account of the fact that there will be a number of personnel who are not
available for operations at any point in time. Some of these personnel are not
available if they are in initial or advanced training, or are unavailable for other
reasons, such as being temporarily medically downgraded. In addition an
allowance is made for fluctuations in attrition rates.

_Estimation of Future Demand_

6.23 Chapter Five of this Assessment outlined three options – Low, Middle and High

    - that represent alternative pathways concerning the future development of the
NZDF that the Government might wish to adopt. Each of these options has
different consequences for future NZDF personnel requirements over the next
25 years.

6.24 The increases identified in this section reflect additional personnel numbers[2 ]

which are needed by each option to implement increased capabilities in the
front line. These estimated increases do not reflect any reductions in personnel
numbers that may result from efficiency reviews currently in train (see
paragraph 6.40 and 6.41 below). Actual figures will be net of efficiency
reductions.

##### Low Pathway

    - _Navy. There are 666 military personnel required to crew all RNZN ships._
However in this option, which allows for no growth in personnel from
current numbers, crew numbers would be constrained to 588. The
personnel numbers in the fleet would remain reasonably static until 2026
when they would decline to 466, reflecting the introduction of anticipated
smaller crews for the frigate replacements. By 2035 in this option overall
RNZN personnel numbers are forecast to be 1,874 Regular Force, 326
Reserve Force and 473 civilians.

    - _Army. There would be no investment in additional personnel for Army_
and therefore no growth in any operationally deployable units. If
selected, this option would require a comprehensive review of current
Army force structures and capabilities. The impact of not investing in
additional personnel would be predominantly on mission sustainment at
current deployment rates, and on the ability to react to any future
increase in operational demands or emerging threats. In this option
overall Army personnel numbers would be capped at 4,900 Regular
Force, 1,925 Reserve Forces and 650 civilians.

    - _Air. The personnel numbers in and directly supporting the squadrons’_
elements would slowly decline from around 1,000 down to 920 through

2
A current personnel profile of the NZDF is provided in a Annex B.


-----

the reduction in overall crew size as current capability is replaced over
future years. There is a reduction of 2 crews and associated output
levels for P-3K (down to 4 and maintained at this level for its
replacement). The A109 would only be used as a training platform. By
2035 in this option overall Air personnel numbers are forecast to be
2,614 Regular Force, 133 Reserve Forces and 431 Civilians.

##### Middle Pathway

- _Navy. The military personnel numbers to crew RNZN ships would grow_
by 78, as personnel constraints are released, to 666 by 2013 which
should allow full availability of the IPVs and OPVs. It would also ensure
full Navy support for acquisition programmes. Navy personnel would
remain at these levels until 2026 when they would decline to 542 as the
anticipated smaller crews for the Frigate Replacements occur in 2028.
In this option overall RNZN personnel numbers are forecast to peak in
2017 at 2,323 Regular Force, 326 Reserve Forces and 473 civilians.

- _Army. Regular Force personnel numbers would grow by 524 and_
Reserve Forces numbers would increase by 2,475. This increase is
predominantly in Combat (increasing combat numbers to form a third
manoeuvre unit,), Combat Support (intelligence and engineers) and
Combat Service Support (medical) The overall increase would also
provide the three manoeuvre units with a fourth (Reserve Forces)
manoeuvre company. This option is in line with the Army
Transformation Programme study that rebalances the total Army Force
towards more operationally deployable elements. It enables the
achievement of current outputs with a limited addition of personnel
numbers. In this option overall Army personnel numbers are forecast to
reach 5,400 Regular Force, 4,400 Reserve Forces and 660 civilians.

- _Air The increase in personnel numbers would enable new platforms to_
be introduced and supported, and existing vacancies to be filled so that
readiness and output requirements can be met, and produced with
reduced risk. Personnel numbers in and directly supporting the
squadrons’ elements would increase from 1,050 to 1,100 in 2020 to
support the changes in capability before stabilising, and then decrease
to 1,050 in 2025. Increases come from the introduction of the short
range maritime patrol aircraft, although there may be the opportunity for
some transfer from other squadrons to support this new platform; plus
additional support for the P-3K (and its replacement) and satellite
surveillance. Subsequent reductions relate to smaller crew sizes when
the C130H and P-3K are replaced (which also reduces the maintenance
personnel needed). The overall change on the squadron’s elements
following those replacements is a decrease from around 950 to 930. The
Middle option allows Air to support current requirements with some level
of risk. In this option overall Air personnel numbers are forecast to peak
in 2020 with 3,099 Regular Force, 143 Reserve Forces and 447 civilians.


-----

##### High Pathway

    - _Navy. The military personnel numbers to crew RNZN ships would grow_
to 733 by 2014 to allow full availability of the IPVs and OPVs and
support to acquisition programmes. The increase in personnel numbers
above the Middle pathway is driven by the need to provide additional
manning for the multi-role sealift and replenishment ship, once it enters
service. Numbers would then remain at these levels until 2024 when
they would decline to 609 as the anticipated smaller crews for the naval
combat replacements occur in 2028. In this option overall RNZN
personnel numbers are forecast to peak by 2017 at 2,427 Regular
Force, 326 Reserve Forces and 473 civilians.

    - _Army Under this option, Regular Force personnel numbers would grow_
by 464 and Reserve Forces numbers would decrease from 4,400 to
3,636. These changes would occur over a comparable time period as
the Middle option. This further growth in Regular Force numbers would
allow more effective mission sustainment than the Low or Middle
pathways by increasing the capacity to sustain multiple missions or
longer duration missions. The planned growth would be in Combat and
operationally deployable elements, including a third battalion complete
as well as enhanced Combat Support (Intelligence, Medical and
Engineers) and Combat Service Support Forces. In this option overall
Army personnel numbers are forecast to peak in 2030 at 6,300 Regular
Force, 3,650 Reserve Forces and 660 civilians.

    - _Air._ The increase in personnel numbers would enable new platforms to
be introduced and supported, and existing vacancies to be filled so that
readiness and output requirements can be met, and produced with
reduced risk. The personnel numbers in and directly supporting the
squadrons’ elements would increase overall from around 1,050 to 1,280
by 2020, decreasing to 1,240 by 2030. Increases are driven by the
higher demand for deployment support by the new NH90 and A109
helicopters, introduction of the fully deployable dual role short range
maritime patrol/utility transport aircraft as a new squadron, the
introduction of the UAS, in addition to the satellite capability from the
Middle option. The personnel increase would allow the full utilisation of
the capabilities added. In this option overall Air personnel numbers are
forecast to peak in 2024 with 3,271 Regular Force, 143 Reserve Forces
and 433 civilians.

6.25 The personnel consequences of these capability enhancements will carry with
them some new challenges for recruitment and management. It will be
important that they are addressed in a timely way, since the lead times needed
to train and develop personnel can be significantly longer than the lead times
needed to acquire new platforms and equipment.


-----

_Regular Force and Reserve Forces_

6.26 The estimated increases set out above represent Regular Force personnel and
some civilian personnel. Reserve Force personnel have not been included per
_se. It is likely, however, that in practice there would be some increase in_
Reserve Force numbers to complement the increases in Regular Force
numbers. In addition, and reflecting current trends in the use of Reserve
Forces, it is also likely that Reserve Force personnel would substitute for
Regular Force personnel in some positions.

6.27 A key question to be addressed, as the NZDF transitions to an integrated and
seamless workforce, is determining how Regular Force and Reserve Force
personnel can best be employed. As noted in paragraph 6.8 above, this is an
area that is undergoing change.

6.28 The traditional approach is based on what is known as a ‘spectrum of
operations’, which ranges from high intensity combat at one extreme to quasicivilian roles such as disaster relief at the other. While this approach still
applies, current theatres of operations have a threat level regardless of the
primary roles that personnel will undertake. Any NZDF personnel who deploy
into a theatre of operations must have the same level of operational readiness
regardless of that role.

6.29 As a general rule, it is resource-intensive to train high end combat forces to
operational readiness level. Consequently it is more effective to maintain
Regular Force personnel at this readiness state. Using Reserve Forces in
combat roles without the same level of investment in training is therefore a
comparatively higher risk than using Regular Forces. There is less risk in using
Reserve Forces to provide cost-effective force protection in lower-intensity
situations, and peace support roles for those missions where the threat state
has declined sufficiently to no longer require the combat capabilities of Regular
Forces. Indeed their civilian skill sets may add capability.

6.30 Training for high-intensity combat is both time-consuming and expensive. This
Assessment proposes that, as a general rule, combat training for Reserve
Force personnel be focussed at the level of force protection and peace support.
Circumstances, however, may alter cases. It is a trend that former Regular
Force personnel have been enlisting in the Reserve Force in greater numbers,
with consequential implications for the kind of roles they can be called on to
undertake.

6.31 The operational advantages that Reserve Forces provide to the NZDF come
from the type, range and quality of skills that they can offer, rather than simply
an increase in the numbers of deployable personnel. In combat support roles,
Reserve Force personnel can make a valuable contribution through their
civilian specialisations such as health or information technology. In _combat_
_service support roles Reserve Force personnel can make contributions in_
areas such as logistics, medical services and equipment maintenance.
Recruiting personnel into the Reserve Forces who already have such specialist
skills is therefore a very cost-efficient way to add considerable capacity to the


-----

NZDF. The NZDF should continue to investigate how relevant civilian
expertise can best be recruited into the Reserve Forces for specialist
employment within NZDF.

6.32 Regardless of role, Reservists must expect to be active rather than inactive. In
future, the deployment of personnel from the Reserve Forces is likely to
become the norm. Reserve Force personnel will therefore need effective
career management much like their Regular Force counterparts, possibly in
partnership with their employers.

6.33 Traditional attitudes towards service in the NZDF have typically encouraged a
period of unbroken service followed by a severance upon exit. The NZDF
stands to benefit greatly from adopting an approach that encourages former
Regular Force and civilian personnel to return to service in the future. The
NZDF needs to develop new policies and systems, and also a facilitative
culture, to make it easier for personnel to exit and re-engage.

6.34 Over recent years it has become more common for Reserve Force personnel to
join the Regular Force for periods of time, due to the increase in operational
tempo and some improvements in the ease with which it is possible to transfer
between the Reserve Forces and the Regular Force. Further study is needed,
but if the trend continues it may provide a reliable source of supply of personnel
with desirable skill-sets. For certain positions, a combination of civilian
professional skills and the more modest military skills of Reserve Force
personnel might be a better mix than either Civilian or Regular Force skills.

6.35 This Assessment proposes that legislative provisions relating to Regular Force,
Reserve Forces and Civilians be reviewed to reflect current usage, to ensure
that they do not impose undesirable rigidities, and to facilitate the movement of
personnel between different classifications.

_Matching Skills to Positions_

6.36 The current NZDF model seeks to strike a balance between two requirements:

    - the need to provide opportunities for future military leaders to acquire a
broad level of experience across a number of disciplines; and

    - the need to have key roles undertaken by subject matter experts.

6.37 Decisions about whether an individual position should be filled by uniformed or
civilian personnel need to be made having regard to the requirements of that
position. The overarching principle must be that all positions, especially those
requiring subject matter expertise, need to be filled by persons with the
requisite expertise.

6.38 A number of issues are relevant. As previously stated, it is a characteristic of
military personnel that they may need to be placed in harm’s way. The NZDF
has a duty of care to mitigate such risks not only on operations but on all forms
of military deployments. It must therefore make sure that personnel making
operational, management and administrative decisions are sufficiently informed


-----

and experienced to be aware of the implications of those decisions for serving
personnel, especially those who are being deployed on missions where there
are additional risks. Equally it must grow leaders who can provide military
advice. In addition, the NZDF needs to ensure that personnel returning from
deployments are constructively employed in ways that contribute to their
personal and career development so as to meet the organisation’s current and
future needs. The NZDF, however, must also manage taxpayers’ resources in
an efficient and effective manner, and it is imperative that personnel have skills
and experience appropriate to the tasks that they are performing.

6.39 The NZDF is currently classifying positions in accordance with a continuum of
expertise for a military organisation in the categories of military, military/civilian,
civilian/military and civilian. It is also examining options for enabling uniformed
personnel to develop secondary specialties in addition to their core military
skills, in areas such as human resource management and acquisition.

_Testing the Numbers_

6.40 Three reviews of personnel requirements are currently being undertaken by the
NZDF: one within the Defence Transformation Programme (DTP)[3], two as
projects within the Defence Personnel Executive (the Right Cost Project of R5[4])
and the Force Structure Review. In addition, the _Cost Down Diagnostic_
exercise undertaken by Deloitte for the NZDF in 2010 identified a number of
areas where personnel numbers might be reduced.

6.41 The NZDF has commenced a Force Structure Review to complete a
comprehensive, competency-based review drawing on work already
undertaken within the DTP, the R5 exercise and the Cost Down Diagnostic, to
identify:

    - which positions are genuinely necessary;

    - which positions or functions can be contracted out cost-efficiently;

    - which positions need to be filled by a subject matter expert, whether
uniformed or civilian;

    - which positions need to be filled by uniformed personnel, and if so, at
what rank; and

    - which skills need to be developed within the NZDF and which can more
appropriately be obtained from external sources.

3
The Defence Transformation Programme will restructure large sections of the NZDF’s support functions to
address duplication and inefficiencies in traditional structures, the primary objective of which is to realise
efficiencies and savings.

4
R5 is a shorthand for the Right People in the Right Place in the Right Numbers at the Right Time at the
Right Cost to meet current and future outputs.


-----

##### Supply

_External Supply Challenges_

6.42 NZDF analyses of forecasts of New Zealand demographic trends over the next
twenty-five years suggest the following implications:

    - The NZDF will need to recruit from a more diverse society;

    - New recruiting strategies will be necessary in order to meet the forecast
demand for personnel with certain technical skills;

    - Proactive plans will be needed to manage the loss of corporate
knowledge from those skilled civilian positions that are currently filled by
an ageing workforce; and

    - New military training and leadership approaches will be needed to reflect
different generational expectations and to manage current trends in
fitness, health and literacy.

6.43 In relation to the supply of personnel, three aspects are particularly relevant first, the absolute size of the population from which recruits are obtained,
second, the prevalence of people within that population who have the desired
personal characteristics, and third, the ability of the NZDF’s personnel training
and development processes to deliver the required personnel at the required
trained state in the required timeframe.

6.44 By international standards, and in comparison to the size of the overall
population, the NZDF is quite small, which helps make the task of meeting its
requirements comparatively less demanding. The challenges set out above are
real, but not intractable. In recent history, the NZDF has, with the exception of
technical personnel, usually had minimal difficulty meeting recruitment quotas.
Its ability to do so in the future will depend on a number of basic ‘labour market’
considerations including, but not confined to, the relative attractiveness of its
remuneration packages and conditions of employment. The analyses
undertaken by this Assessment suggest that the NZ population will be capable
of furnishing enough people with the right characteristics to meet the NZDF’s
requirements. Given adequate inducement, appeal, remuneration and
conditions of employment, the NZDF should be able to recruit the personnel it
will need in the foreseeable future. It will need to further develop its strategies
to attract the technical personnel it requires.

_Civilians and Contractors_

6.45 Many roles that are met by the NZDF’s civilian personnel might equally be
provided by contractors. Decisions about whether a requirement should be
outsourced should be based primarily on risk assessments, balancing need and
certainty of supply against cost. If requirements can be met by outsourcing with
an acceptable degree of risk in relation to certainty of supply, and at a lower
cost, then provision of the service should be outsourced. If there are no


-----

external providers, or if certainty of supply is at risk, or if the cost of outsourcing
is higher, then the service should be delivered in-house.

6.46 When outsourcing any functions, it is essential to retain enough in-house
expertise to manage contracts and invigilate performance. It is also prudent to
avoid becoming so dependent on any one contractor that the NZDF is
strategically exposed to the continuity of the provision of service thereby
creating a high risk situation.

_Recruitment Performance_

6.47 Success in recruitment is measured in part[5] by the relationship between target
numbers and the numbers actually recruited. Success in achieving target
numbers has recently increased from 89.3% of target in the third quarter of FY
07/08 through to 112.8% of target in the third quarter of FY 09/10.

6.48 Three factors may have contributed to this:

    - financial constraints have caused reductions in recruitment targets in
order to balance personnel budgets (meaning that those reduced targets
are easier to achieve);

    - the recession has reduced demand elsewhere in the labour market; and

    - higher starting salaries due to the new military remuneration system
have encouraged higher than normal interest in the NZDF as an
employer.

6.49 There is risk that, with any resurgent growth in the wider labour market, there
may be a correspondingly negative impact on recruitment success. This would
need to be mitigated, whether by changes to processes or through more
intensive efforts.

_Improving Recruiting Processes_

6.50 A DTP initiative involves centralising the recruiting function to facilitate common
approaches to recruiting practices and processes across Services.
Streamlined recruiting processes are intended to funnel recruits to the areas of
greatest need within NZDF and reduce or eliminate the previous tendency of
single Services to compete with each other for the same pool of recruits.

6.51 New recruits are often attracted by the prospect of training and personal
development. A survey of young people undertaken as part of the Public
Consultation process of this Assessment identified educational and career
opportunities as factors that should be emphasised. They also suggested that
the qualifications and skills acquired while in the Defence Force should be
recognised within civilian professions. This Assessment agrees that the NZDF
potentially has much to gain by emphasising these benefits.


5


Other criteria include the proportion of recruits who are retained in employment and are successful in their
assigned roles.


-----

6.52 In order to gain greater access to technically-skilled tertiary graduates, the
NZDF should:

    - pursue closer relationships with tertiary education providers;

    - do more to attract those with technical abilities through better marketing
of the practical or post academic training that the NZDF can offer; and

    - ensure training delivered in the Services continues to provide industryrecognised qualifications.

6.53 The NZDF should also review its recruitment methods so as to attract more
personnel from non-traditional areas, including graduates and candidates from
ethnic groups that are typically under-represented in the current intakes.
Research evidence suggests that older members of the public, as key
influencers, see the NZDF as a place to develop valuable skills and complete
training. Recruiting strategies should continue to make use of such research.

##### Retention

6.54 Attrition can be very costly in both loss of experience and in financial terms. A
key challenge is to keep attrition to the minimum level that still allows sufficient
movement though the ranks. Rates of attrition, usually measured as 12-month
rolling averages, are difficult to forecast. They vary significantly over time, and
typically differ between military and civilian personnel, between Regular Force
and Reserve Forces personnel, and between each of the three Services. For
example, the attrition rate for the Army varied from 18% in 2004 to 10% in
2009. During the same period, the rate for the Air Force varied from 8% in
2004 to 5% in 2009. Currently the attrition rate across the three Services for
Regular Force personnel is relatively low by historical standards, however
Reserve Force attrition rate at 18-25% is considered moderate by the same
standards.

_Reasons for Staying and Leaving_

6.55 The top three reasons reported by Regular Force personnel for staying in the
NZDF are very consistent across the Services. They are (1) challenging and
interesting work, (2) job security and (3) job satisfaction. Civilians report the
same top three reasons, although the order of importance differs. This
Assessment welcomes the NZDF’s initiative to start to include Reserve Forces
into its ongoing Attitudinal Survey, to establish their views.

6.56 Both uniformed and civilian personnel stay in the NZDF because of the
interesting and challenging work, job security and job satisfaction. They leave
to pursue development outside the NZDF, to meet family commitments, and for
their own personal wellbeing.

6.57 Attrition across the Regular Force is influenced by many factors. It is higher for
Other Ranks than for Officers and higher for females than males. A key issue
is that, notwithstanding some improvement over the last two years, attrition in
the first year of service is still undesirably high, ranging from 20-30% across the


-----

three Services. This points to the need for a better understanding of causes
and improved selection criteria (see paragraphs 6.59 and 6.60 below).

_Improving Retention_

6.58 Retention is enhanced if personnel find their work rewarding, are well-treated
and regard themselves as adequately-remunerated, are physically and
psychologically healthy, and are content in their home life and in their
community. The NZDF will continue to develop its policies and programmes in
these areas.

6.59 The NZDF has recently revised its remuneration strategy so that it can now
better align remuneration with external markets that previously have attracted
highly skilled and motivated people away from the Services. That said, this
strategy has not been able to be fully implemented due to funding pressure and
may have implications on attrition rates unless addressed.

6.60 The NZDF is currently undertaking research into cohorts of new recruits in
order to identify the reasons for early first-year release. It is important that the
research findings be reflected in enhancements to recruitment and initial
training strategies.

6.61 The NZDF should continue to co-ordinate research on the causes of attrition
and monitor the success of strategies for retention. In addition, it will need to
ensure that remuneration and other conditions of service remain competitive
with those provided by other employers.

##### Training

_Training Value for Money_

6.62 The NZDF currently spends many millions of dollars each year on education
and training. This is a substantial annual investment and needs to return good
value for money. Apart from providing the NZDF with the trained personnel that
it needs for operational purposes, investments in training and personnel
development are positive influences on recruitment and retention.

6.63 To ensure that value is achieved, the NZDF’s overarching strategy is generally
to match training with immediate workplace requirements. More substantial
and developmental investments in individuals are made only when the
probability of a sufficiently worthwhile return of service justifies the investment.
Hence, just-in-time training is the preferred approach until personnel have
reached a point in their career where it is appropriate to provide more advanced
training or development.

6.64 The DTP is currently undertaking a critical examination of education and
training processes and practices. The NZDF intends to streamline education
and training and reduce overheads while increasing learning opportunities. The
NZDF has established a centralised Training and Education Directorate. This
Directorate will review training based on the following principles:


-----

    - all training is to be delivered on a needs-based syllabus;

    - delivery is to be provided by the lowest cost mechanism that meets
NZDF needs;

    - all training outside environmentally (e.g. Navy, Army and Air) specific
needs is to be analysed, designed, delivered and audited with a single
accountability; and

    - in respect of education and training, there is to be one common set of
doctrine, policy and practice for the NZDF.

6.65 The Training and Education Directorate will also assume the responsibility for
assessing what training should be delivered within the NZDF, and what would
be better outsourced to competitive training providers.

_Reducing Time to Competence_

6.66 Training costs are a direct function of the time taken for each course or
programme of instruction. Longer courses are more expensive, not only in
terms of the direct cost of the course but also in terms of the loss of productivity
and the need to cover the work previously undertaken by the trainee.

6.67 Clearly, efficiencies can be realised if it is possible to reduce the time taken to
complete a course of training to a prescribed standard (known as the “time to
competence”). The NZDF intends to continue to invest in, or gain access to,
tools that improve training and reduce the time to competence. These include
simulators for ship’s bridges, engineering, small arm weapons and flight
simulators.

6.68 The NZDF has also introduced a Learning Management System (LMS) that will
allow face to face instruction to be “blended” with e-learning so as to shift as
much training as possible out of the classroom, reducing course length and
time to competence. The LMS will ultimately be accessible to all NZDF
personnel via the Defence Information Exchange System and the internet

6.69 Approaches to training and education need to meet the expectations of newlyrecruited personnel and deliver on the brand promises of the NZDF as a
technologically progressive and competitive education provider when compared
with other tertiary institutions.

##### Career Development

6.70 Past exit survey results have indicated that career management within the
NZDF has been a considerable source of dissatisfaction. Steps need to be
taken to ensure NZDF career management principles and practices meet
expectations.

6.71 The NZDF believes that better results can be achieved if individuals are
empowered to take a greater role in planning their career path and taking
greater responsibility for their own development. In doing this, it is necessary to
balance the needs and wishes of the individual with the requirements of the


-----

NZDF to achieve a sufficient return on training investment. Nonetheless,
empowering individuals to be active in their own career planning is likely to be a
positive factor in retention. Proactive career management can ensure both
organisational and individual needs remain aligned.

6.72 The traditional approach to developing senior military personnel for broader
leadership roles has consisted primarily of attendance at military staff courses
and a pedigree of postings to a range of different positions and roles. This
Assessment has concluded that the traditional approach can usefully be
extended in at least three ways.

i The NZDF could promote partnerships with external organisations within
both the government and private sectors. This could formalise career
development pathways that include important experience outside the
NZDF. It would also help ensure that the NZDF remains ‘linked-in’ to
industry and advances in corporate practice.

ii The NZDF could devise and promote career pathways that are focused
around specialist areas. Given the often extended period required to
train and develop subject matter experts, the NZDF should be very
active in identifying and forecasting future requirements.

iii The NZDF may need to invest in a wider range of non-military courses.

##### Research

6.73 Good quality and relevant personnel research provide critical evidence
necessary to inform operational, policy and business case decisions. The
NZDF carries out some research in the area of recruitment, retention and
organisational climate. The area, however, is complex and changeable and
much more can be learned. This Assessment considers that it is essential that
the NZDF continues to develop an improved human resource research
capability to support fact-based policy development and organisational
decision-making.

##### Conclusion

6.74 Strategic human resource management is critical to the future ability of the
NZDF to generate the capabilities and deliver the outputs required by
Government. The NZDF is unable to recruit many of the skilled personnel it
needs from the wider labour market and must therefore train and develop those
personnel itself. This requires considerable ongoing investments in those
personnel and the investments must return value for money.

6.75 It is important and will remain important for the NZDF to determine accurately
the number of personnel that it requires and will require in the future – neither
too many nor too few. The DTP and R5 reviews are currently testing current
assumptions and identifying areas where efficiencies can be made in the
logistics, personnel and training areas – in effect reducing demand in the


-----

“middle” and “back” of the organisation to create savings that can be used to
fund the frontline positions. This Assessment endorses the value of that work.

6.76 Given the size of the NZDF compared to the size of the general population, and
provided that remuneration and conditions of service remain appropriate, this
Assessment does not anticipate significant difficulties meeting future
recruitment requirements. However, trained NZDF personnel are often very
desirable to private sector employers. The NZDF’s ability to retain the
personnel it needs in future will be absolutely critical to its ability to achieve and
maintain the desired levels of capability. The NZDF needs to understand all
aspects of its personnel very well including, in particular, the causes of attrition,
and should continue and extend its research on those issues.

6.77 A number of areas have been identified where the NZDF’s ability to access the
personnel it needs can be improved. These include better career development
practices, changing traditional career paths and facilitating the ability of Regular
Force and Reserve Force personnel who leave the NZDF to re-enlist and/or to
move between different classifications. Reserve Forces are a potentially
valuable source of trained personnel but only if their rate of usage is high
enough to justify the investment made in them. There may be further
opportunities to increase the ease with which they can be released from their
civilian employment so that usage rates can be increased, and these should be
explored. These approaches aim to reduce shortfalls in critical trades and
branches but improve the skills and experience in key leadership areas.

##### Recommendations

6.78 Recognising that the effectiveness of the NZDF depends on the number and
quality of its personnel, both military and civilian, the Assessment recommends
that:

    - as a legislative opportunity arises, the definitions in the Defence Act 1990
relating to territorials and reserves, including the names of the bodies into
which they are enlisted, be amended and updated to improve clarity and
better reflect the roles that they now undertake;

    - the Ministry of Defence and the NZDF, in consultation with the Department
of Labour, should jointly review the current legislation to determine if
amendments can be made that will better facilitate the ease with which
Reserve Forces can be released from their regular employment so that they
can be deployed on operations; and

    - the NZDF should develop new career-transition policies and initiatives to
encourage the re-engagement of Reserve Force and former Regular Force
personnel;

    - in relation to positions that require subject matter expertise, including
management position, the NZDF should adopt the principles that:

          - all positions should be carefully and critically examined to determine
what expertise, whether military or non-military or both, is required to
discharge the requirements of the position successfully;


-----

    - positions should only be filled by personnel with the necessary expertise;
and

    - positions should be filled by the person best fitted to do so, whether or
not that person is uniformed or civilian.

- the NZDF should develop new approaches to senior military personnel for
broader leadership roles; and

- the NZDF should develop partnerships with other government agencies in
order to facilitate joint training;

- the NZDF should continue to develop an improved human resource
research, and to research critical areas such as the causes of attrition, to
support fact-based policy development and organisational decision-making.


-----

##### Chapter 7
### Financial Context And Costs Of Capability Pathways

7.1 Chapter Five discussed three pathways for the military capabilities that could
be needed between now and the year 2035. This chapter examines the likely
cost implications arising from that analysis. It describes the NZDF’s current
funding pressures, discusses how those pressures arose, and provides
estimates of the costs of each pathway over that period.

7.2 The current funding pressures are severe and will continue in the short- to
medium-term. They must be managed carefully. They will impact not only on
the actions that may be taken in the near future, but also on the way in which
the Government may wish to chart its course for defence policy over the next
25 years.

##### Financial Context

7.3 The NZDF is currently rebuilding its capability after a period of decline.
Defence operating expenditure[1] fell during the first half of the 1990s. From a
high of $1.24 billion in 1988/89 to a low of $947 million in 1996/97, the defence
budget reduced by almost a quarter in nominal terms. This reduction was then
reversed by increases from 1996/97 onwards to $1.72 billion in 2008/09.

7.4 It is more relevant to make comparisons in real terms. Adjusted for CPI
inflation and expressed in 2008/09 dollars, defence operating expenditure had
declined by 1996/97 to 65% of the 1989/90 figure. By 2008/09, it had
recovered to 90% of the 1988/89 figure.

7.5 These comparisons understate the impact in personnel and other operating
expenditure. Specialised military equipment escalates in cost at a rate above
CPI inflation, which increases capital costs and capital valuations. Both new
purchases and revaluations of existing equipment therefore increase the
depreciation component of operating expenditure.

7.6 The history of Defence operating expenditure in the 20 years from 1989/90 to
2008/09 is illustrated in the graph below.

1 Defence operating expenditure is categorised under four labels – personnel, which includes human
resource costs; depreciation, which is the amount by which the value of assets reduces each year
because they are wearing out; capital charge, which is a fee charged from departments by the Crown for
holding capital (analogous to interest on borrowed money); and other operating, which includes everything
else. _Capital charge in some respects is treated differently from the other categories. To simply the_
exposition in this chapter, operating expenditure will be defined as including personnel, other operating
and depreciation, but excluding capital charge.


-----

|Col1|L|
|---|---|
||i|
|||


n

7.7 An alternative perspective can be obtained by considering the level of defence
operating expenditure as a percentage of New Zealand’s GDP. In 1989/90 it
amounted to approximately 1.7 %. In 2003/04 it amounted to 0.87 %. It is now
approximately 1 %.

7.8 The reduction in defence spending has in part reflected changes in force
structure. These included:

    - reductions in certain force elements, including in the number of frigates
and the discontinuation of the air combat wing;

    - reductions (by design) in the associated number of personnel;

    - planned reductions in NZDF infrastructure, including a number of base
closures; and

    - reduced expenditure on operations, equipment, materiel, infrastructure
and maintenance.

7.9 Between 2002/03 and 2008/09, the NZDF had been pursuing an approved
programme of redevelopment. This involved the replacement and upgrading of
a number of platforms and major items of equipment, and increases in
personnel numbers. The programme was supported by a funding envelope
that provided for new capital injections of $1.0 billion over the 10 years from
2002/03 to 2011/12.

7.10 Under that programme of redevelopment, a number of significant equipment
acquisitions and upgrades were undertaken and have been completed:

    - the acquisition of a multi-role vessel, four inshore patrol craft, and two
offshore patrol vessel under Project Protector;


-----

    - the acquisition and upgrading of two B 757 aircraft;

    - the acquisition of a medium-range anti-armour weapon;

    - the acquisition of 105 Light Armoured Vehicles (LAVs); and

    - the acquisition of 321 Pinzgauer light operational vehicles.

7.11 Further significant equipment acquisitions and upgrades which are under
contract but not yet completed include:

    - the acquisition of eight NH 90 medium-utility helicopters and five A109
training/light utility helicopters;

    - an upgrade of the platform systems of the ANZAC frigates;

    - an extension to the life of the C130 Hercules tactical air transport
capability; and

    - an upgrade of the mission management, communications and navigation
systems of the P3 Orion maritime patrol aircraft.

7.12 The programme of redevelopment also carried a requirement for increased
personnel numbers and increased operating expenditure.

7.13 A funding package initiated by the previous Government in 2005 provided
additional operating and capital funding. Its key elements included:

    - an increase in operating funding of approximately $4.4 billion (GST
exclusive) for NZDF over the ten-year period from 2005/06 to 2014/15;

    - further capital injections of up to $209 million over the period from
2007/08 to 2009/10; and

    - the Crown bearing the risk associated with the impact on depreciation of
asset revaluations for at least the first five years of the ten-year period,
(reviewable after the first five years).

##### Offsetting Efficiencies

7.14 The funding package, although substantial, did not provide all the additional
operating funding required by the NZDF to implement the redevelopment
programme. The shortfall was to be met through the achievement of further
efficiencies.

7.15 To pursue these efficiencies, the NZDF initiated the Defence Transformation
Programme (DTP) to take a strategic view of the overall support functions. To
date, a total of $84 million has been saved through several ‘quick win’ projects.

7.16 In 2009, the DTP re-focused on longer-term transformational change across the
NZDF, to deliver further sustainable savings. Initially, three areas were
targeted: human resource management, logistics, and NZDF Headquarters.
These initiatives have moved to the implementation phase, and the NZDF is
putting in place:


-----

    - a new consolidated Defence Logistics Command;

    - a new consolidated Human Resources Organisation;

    - a new consolidated Training and Education Directorate; and

    - a new way of structuring and working in Headquarters.

##### Current Financial Position

7.17 The impact of the international financial crisis and global recession on the
New Zealand economy, and on the Crown’s fiscal position in particular, has
significantly limited the Government’s ability to engage in new spending in the
short-to-medium term. As a consequence, the funding assurances provided in
2005 Defence Funding Package were withdrawn, pending the outcome of this
Assessment.

7.18 The Crown does, however, remain contractually committed to acquisitions and
upgrades, including those listed in paragraph 7.11, that have not yet fully come
to charge. Significant capital expenditure will therefore be needed to meet the
direct costs of those upgrades and replacements. Additional operating
expenditure will also be needed to meet the increased depreciation and other
operating costs associated with bringing them into service. Managing these
operating expenditure pressures will be a major challenge over the next five
years.

7.19 The Government has approved an increase of $35 million in operating
expenditure to help cover the cost of the additional depreciation in 2010/11.
This, coupled with reprioritisation decisions, will enable the NZDF to remain
within its appropriations for the 2010/11 fiscal year. The resource plan for
2011/12, however, forecasts an operating deficit of around $90 million in that
year. The forecast deficit increases in the out-years. This problem of a
compounding forecast deficit will need to be resolved no later than Budget
2011.

7.20 On current forecasts, the impact of past decisions will mean that unfunded
depreciation will increase by about $100 million over the next two years. The
increased costs associated with these legacy commitments are essentially
unavoidable. Notwithstanding the increases in operating funding approved for
2010/11, the funding available for ‘personnel’ and ‘other operating’ expenditure
will be $45 million less in 2010/11, and $133 million less in 2011/12, than was
available in 2009/10.

7.21 In summary, the unfunded depreciation from capital commitments will crowd
out available funding for ‘personnel’ and ‘other operating’ expenditure. The
forecast position over the next five years is set out in the table below.


-----

|$ Millions|2009/10|2010/11|2011/12|2012/13|2013/14|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Personnel and Other Operating|1465.1 ↓|1447.0 ↓|1368.1 ↓|1356.6 ↓|1360.6 ↑|
|Depreciation|338.5 ↑|382.7 ↑|437.9 ↑|444.4 ↑|440.4 ↓|


7.22 The current position of the NZDF’s funding provides the starting point for
positioning future development plans. In the following sections we provide
forecasts of the estimated costs of the capability pathways discussed in the
previous chapter, covering the period between now and 2035.

##### Characteristics of Costs Estimates

7.23 While every endeavour has been made to ensure that cost estimates made by
this Assessment are as robust as they can be, there are unavoidable
uncertainties, and therefore limits, to the fidelity that any estimates can achieve
over a 25 year period. The NZDF’s costs are subject to a number of sources of
variability, including CPI inflation, military cost escalation, asset revaluations
and movements in foreign exchange rates. The cost estimates that follow need
to be understood in the light of these uncertainties. To take one example, if
CPI inflation were to be constant at a modest 3% over the 25 year period, $1
today would be worth about 50c in 2035.

##### Fiscal Strategy and Indicative Funding Parameters

7.24 The analysis undertaken by this review has been informed by the _Fiscal_
_Strategy Report presented as part of Budget 2009, which was reconfirmed by_
the _Fiscal Strategy Report_ 2010. In broad summary, that strategy made
provision for increases in capital expenditure of $13 billion in total over the next
10 years and increases in operating expenditure of $1.1 billion per annum for
the next 10 years.

7.25 If the $1.1 billion annual increases in operating expenditure were to be shared
across all government agencies in the same proportions as their average
historical increases, the operating expenditure component of Vote Defence
Force would increase by an average of $36 million per annum for the ten years
to 2019[2].

7.26 If the $13 billion for increased capital expenditure were to be shared across all
government agencies in the same proportions as their average historical capital
injections, the NZDF would receive average annual injections of $80 million.

2
This would represent a real reduction in defence spending over the decade and would cause it to fall
below 1% of GDP.


-----

7.27 Future increases need not be constrained to conform with the proportions that
applied in the past. Pressures for increased funding, however, can be
expected from all sectors of government. To provide a general indication, the
Treasury proposed that average funding increases could be considered in
relation to three indicative levels – reduced (less than historic share), central
(historic share) and increased (more than historic share) - as set out in the
following table:

**Average Increments** **Reduced** **Central** **Increased**
**Per annum**

**Operating** $24 million $36 million $72 million

**Capital** $40 million $80 million $160 million

7.28 The cost estimates presented below are compared with these indicative levels
for the next 10 years (the period covered by the 2009/10 fiscal strategy).
However, it is worth making two observations. First, while it is likely that there
will be funding constraints for some years, the May 2009 Fiscal Strategy Report
reflected the considerable uncertainty which prevailed at that time as a result of
the global financial crisis. The Government has maintained its 2009 stance in
the May 2010 Fiscal Strategy Report, but there are perceptions now of a good
deal less uncertainty and a more positive economic outlook than prevailed in
2009. Second, this Assessment covers a period of 25 years. While always
mindful of affordability issues, the analyses of this Assessment have not been
based on the unlikely assumption that the fiscal conditions which prevailed at
the start of the review period would continue throughout its 25 year duration.

##### Costs of Capability Pathways

7.29 The following tables provide estimates of the increases in operating and capital
expenditure associated with the Low, Middle and High pathways. To facilitate
comparability across the 25 year period of the Assessment, increased costs are
given in $2009 at 2009 prices.

7.30 To repeat a point made earlier, the fidelity of cost estimates declines over time
because of accumulating uncertainties. In general terms, fidelity could be
characterised as follows: 2010/11 – 2014/15 will be reasonably robust,
2015/16 – 2019/20 should still be a fair indication, and 2020/21 – 2034/5 will be
increasingly uncertain. Accordingly we present our estimates of the additional
costs of each of the three capability pathways in those time bands.

|Average Increments Per annum|Reduced|Central|Increased|
|---|---|---|---|
|Operating|$24 million|$36 million|$72 million|
|Capital|$40 million|$80 million|$160 million|


-----

7.31 In addition, the following points should be noted:

    - The estimates do not include provision for additional expenditure on the
Defence estate. Actual requirements will depend on decisions not yet
taken; and

    - The estimates do not assume any savings arising from the VfM review or
other Defence efficiency exercise already underway. The amounts and
timing of such savings will be estimated once the outcome of the VfM
study is received.

_Low Pathway_

Period 2010/11 – 2014/15

$ Million Fiscal allocation in three indicative Forecast average
expenditure bands additional cost
$2009 $2009

Reduced Central Increased

Average Annual
Increase in

24 36 72 48

Operating
Expenditure

Average Annual 40 80 160 21
Capital Injections

Period 2015/16 – 2019/20

$ Million Fiscal allocation in three indicative Forecast average
expenditure bands additional cost
$2009 $2009

Reduced Central Increased

Average Annual
Increase in

24 36 72 21

Operating
Expenditure

Average Annual 40 80 160 47
Capital Injections

7.32 For the period 2020/21 to 2034/35, the detail of forecast expenditure is much
less certain. Operating expenditure other than depreciation is not expected to
rise significantly. The major capital purchases in this period (in 2009 dollars)
are:

    - Completing the programme of replacement of the tactical air transport
capability (C130 Hercules and B757 aircraft);

    - Replacement of the naval combat force (frigates);

|Period 2010/11 – 2014/15|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|$ Million|Fiscal allocation in three indicative expenditure bands $2009|||Forecast average additional cost $2009|
||Reduced|Central|Increased||
|Average Annual Increase in Operating Expenditure|24|36|72|48|
|Average Annual Capital Injections|40|80|160|21|

|Period 2015/16 – 2019/20|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|$ Million|Fiscal allocation in three indicative expenditure bands $2009|||Forecast average additional cost $2009|
||Reduced|Central|Increased||
|Average Annual Increase in Operating Expenditure|24|36|72|21|
|Average Annual Capital Injections|40|80|160|47|


-----

    - Replacement of the MRV (Canterbury); and

    - Replacement of the long-range maritime surveillance capability (P3
Orions).

7.33 The total of forecast capital expenditure in that 15 year period is $8.4 billion in
2009 dollars, of which $1.8 billion would be funded by capital injections.

7.34 The Low Pathway keeps additional expenditure to a minimum and is broadly
consistent with the indicative expenditure bands. It is, however, the highest risk
pathway and represents a decline in capability over time.

_Middle Pathway_

Period 2010/11 – 2014/15

$ Million Fiscal allocation in three indicative Forecast average
expenditure bands additional cost
$2009 $2009

Reduced Central Increased

Average Annual
Increase in

24 36 72 70

Operating
Expenditure

Average Annual 40 80 160 91
Capital Injections

Period 2015/16 – 2019/20

$ Million Fiscal allocation in three indicative Forecast average
expenditure bands additional cost
$2009 $2009

Reduced Central Increased

Average Annual
Increase in

24 36 72 32

Operating
Expenditure

Average Annual 40 80 160 56
Capital Injections

7.35 For the period 2020/21 to 2034/35, the detail of forecast expenditure is much
less certain. Operating expenditure other than depreciation is not expected to
rise significantly. The major capital purchases in this period (in 2009 dollars)
are:

    - completing the programme of replacement of the tactical air transport
capability(C130 Hercules and B757 aircraft), with additional simulator;

    - upgrading part of the LAV fleet;

|Period 2010/11 – 2014/15|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|$ Million|Fiscal allocation in three indicative expenditure bands $2009|||Forecast average additional cost $2009|
||Reduced|Central|Increased||
|Average Annual Increase in Operating Expenditure|24|36|72|70|
|Average Annual Capital Injections|40|80|160|91|

|Period 2015/16 – 2019/20|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|$ Million|Fiscal allocation in three indicative expenditure bands $2009|||Forecast average additional cost $2009|
||Reduced|Central|Increased||
|Average Annual Increase in Operating Expenditure|24|36|72|32|
|Average Annual Capital Injections|40|80|160|56|


-----

    - replacement of the naval combat force (ANZAC frigates);

    - replacement of the naval helicopter fleet (Seasprites);

    - replacement of the MRV (Canterbury); and

    - replacement of the long-range maritime surveillance capability (P3
Orions).

7.36 The difference between the Low and Middle pathways, reflected in their cost, is
one of gradient, rather than platforms. The total of forecast capital expenditure
in that 15 year period is $9.7 billion in $2009, of which $2.7 billion would be
funded by capital injections.

7.37 The Middle Pathway is broadly consistent with the high end of the indicative
expenditure bands. It is, however, much less risky than the Low Pathway and
represents an increase in capability over time.

_High Pathway_

Period 2010/11 – 2014/15

$ Million Fiscal allocation in three indicative Forecast average
expenditure bands additional cost
$2009 $2009

Reduced Central Increased

Average Annual
Increase in

24 36 72 77

Operating
Expenditure

Average Annual 40 80 160 311
Capital Injections

Period 2015/16 – 2019/20

$ Million Fiscal allocation in three indicative Forecast average
expenditure bands additional cost
$2009 $2009

Reduced Central Increased

Average Annual
Increase in

24 36 72 72

Operating
Expenditure

Average Annual 40 80 160 403
Capital Injections

7.38 For the period 2020/21 to 2034/35, the detail of forecast expenditure is much
less certain. Operating expenditure other than depreciation is not expected to
rise significantly. The major capital purchases in this period (in $2009) are:

|Period 2010/11 – 2014/15|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|$ Million|Fiscal allocation in three indicative expenditure bands $2009|||Forecast average additional cost $2009|
||Reduced|Central|Increased||
|Average Annual Increase in Operating Expenditure|24|36|72|77|
|Average Annual Capital Injections|40|80|160|311|

|Period 2015/16 – 2019/20|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|$ Million|Fiscal allocation in three indicative expenditure bands $2009|||Forecast average additional cost $2009|
||Reduced|Central|Increased||
|Average Annual Increase in Operating Expenditure|24|36|72|72|
|Average Annual Capital Injections|40|80|160|403|


-----

    - completing the programme of replacement of the tactical air transport
capability(C130 Hercules and B757 aircraft), with additional simulator;

    - replacement of the naval combat force (ANZAC frigates);

    - replacement of the MRV (Canterbury);

    - replacement of the long-range maritime surveillance capability (P3
Orions);

    - acquisition of a Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) capability;

    - replacement of Light Operational Vehicles (LOV);

    - Inshore Patrol Vessel (IPV) replacement; and

    - Offshore Patrol Vessel (OPV) replacement.

7.39 The total of forecast capital expenditure in that 15 year period is $10.1 billion in
$2009, of which $554 million would be funded by capital injections. In nominal
dollars the total of forecast capital expenditure in that 15 year period is
$32.8 billion, of which $2.0 billion would be funded by capital injections.

7.40 The High Pathway exceeds the indicative expenditure bands. It is, however,
the lowest risk pathway and represents a material improvement in capability
over time.

##### How Might Costs Change?

7.41 The cost estimates provided above are given in $2009 with items being costed
at 2009 prices. It is pertinent to ask how those costs might change over time.
This Assessment considered three main sources of variability:

    - Domestic (CPI) inflation;

    - Foreign exchange rates; and

    - Military cost escalation.

_Inflation_

7.42 Domestic inflation is partly subject to the influence of the Reserve Bank, which
is charged to restrain the rate of inflation by its influence over the supply of
money within the New Zealand Economy. In recent years, the Reserve Bank’s
targets have been around 0% – 3%. A 3% figure also roughly accords with
historical average increases. It is therefore reasonable to consider the effect of
a 3% rate of domestic inflation on the NZDF’s future costs.


-----

7.43 To counteract the effect of inflation on government expenditure, departments
do not receive any automatic increases in their baselines to compensate for
increased costs due to inflation. Departments are expected to absorb cost
increases by achieving greater efficiency. It is therefore likely in practice that
the impact of CPI inflation on NZDF costs over time will be less than the actual
rate of inflation.

_Foreign Exchange_

7.44 New Zealand purchases much of its military equipment and platforms from
overseas suppliers and pays for it in overseas currency. Changes in the
foreign exchange rate will change the cost of those items in New Zealand
dollars. Changes in foreign exchanges rates are virtually impossible to predict.
One indication of a long-term average future rate, however, can be inferred
from long-term historic average rates of the trade-weighted index, which is one
measure of the value of New Zealand currency in relation to a basket of the
currencies of other countries with which New Zealand trades. In calculations
using $2009, the TWI was 9.9% higher that its historical average rate over the
last 20 years. If the historical average rate were to apply over the 25 year
period of this review, capital cost estimates would increase accordingly.

_Military Cost Escalation_

7.45 It is a characteristic of military platforms and equipment that they can become
both more capable and more expensive over time. This issue is discussed in
more detail in paragraphs 8.36 to 8.41 of the next chapter. The position is
complex, because it depends on the type of equipment. Some technologies
(such as computers) develop in ways that increase capabilities over time for
reduced real costs. Other technologies increase capabilities over time for
about the same real costs. A number of categories, however, such as combat
aircraft, typically increase capabilities over time at a significantly increased cost.

7.46 The 2008 audit of the Australian Defence Budget[3] undertaken by George
Pappas with the assistance of McKinsey and Company used historical data
relating to average real cost increases for items of military equipment. These
data emphasise the disparity of cost escalations depending on the type of
equipment. They range from less that 1% for naval support vessels to over 7%
for anti-submarine warfare helicopters. The increases in question are real and
do not include inflation. If the historical average rate were to apply over the 25
year period of this review, capital cost estimates would increase accordingly.

7.47 While each of these sources of possible cost escalation are feasible, they are
also far from certain. Even if they prove to be accurate, they should not be
considered in isolation when assessing affordability of capability development
pathways. Other information that provides context should also be taken into
account to cast a more realistic light on any impact they might have.

3 _2008 Audit of the Defence Budget, Australian Department of Defence, 3 April 2009_


-----

7.48 When considering affordability over the 25 years covered by this Assessment,
the countervailing perspective on likely cost is likely ability to pay. New
Zealand can expect improvements in its ability to pay through GDP growth (and
the strengthening of the Government’s fiscal position), and reductions in cost
not included in the estimates that follow from efficiencies or the availability of
more cost-effective technologies.

7.49 In relation to domestic inflation, for example, every government agency will
seek to deal with CPI inflation through reducing their costs and finding
efficiencies.  In the same vein, and absent of any changes in tax policy, CPI
inflation generally increases the level of Government revenue by more than the
rate of inflation and thereby improves, rather than reduces, the relative
affordability by the Crown of departmental expenditure items.

7.50 Although the cost of some military equipment has increased historically in real
terms, future rates of increase may not necessarily match historical rates. For
example, the real cost of emergent technologies such as UAVs typically
increases at a high rate (6.8% for UAVs). As technologies mature, however,
the rates of increase generally decline. Further, and notwithstanding increases
in real costs, the NZ economy is forecast to continue to grow in real terms[4] and
so too will the national capacity to fund defence cost increases.

7.51 The modelling was careful not to assume any cost reductions before they are
certain. Thus, as indicated above, the figures presented above do not include
estimates of the reductions in costs which are expected to come from internal
reforms and the Value for Money exercise. Such estimates will be presented to
Ministers when work currently underway has been finalised. In addition, the
indicative funding bands (as set out following paragraph 7.27 above) were not
adjusted to take account of inflation, and did not assume any future relaxation
of the Government’s fiscal strategy.

##### Conclusion

7.52 Defence funding is less in real terms today than it was in 1990. At around 1%
of GDP, it is also a smaller proportion today than the 1.7% it was in 1990.

7.53 A ten-year programme initiated in 2002 to upgrade or replace most major
platforms is nearing completion and the NZDF will take delivery of a number of
new platforms over the next two years. As these platforms are introduced into
service, the NZDF must pay their capital cost. It will also incur additional
operating expenditure thereafter by way of increased depreciation and, in some
cases, higher running costs.


4


The May 2010 Fiscal Strategy Report forecasts GDP growth of 3% per annum for the next
three years.


-----

7.54 The global financial crisis has created economic consequences for New
Zealand and revenue consequences for the Crown to which the Government
has responded by signalling a very tight fiscal stance for several years. The
additional capital and operating expenditure, to which the Crown is now
contractually committed, must be met within the parameters of that tight fiscal
stance. This will create major challenges for the NZDF over the next five years.

7.55 Looking further into the future, this Assessment has identified opportunities for
enhancing the NZDF’s capabilities in ways that are encapsulated in the Middle
and High capability pathways. Estimates have been provided of the likely
additional cost of these development pathways, based on the best information
currently available. There are numerous uncertainties, however, and the fidelity
of the estimates will diminish relatively quickly over time. It is therefore very
desirable to establish a long-term funding regime going forward and to
implement a complementary regime of financial management. The objectives
are to facilitate long-term planning and prioritisation, avoid fiscal surprises for
the Government, maintain alignment between resource allocation and policy
objectives, and achieve value for money in defence spending. These issues
are discussed further in the next chapter.


-----

**Chapter 8**
#### Funding and Financial Management

8.1 Given the nature of defence capabilities and the lead times needed to develop
them, defence planning is a process that must necessarily address the long
term. The objective of a regime of funding and financial management must
therefore be to facilitate the process of resourcing the NZDF in such a way that
it can provide the Government continuously over the long term with viable
response options to a range of contingencies, including the ability to sustain
deployments for long periods.

8.2 Chapters One to Five of this Assessment discussed the likely defence
challenges that will confront New Zealand and the capabilities required to meet
them. In essence, meeting those challenges will involve bringing into service
capabilities that are currently being acquired or upgraded, and further
strengthening the NZDF over time as resources allow.

8.3 Chapter Seven of this Assessment discussed the present financial context of
the NZDF, drew attention to the funding challenges that it must meet over the
short-to-medium term, and provided estimates to 2035 of the costs of options
for alternative mixes of capabilities. It observed, however, that the estimates
were made in the context of numerous uncertainties and their fidelity would
diminish relatively quickly over time.

8.4 These considerations point to the desirability of implementing a regime of
funding and financial management that is consistent with, and supports, the
overall strategic thrust of this Assessment and can help manage the
uncertainties. Ideally, such a regime would need to:

    - ensure that required capabilities are available and operational outputs
are delivered;

    - maintain visibility of likely future requirements as far forward as it is
feasible to do so;

    - ensure the alignment of resource allocation decisions with policy
requirements;

    - facilitate informed trade-offs and prioritisation between capabilities and
outputs over time;

    - be consistent with the Crown’s overall fiscal, budget and capital asset
management requirements;

    - provide relative certainty of funding to aid long-term planning;

    - facilitate the management of uncertainty and input cost increases;


-----

    - provide incentives to achieve cost efficiencies without compromising
capabilities or outputs;

    - enable the Government to exercise adequate control over spending
levels;

    - be consistent with the general requirements of the Public Finance Act
1989 and other centrally-imposed instructions and requirements; and

    - be robust and enduring.

8.5 This chapter examines key issues needed to achieve a regime that would meet
those objectives and makes specific recommendations concerning its
implementation.

##### The Defence Decision Environment

8.6 A regime of funding and financial management must work well in the decision
environment within which Defence operates. That environment has some
unusual features.

8.7 It is impossible for governments to maintain military forces that are capable of
responding to every conceivable security event. Further, it is both unnecessary
and inefficient to maintain many military capabilities in a constant state of
complete readiness. And there are competing priorities for scarce resources.
Besides maintaining existing capabilities, the NZDF needs to spend money on
developing new capabilities, managing domestic operational activities and
managing overseas deployments.

8.8 Resource allocation decisions in a Defence context can therefore be
characterised as trying to maximise the benefits that follow from spending on
competing priorities in situations of high uncertainty. An added complication is
that many decisions are difficult to vary or reverse and may have
consequences for years or even decades to come. This combination creates
characteristic challenges for Defence planning and decision-making that are
shared by few other government agencies. The need to address and overcome
these challenges has a direct bearing on how defence funding and financial
management should be approached.

8.9 All planners must confront uncertainty. The environment in which Defence
planners must frame decisions is, however, complicated by sources and
degrees of uncertainty not typically found elsewhere in the public sector. These
include:

    - the unpredictability of security events, the nature of the responses that
may be required and the associated capabilities, personnel, information
and training necessary to meet those requirements;

    - demand and supply of human resources, especially attrition rates;

    - the rate of technical development and the incidence of technological
obsolescence;


-----

    - the sporadic unavailability of some critical items of equipment and
materiél, with consequential implications for the prudential levels of
inventory that must be held;

    - price and exchange rate volatility; and

    - the impact on depreciation expenses of revaluations of assets (often in
overseas currencies).

8.10 Given these uncertainties, the strategic significance of many decisions, and the
need to ensure that Ministers have sufficient visibility, this Assessment
considers it important that:

    - high-level decisions about resource allocation are made using a process
that ensures that they both meet operational requirements and are
aligned with policy; and

    - Cabinet annually has visibility over short-to-medium term operational
requirements and financial (capex and opex) programmes.

##### Capital Expenditure

8.11 Military equipment and platforms are generally expensive - often very
expensive. Careful capital planning is essential. Defence is defined as a
‘capital intensive agency’ within the meaning of the Capital Asset Management
(CAM) regime that applies to all government agencies. The objectives of CAM
are to:

    - ensure the provision of reliable capital projections and avoid material or
fiscal surprises;

    - give Ministers early consideration of options;

    - demonstrate the cost effectiveness of existing assets;

    - contribute to the sustainability of government’s long-term fiscal position;
and

    - enable government and agency negotiation of sustainable service
delivery and outcome performance.

8.12 Under the CAM regime, Defence is required to:

    - adopt a whole of life approach to asset management, rather than
focusing solely on the initial capital outlay;

    - demonstrate an “advanced” standard of asset management as defined
by the CAM regime;

    - manage asset portfolios across a 20 year planning horizon;

    - comply with a formal two stage Cabinet approval process for all new
capital investment proposals above a specified threshold that require
Cabinet approval (under current rules) or that are assessed as high risk
by the responsible Minister based on a risk profiling methodology; and


-----

    - implement an additional layer of project management assurance,
irrespective of funding source, for all new capital expenditure proposals
that are assessed as being high risk.

8.13 This Assessment has concluded that, notwithstanding the uncertainties of the
Defence decision environment and subject to an appropriate regime for
business case analysis, the new CAM regime is sound and should work well for
Defence. It should promote good asset planning and management practices
without any additional embellishments being needed.

8.14 This Assessment did identify a useful change within Defence itself. In recent
years, Defence capital planning has been undertaken within the constraints of a
long-term capital envelope. Such planning has been undertaken at two levels:
the Capital Programme Major (CP Major) for items that cost above $7 million
(requiring Ministerial or Cabinet approval) and the Capital Programme Minor
(CP Minor) for items that cost less that $7 million (falling within the delegated
authority of the Chief of Defence Force).

8.15 Partly because capital funding for any item is drawn from the same capital
funding pool, and partly because of the benefits of managing capex and opex
using a common process, this Assessment considers that the CP Major v CP
Minor distinction should be abandoned. The capital programme should be
managed as one integrated programme using one prioritisation process.

8.16 The need to take a long view of capability planning and management makes it
desirable to operate rolling long-term capital profile for planning purposes. This
would not represent a funding envelope in the conventional sense (that is, a
pre-commitment by the Government to future expenditures). It would, however,
represent a set of future spending intentions for which costs had been
estimated and to which the Government had agreed in principle.

8.17 In a Defence context, the costs of a long-term programme of capital purchases
are very difficult to forecast because:

    - the exact characteristics of many capital items can only be determined
close to the time of purchase;

    - the future purchase price of most items is uncertain;

    - the timing of many future payments is uncertain; and

    - the forex rates that will apply to particular payments are uncertain.

8.18 The long-term capital planning profile would typically be estimated in NZ
dollars. Variances in the cost of capital items would inevitably impact on both
what could be afforded and the timing of purchases. It would be important, in
managing the programme, to ensure that Ministers had good visibility of these
impacts as new information became available. The programme should also
provide a risk and sensitivity analysis, and indicate how the risks are best
managed.


-----

8.19 The management of the capital programme would also be improved by better
information and analysis to inform decisions. This applies to:

    - a more rigorous examination of specifications;

    - a strengthened analysis of benefits that would be realised;

    - including appropriate allowances for cost escalation;

    - improved business case analysis; and

    - improved estimation of capital and whole-of-life costs.

8.20 In a defence context, business case analysis using a pure cost benefit analysis
methodology is complicated by the difficulty in quantifying benefits. As part of
the development of the CAM regime, the Treasury is reviewing the general
requirements for business cases. Defence is contributing to this process with a
view to establishing a set of general requirements that are also suitable for
Defence.

8.21 Apart from decisions to proceed with capital procurements, the system needs to
manage the continuing expenditure implications of the procurement process.
Such implications may include, for example, the need to vary specifications to
account for technology changes, or the opex implications of delays in
introducing new or upgraded platforms into service.

##### Operating Expenditure

8.22 As indicated in Chapter Seven, Defence operating costs are usually grouped
into four general categories: ‘personnel’, ‘other operating’, ‘depreciation’ and
‘capital charge’. Depreciation, capital charge and personnel costs are usually
very inflexible in the short-to-medium term, as are the majority of other
operating costs. The maximum proportion of total operating costs that can be
varied at short notice is only between 10 and 15 percent. To make the
implications clear, a 15 percent reduction would imply almost no operating
activity by the NZDF.

8.23 The key implication of this inflexibility is that any shocks to operating
expenditure through adverse input price movements cannot easily be absorbed
by any means other than by curtailing whatever expenditure can be avoided in
the short term. Such reductions can be manifest, for example, as suspensions
of recruitment, reductions in the level of planned manoeuvre training, or
deferrals of the programmed maintenance of buildings and infrastructure.
Although such short-term expenditure avoidance does constitute a credible
temporary response, it cannot be sustained over the longer term without
consequences that become progressively more serious. Over time, such a
strategy will result in higher average long-term costs and reductions in
operational readiness and efficiency.


-----

8.24 The counterfactual proposition is also true. Where the NZDF has been obliged
to cut back operations for fiscal reasons, relatively modest increases in opex
can enable it to resume full operations and significantly increase its delivery of
outputs.

8.25 The impact on operations of some cost increases can be mitigated if the NZDF
has some flexibility and some time to adjust. However, the process of
Parliamentary appropriations (which are time bound and almost always annual)
can introduce inflexibilities into a funding regime. This points to the desirability
of the NZDF maintaining modest contingencies against unexpected price
increases which it should not lose simply by virtue of the contingency being
unspent at the end of a fiscal year. It also points to the desirability of achieving
some further flexibility by being able to move funding across fiscal years in
certain circumstances, so long as overall average expenditure profiles are
maintained.

8.26 Notwithstanding these conclusions, it is important for the NZDF to operate a
diligent and well-informed process of risk management, and to respond to price
changes when they occur. The discussion in paragraphs 8.26 above was not
intended to absolve the NZDF from the need to take steps to adjust to cost
changes. It was intended to identify a process which, while fiscally neutral to
the Crown, would provide the NZDF with greater flexibility and more time to
react to cost changes to which it was difficult to adjust at short notice without
curtailing capabilities and outputs.

_Classification of Costs_

8.27 Within the NZDF, in accordance with the Public Finance Act 1989, operating
expenditure is allocated across output expenses. Another way in which costs
have been classified, however, is by whether costs are incurred in the “front”,
the “middle” or the “back”. In general terms:

    - _Front refers to the costs that are incurred directly as part of an_
operational activity or deployment, including multi-agency operations and
tasks, community services and the maintenance of military
preparedness. For example, the direct costs associated with an
exercise of maritime surveillance – the depreciation on the aircraft, the
fuel, the remuneration of the aircrew – are “front” costs.

    - _Middle refers to the costs that are incurred in activities that provide direct_
support to the “front”, and include logistics, military intelligence,
education and training and personnel management. To return to the
previous example, the costs of providing “deep” maintenance of the
aircraft are “middle” costs.

    - _Back refers to the costs of activities that provide indirect support to the_
“front” and “middle”. To return to the previous example again, the costs
of maintaining the infrastructure needed to support the air force base are
“back” costs.


-----

8.28 The system of classifying costs as “front”, “middle” and “back” is a simple one,
but the relationships between the cost elements associated with capabilitygenerating and operational activities are often dynamic and complex. It is
essential for management purposes to have a clear picture of both the activity
relationships and the consequential cost relationships. For example, an
increase in costs associated with adding additional aircraft to the current
strength does not necessarily imply a pro-rated increase in maintenance costs
and or infrastructure costs. There may instead be either economies or
diseconomies of scale.

8.29 This assessment considers that there is considerable scope for Defence to
improve its understanding of the relationships between its activities and their
costs, and the prospect of improved efficiency and financial management by
doing so.

_Opex/Capex Balance_

8.30 To achieve the desired levels of efficiency, it is essential that funding for opex
should be maintained in a careful balance with the corresponding funding for
capex. For the reasons outlined in Chapter Seven, the present situation is one
of imbalance.

8.31 Avoiding opex/capex imbalances will be helped by:

    - where possible, managing opex with a modest provision for
contingencies; and

    - pursuant to the new CAM requirements, ensuring that submissions
seeking approval for capex include best estimates of whole-of-life costs.

8.32 To maintain the desired opex/capex balance, any decision to make a capital
injection should also ensure that there is provision for the operating expenditure
associated with the use of that capital. This might or might not mean an
addition to the operating expenditure baseline - the Government may prefer to
fund a new capability in part or in whole by reallocating resources from other
capabilities – but in every case the source of the operating funding and the
consequences of any reallocations should be made explicit to, and be approved
by, the Government.

8.33 As indicated in paragraph 8.10 above, defence expenditures are subject to
considerable uncertainties. Management of these uncertainties can be
facilitated by protecting funds in order to provide for unexpected contingencies.
The NZDF does this already for opex through the use of an internal system
known as the Reprioritisation Account, and the Ministry provides for
contingencies in all its procurement contracts. However, this Assessment has
identified scope for the improved management of expenditure uncertainty
though well estimated and actively-managed contingency provisions for both
capex and opex.


-----

8.34 In summary, this Assessment considers it important that:

    - operating and capital funding are maintained in an appropriate balance;

    - opex and capex are managed jointly by means of a resource allocation
process that takes account of the opex implications of capex; and

    - the uncertainties affecting both opex and capex are managed using
contingency funds to cover unexpected changes in costs.

##### Cost Escalation

8.35 It is often asserted that defence costs rise faster than costs in the wider
economy. If this were true, it would provide an additional complication to the
challenges that would have to be managed by a regime of funding and financial
management. This assessment examined the issue carefully and also sought
external advice from the New Zealand Institute of Economic Research.

8.36 The technical literature is clear on some issues and equivocal on others. In
general, defence cost increases can be categorised in two ways:

    - military inflation; and

    - military cost escalation.

##### Military Inflation

8.37 Military inflation is defined in the same way as any other index of inflation,
namely as the change in price over time for a group of the same items (a
“basket”) of goods and services, with the effects of changes in quality and
quantity eliminated. Just as any country’s measure of domestic inflation uses a
basket of goods specific to that country, so any country that wanted to measure
military inflation would need to determine a basket of defence-related goods
and services that was specific to that country. Few countries, however, have
attempted to develop an index of military inflation, and none appear to have
been successful. The NZDF has built a model that is currently being reviewed
by the New Zealand Institute of Economic Research. This will provide a basis
in the future for measuring and better managing this issue.

8.38 Wages in the general NZ economy have risen at a steady rate of about 4.0%
per annum since 2002. Over the same time period the unit cost of all NZDF
personnel has risen by an average of 3.9% per annum. This agreement
between military and general wage rises reflects a similar finding for the
Australian Defence Force.

8.39 Other operating costs are also rising. Many however, such as. food, fuel and
services, are represented in the usual CPI basket of goods. This Assessment
did not find evidence that the costs of what are essentially non-military inputs to
defence outputs are rising any faster than similar costs in the wider economy.
The NZDF does, however, have considerable exposure to adverse movements
in some of these costs, such as fuel.


-----

_Military Cost Escalation_

8.40 Unlike the term “military inflation”, which relates to all the costs incurred by a
defence force, the term “military cost escalation” relates only to the costs of
specialised military equipment. It can be estimated by comparing the cost of a
basket of typical functions or capabilities (for example, helicopters) over time
and particularly over “generational” changes in platforms. The functions or
capabilities in the basket remain the same, or are enhanced to match similar
threat enhancements, but the equipment providing those functions changes (for
example, the cost of an Iroquois from 1970 compared with an NH90 today).
These costs typically increase over time, due very largely to changes in the
quality of equipment. The evidence supporting military cost escalation is clear.
The trend has persisted over the last 150 years, regardless of changes to the
geopolitical situation, and can be expected to continue in the foreseeable
future.

##### Asset Revaluations

8.41 Under International Financial Reporting Standards, NZDF assets including
military equipment must be re-valued at regular intervals. The effect of such
revaluations is generally to increase the valuation of an asset and therefore the
amount of depreciation payable. For the NZDF, this can have a noticeable
impact on operating expenditure. Over the last 7 years, the cumulative impact
has been to add an additional $82m of operating costs.

8.42 In recent years the NZDF’s baseline has been adjusted to cover the impact of
such revaluations, following an agreement put in place under the previous
Government. This Assessment has concluded that this approach should
continue. To do otherwise could provide occasional windfall gains, but would
most often impose windfall costs that would add to the already severe pressure
on the NZDF’s operating baseline. The better position would be to avoid either
windfall gains or windfall costs.

##### Conclusion

8.43 Given the nature of Defence capabilities and the lead times needed to develop
them, Defence planning is, of necessity, a process that must facilitate
management over the long-term. Defence planners must frame decisions in a
context of sources and degrees of uncertainty not typically found elsewhere in
the public sector. This points to the need for:

    - a funding regime that provides Defence planners with reasonable
certainty of Ministers’ intentions going forward; and

    - a financial management regime that is capable of allocating resources
over both the short and long term in accordance with policy, and
managing the uncertainties.


-----

8.44 For planning purposes, it is desirable to have long-term planning profiles for
both capex and opex. Ideally, these profiles need to be rolling and reviewed
annually so that they continue to look forward for a period of 10 years. They
also need to reflect appropriate estimates of cost escalation. This will ensure
the profiles are consistent with CAM reporting requirements. Effective
management of the many fiscal uncertainties within profiles would require a
sophisticated, risk-based approach. Prudential contingencies would need to be
maintained in both opex and capex budgets and actively managed as a hedge
against actual costs being larger that forecast. Allowing the NZDF some
flexibility to move opex funding across fiscal years would help manage
uncertainties and maintain the necessary balance between capex and opex.

8.45 The new requirements of the CAM regime should work well for Defence,
subject to a satisfactory resolution of issues around business case analysis. It
will oblige Defence to operate a capital programme that looks forward at least
20 years and will provide Minister with good visibility of the costs and timing of
major items of capital expenditure and the accumulated depreciation that will be
available to fund them. This visibility would be reinforced through a process of
obtaining annual Cabinet approval of the NZDF’s expenditure proposals for
each fiscal year, presented in the context of estimates of future funding
requirements and the indicative planning profiles.

8.46 A critical feature of the funding regime is that capital expenditure and operating
expenditure should be kept in balance. Thus, decisions to provide capital
contribution to fund new capital items should always be accompanied by
complementary decisions relating to the provision of the associated operating
expenditure.

8.47 This Assessment has concluded that the strategic-level allocation of funding
within Defence needs to be undertaken in a way that provides good visibility to
Ministers and ensures that expenditure aligns with policy. A funding and
financial management regime is needed that is consistent with the objectives
set out in paragraph 8.5 above. This will help Defence navigate through the
fiscal challenges of the next five years and make progress on the work of
strengthening of the NZDF that analysis of future strategic capability and
operational requirements indicates is desirable.

##### Recommendations

8.48 This Assessment recommends:

    - That a regime for funding and financial management be implemented
that has the following characteristics:

− Annual re-forecasts of capex requirements for the next 20 years [a
current requirement of CAM];

− Annual re-forecasts of opex requirements for the next 20 years;


-----

− Use of rolling ten-year capex and opex planning profiles that
maintain opex and capex in balance, are updated annually and are
subject to full revisions at intervals of not more than five-years in
the course of a Defence Assessment;

− The annual approval by Cabinet of the NZDF’s expenditure
proposals for the next fiscal year within the context of the rolling
ten year indicative planning profiles;

− Alignment of capex and opex in any capability funding decisions,
so that any decision to approve a capital injection should also
address the opex implications;

− Some flexibility for moving output funding across fiscal years so
long as it remains consistent with the indicative planning profiles;
and

− Protection against opex increases arising from asset revaluations.

8.49 That the NZDF, the Ministry of Defence and the Treasury undertake further
work on the detail of how such a regime could work in practice, and report their
conclusions to the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Defence.


-----

**Chapter 9**

### Defence Real Estate And Infrastructure

##### Introduction

9.1 The Defence estate comprises 74,833 ha of land, concentrated in nine main
bases and two primary land training areas. In all it is spread across
approximate 100 sites, around 25% of which are leased mainly for offices
(including HQ NZDF in central Wellington) and recruiting centres. The estate
includes approximately 5,000 buildings, of which 2500 are houses. These
buildings occupy 1.1million m[2] of floor area. The estate also contains 105 sites
and buildings with heritage merit.

9.2 In terms of valuation, two aspects are particularly material:

    - the land value is approximately $724 million and the building
replacement value is approximately $1,658 million; and

    - as at 30 June 2009, the portfolio of land and building was valued
commercially at $1.530 billion, around 28% of the NZDF’s total assets.

9.3 The estate requires approximately $105 million per annum (excluding
depreciation) to hold, manage and maintain.

9.4 These are significant investments and ongoing costs. As with all other defence
expenditure, it is important that expenditure on the Defence estate represents
value for money. This can be achieved by ensuring that:

    - the portfolio matches actual and forecast requirements (neither too much
nor too little);

    - usage is efficient and economical; and

    - for any particular site, the model of ownership selected, (whether by the
Crown, a commercial provider or a public-private partnership), is best
suited to the purposes for which the land and buildings are needed.

9.5 Since the 1980s, there have been several reviews into the Defence estate and
a rationalisation programme that has seen the disposal of eight major and 31
minor sites. Since 2000, these disposals have yielded approximately $180
million. Another $230M in disposals is presently under management. The
lessons learned from the New Zealand reviews, comparable reviews in other
Western defence forces, and the received wisdom from the property
management industry, are all very similar:


-----

    - Consolidation can provide some opportunities to achieve better value for
money, albeit that this may require significant up-front investment and, if
so, typically will require a long period subsequently to achieve a positive
payoff;

    - Insufficient reinvestment and deferral of maintenance will inevitably
impair the value and utility of the estate and, importantly, will raise
overall costs in the long run;

    - The management of a diverse estate achieves better value when it is
both centralised and strategic in focus; and

    - Commercial provision, whether through conventional renting
arrangement or public-private partnerships, can often improve facilities
and reduce costs.

##### Current Issues

9.6 The Review has found that:

    - The present Defence estate is ageing across the board. Unless
remedial action is taken, there is a serious threat of block obsolescence
and major reinvestment in years to come. This situation is the result of a
long history of insufficient maintenance and reinvestment.

    - After 20 years of downsizing, consolidation, and commercialisation of
services, the scope for further rationalisation is now reduced. New
initiatives are showing evidence of diminishing returns. Besides those
items of the estate already planned for disposal, there is very little else of
substance that could be made surplus in the short term.

    - Nonetheless, the present management programme is implementing
some innovative approaches.

i The disposal programme presently has several items under action
including the NZDF off-base housing estate, Watts Peninsular,
and several Treaty of Waitangi settlement actions.

ii As the result of policy changes relating to the provision of housing
and accommodation assistance, regular force personnel are now
better able to access the commercial market for their
accommodation requirements. This is freeing up old NZDF
houses for disposal and is avoiding the need for reinvestment.

iii The NZDF is in the process of changing the management of the
estate to put it firmly on a tri-service basis with centralised policy
and priority setting, regional hubs and spokes, and governance by
the Executive Leadership Team.

iv The Defence Transformation Programme will rationalise Logistics
and Human Resources Management (including education and
training), which is likely to lead to a significantly more efficient
utilisation of those parts of the estate.


-----

9.7 The Review endorses the actions currently being taken and has treated them
as “givens” in its consideration of options for the future.

##### Derivation of Principles and Criteria

9.8 The Review has taken a “principles” approach towards defining what the future
estate should be. These principles were derived from both overseas
experiences and the lessons of previous NZDF reviews. The approach
generated a much larger list of criteria than has been seen in the past. This
was used to achieve a better-informed evaluation of the present estate and
identified some less obvious issues.

9.9 The Review’s analysis indicated that five considerations were the most
important:

    - _Mode of provision - In any circumstance, is it preferable to own, lease, or_
enter into partnership?

    - _Rate of utilisation – Does the rate of utilisation imply that a particular_
facility should be a candidate for the programme of consolidation?

    - _Fitness for purpose – Is the design of the facility appropriate for its_
intended purpose? Is it maintained to a sufficient standard to ensure
that it can be used as intended?

    - _Resource efficiency - Is the estate being managed in the most efficient_
way? How does the way in which it is being managed impact upon
future proofing and fitness for purpose?

    - _Cost – Are whole-of-life costs being minimised? Can the whole-of-life_
management of the facility (including maintenance and replacement) be
achieved economically within fiscal constraints?

##### Constraints and Opportunities

9.10 In considering what might be done about the ageing estate and the backlog of
maintenance, the Review has been conscious that the Government has
signalled a period of fiscal constraint over the next few years as New Zealand
recovers from the global recession. It could therefore be several years before
the NZDF estate can be placed on a sustainable recovery path and longer still
before it will approach its desired configuration in terms of condition, age,
location and utility.

9.11 One of the key lessons from previous reviews and estate rationalisation
projects is that planning for major changes can be quite protracted. The largest
changes that the NZDF has contemplated have taken between three and four
years before a comprehensive business case could be put to the government.
The time taken between a decision to dispose of a property and completion of
that disposal varies widely from between two and fifteen years.


-----

9.12 There appears to be more opportunity for commercial solutions in the Defence
estate area. It is worth observing, however, that:

    - Well-analysed business cases are required in all instances. The choice
of preferred approach will depend on what the analysis discloses in each
instance.

    - There are constraints that may preclude commercial solutions in some
cases. For example, commercial scheduled air services will not be
permitted access to RNZAF operational bases.

    - Apart from commercial partners, the NZDF could also enter into
partnerships with other government agencies to meet common needs.

    - Public-private partnerships (PPPs) can provide worthwhile opportunities.
Although PPPs are most commonly entered into for the provision of new
services or facilities, it not unfeasible to establish them to take over the
provision of existing services or facilities. That approach, therefore,
should always be among those explored.

##### Public-Private Partnerships

9.13 Apart from purchase or lease, the NZDF can secure access to the land and
facilities through public-private partnerships (PPPs). These are typically
arrangements by which a public service or public facility is funded and operated
through a contracted partnership between a government agency and a private
sector provider. The private partner is often a consortium of companies which
usually forms a dedicated company known as a "special purpose vehicle"
(SPV). The SPV gives effect to the partnership by providing the contracted
service, or building and operating the contracted facility, for the contracted
period. The SPV typically assumes some financial, technical and operational
risk. If the government agency is also investing in the partnership, it may
reinforce its position by securing equity in the SPV.

9.14 PPPs can offer real benefits in a number of situations, but they are not a
panacea for all ills. A useful body of empirical knowledge has developed over
the last fifteen years from the experience of overseas governments, especially
in Europe, the United Kingdom and Australia, and there is also a growing body
of technical literature from which the NZDF can draw. The Review sought to
identify and apply these lessons when considering issues relating to the
Defence estate. In general terms, the received wisdom can be summarised as
follows.

    - For a PPP to be successful, care must be taken to ensure that the
institutional and legal framework, including the contract itself, is robust.
The partnership arrangements must be able to endure for the full period
of the contract, surviving any changes in government or the structure of
the consortium. In general, PPPs work best when the SPV is subject to
appropriate incentives, including a significant share of the risks, and can
bring greater operational and risk management expertise than could


-----

ordinarily be obtained by the government agency through other means.
For its part, the government agency must have enough expertise to
negotiate a beneficial contract and invigilate performance.

    - A PPP can be entered into if, on a risk-adjusted basis, it appears likely to
provide better value for money than the other forms of provision or
procurement that are available. Determining what constitutes a
beneficial contract, however, is often far from simple and requires a good
deal of complex and careful analysis. The overseas experience of using
PPPs to provide capital finance, for example, has often been
disappointing. The SPVs have frequently obtained a rate of return higher
than the cost of sovereign debt, notwithstanding that most of the income
risk was being borne by the government in question.

##### Scenarios for Recovery

9.15 The Review developed four scenarios for the recovery and future development
of the estate. These differ in terms of the extent to which facilities are provided
by external commercial sources, and in terms of the cost of bringing the
scenario into effect. They are not mutually exclusive. If resource constraints
were not an issue, any one of the four could be adopted and pursued
immediately. Given that resource constraints are an issue, however, the
Review has concluded that the scenarios should be pursued sequentially.

The four scenarios are:

    - _Conservative: reflecting current fiscal constraints and the lead-time_
needed to plan change;

    - _Pragmatic: reflecting steady improvement as resources allow;_

    - _Progressive: requiring significant capital investments and major,_
commercially-oriented change; and

    - _Radical: moving to a situation where almost all estate requirements are_
met through commercial solutions.

_The Conservative Scenario_

9.16 The Conservative scenario, with its limited investment requirements, represents
a five year holding period that will allow the key developments to be
implemented. It will also allow the NZDF to gain some control of the rate of
decline of its remaining estate, while further planning takes place.

9.17 The _Conservative scenario requires an average annual increase in operating_
funding over the next five year period of $7 million over the amount spent in
2009/10, together with average capital funding of approximately $65 million per
annum.


-----

_Pragmatic Scenario_

9.18 The Pragmatic scenario builds on and extends the Conservative scenario. The
_Pragmatic scenario would offer additional benefits through improvements in_
overall fitness for purpose, support for personnel, utilisation and resource
efficiency. It could be pursued in the ten years that follow the five-year period
of the Conservative scenario, (i.e. from 20015/16 to 2025/25). It would require
an average increase in operating funding of $24M per annum through that tenyear period, together with average capital funding of approximately $78 million
per annum.

_Progressive Scenario_

9.19 The Progressive scenario is characterised by:

    - The NZDF being consolidated into its core estate configuration;

    - Significant capital injection and investment in long-term change;

    - Long-term payback periods;

    - A range of commercial solutions being explored;

    - Increased opex requirements due to more leases and partnerships but
better estate performance, together with some increased risk; and

    - Whole-of-government/shared solutions.

9.20 This scenario takes a much longer-term view because it would not be possible
to implement it in the present fiscal environment. Such large changes take
years to consider, plan and prioritise, and no individual proposal would proceed
unless the analysis supported it. In each case, the business case would need
to cover a full range of procurement strategies, from build-to-own to PPPs.
Until such an analysis was completed, it would not be possible to determine
whether any particular proposal would proceed, what procurement strategy
would be preferred if it did, or what the proposal would cost.

_Radical Scenario_

9.21 The _Radical scenario would move the NZDF into a position where most_
services and facilities were provided through commercial relationships. The
provisions of the necessary estate and facilities would be but one of the
services being purchased. The aim would be to free up capital and leverage off
the efficiencies available in the commercial market. Only NZDF-specific sites
such as weapons ranges would be retained in NZDF ownership.

##### The Way Ahead

9.22 Paragraph 9.7 identified the need for remedial action on the ageing estate.
Chapter 7 drew attention to the fiscal pressures on the NZDF and the need to
achieve value for money. Taken together, these considerations point to the
need for a vigorous programme of rationalisation and remediation. The rate at


-----

which such a programme can proceed will depend in part on the Government’s
assessment of the relative priority it should afford this aspect of defence
spending in relation to other spending priorities.

9.23 This Assessment proposes that the Government accept the need for the NZDF
to pursue at least the _Pragmatic and preferably the_ _Progressive scenario as_
soon as possible. Either approach will need to allow time to complete changes
and initiatives currently underway and to undertake the necessary planning and
business case analyses. As a consequence, new spending on the estate
would be necessarily restrained in the short term.

9.24 Irrespective of the pace of activity chosen by the Government, a number of
relatively immediate initiatives are recommended. These are to:

    - Introduce tri-service estate management with centralised asset
management, allocation, utilisation and investment priorities;

    - Implement a “hubs and spokes” concept, with the hubs being: Auckland,
the Manawatu, Wellington and Canterbury;

    - Continue to dispose of housing and other “off-base” properties;

    - Invest in shared services and third party partnerships, particularly with
other government departments;

    - Expedite Treaty of Waitangi solutions;

    - Be more ruthless in disposing of facilities that are beyond economic
repair; and

    - Complete a Defence Estate Strategic Plan and align hub plans and
infrastructure development plans with each other and the overall
Strategic Plan.

##### Flexibility for Future Changes

9.25 This analysis has been prepared on the basis of what is presently known about
the estate, operational requirements, military capabilities, and what changes
are planned over the short-to-medium term. Current efficiency initiatives are
likely to increase the need for general purpose office accommodation outside
the Wellington central business district. There are also likely to be significant
opportunities arising from rationalised repair and maintenance practices; from
combining education, training and administration functions; and from extended
outsourcing. The way in which these opportunities will be realised has yet to be
determined. Again, there seem to be a number of candidates for commercial
solutions.

9.26 There are other issues (for example Treaty of Waitangi settlements not yet
concluded) that have the potential to alter the detail of this analysis. They are
very unlikely, however, to alter its substance. Most such issues will be resolved
over the next year and the outcomes will be incorporated into the planning
phase that lies ahead.


-----

##### Conclusion

9.27 The current approach to estate management is unsustainable, given its current
condition and functionality. There may be a number of opportunities for
improvement that could be taken in the short-to-medium term depending on the
outcome of business case analyses and the availability of any investment
funding needed. At a minimum, some modest extra spending on the estate
seems essential if policy failure is to be avoided.

9.28 On present indications, the way ahead will take many years and will require
significant investment. The benefits, however, will be worthwhile. Beginning to
implement the _Progressive scenario within the next few years seems entirely_
achievable and should be pursued.

9.29 The conclusions of this Review should be incorporated into a Defence Estate
Plan. An early objective of that Plan should be to implement the reforms to
present estate management described in paragraph 9.29 above that will be
necessary to achieve the desired outcomes.

##### Recommendations 

9.30 That the NZDF adopt the progressive scenario as its strategic objective for the
Defence Estate, and move to implement that scenario as quickly as the
available funding allows.


-----

**Chapter 10**
### Procurement And Organisational Reform

##### Introduction

10.1 The structure and functions of New Zealand’s two defence organisations (the
Ministry of Defence and the Defence Force) were established in 1990 by the
Defence Act of that year. Further reforms were recommended in a review by
Don Hunn in 2002, only some of which were implemented. Subsequent
reviews, such as the Defence Capability and Resourcing Review of 2005,
suggested that aspects of the restructuring had not stood the test of time and
that some reforms remained to be implemented.

10.2 Recent reports have highlighted issues concerning major defence acquisition
projects. In June 2008 the Office of the Auditor-General reported to the Foreign
Affairs, Defence and Trade Select Committee on time and cost issues with
defence projects. This was followed in September 2008 by the Coles Report
on Project Protector that led to mediation and a financial settlement.

10.3 This chapter discusses issues related to the organisational structures of the
Ministry and NZDF, including the arrangements for the management of
procurement.

##### Scope and Background

10.4 To assess the effectiveness of the two Defence organisations, and benchmark
Defence’s performance in relation to procurement, the Secretary commissioned
two reviews from external, independent experts:

    - Michael Wintringham, formerly the State Services Commissioner, who
examined broad structural, governance and management issues; and

    - Aurecon Ltd (an international firm of engineers and project experts with
extensive defence experience), which was tasked with looking at
procurement, project management and overall defence capability
management from a ‘best practice’ perspective.

10.5 Broadly, both reviews conclude that there are real issues that need to be
addressed. They recommend reform of structure, governance, accountability
and project processes to deliver better outcomes and improved effectiveness in
defence capability management and procurement.


-----

##### The Wintringham Report

10.6 Michael Wintringham undertook a ‘first principles’ analysis of the concepts that
underlie the defence structural reforms embodied in the Defence Act 1990. He
traced the changes that have occurred to these principles following successive
reviews, concluding that the 1990 principles and structure were, and remain,
sound. Subsequent modifications however, have diverged from these
principles, in some cases radically, and have been the cause of many (but not
all) of the perceived difficulties and frustrations of the present working
arrangements.

10.7 The principles identified by Michael Wintringham are:

i Chief executive sole accountability for performance: The State Sector
and Public Finance Acts clearly place accountability and authority for the
management of all the costs and resources for the delivery of outputs on
the chief executive, based on full financial information and conventional
management practices. For all state sector chief executives, this
encompasses resource management including the acquisition of capital
equipment (i.e. expenditure of appropriated funds to purchase and
maintain assets).

ii Provision of policy advice: Michael Wintringham is clear that policy
advice is predicated on the principles of _transparency_ and
_independence. He is also clear that_ _contestability, in the sense of_
streams of advice ‘competing’ for primacy was not an initial design
consideration, especially for Defence. He notes that contestability, if it is
a relevant concept at all, is part of the process of developing robust and
‘tested’ or well considered advice.

iii Transparency: Transparency of policy advice implies bringing different
perspectives before the Government. If there are differences of view,
driven by differing perspectives of an issue, these should be exposed for
Ministers’ consideration and decision, and not resolved through
compromise among officials.

iv Independence: Policy advice by any one party is intended to be part of a
continuum. In the defence context, the Government requires advice on
defence policy that is independent of, for example, military preferences
for particular platforms (existing or prospective), and of military views on
their role in New Zealand’s foreign and national security policy
frameworks. The Government also requires advice from a professional
military perspective.

v Audit and evaluation: Michael Wintringham addresses what he sees as
a confusion that has developed over purpose and role.

       - First, he proposes that the evaluation of the performance of the
CDF, as with the great majority of other State sector chief
executives, should be the responsibility of the State Services
Commissioner.


-----

       - Second, he defines output and policy evaluation. The principal
question is: Have the decisions on force structure, equipment and
funding, derived from the policy and funding decisions for the
Defence Force, delivered the anticipated capability? The findings
are about achievement of policy goals (rather than audit against a
standard).

       - Third, he defines audit, against a standard, for the efficiency of
production. The principal question is: How cost effectively is the
available funding being applied to produce the desired result, and
is the result itself, to an adequate standard, actually being
delivered?

       - Fourth, he proposes that it is not appropriate that the Audit and
Assessment function report to the Minister. Some assessments
may be made of the policy and outputs set by Government and at
times these may find issue with those settings.

##### The Aurecon Report

10.8 The Aurecon consultants focussed solely on procurement, from concept to
disposal. They have not based their analysis explicitly on a set of stated
principles. Rather they have drawn on observation, experience and the
received wisdom of best-practice, and have commented directly on issues and
possible solutions.

10.9 Aurecon found problems in defence acquisition with relationships, processes
and conflicting accountabilities. They traced these problems to present
management structures, some of which derive from clauses in the Defence Act
1990. These conclusions were evidenced by:

    - a fragmented and chronically under-resourced procurement system;

    - a poor project management culture across both organisations;

    - a noticeable lack of authority and accountability;

    - a culture of management by committee;

    - a pervasive approval process involving numerous organisations and
committees;

    - a silo mentality between MOD Acquisitions and the Single Services;

    - a poor level of communication between organisations;

    - no formal risk management process;

    - an environment and structures where personalities had dominated to the
detriment of both organisations; and

    - a lack of trust created by and reflective of the division between the
organisations.


-----

10.10 Aurecon concluded that capability development, procurement and the
responsibility for through-life support are fragmented and dispersed through the
two organisations. To deliver the ‘right capability at the right price at the right
time’ they recommend that all these functions need to be merged into a new
‘matériel division’. The two organisations should remain separate in terms of
the State Sector Act, but work together with common goals, outputs and
success factors so that they are one organisation in form and in practice.
Aurecon recommend that the management of this relationship should take the
form a ‘diarchy’ at the functional level.

10.11 Aurecon’s higher level structural recommendations include:

    - that the roles of the Secretary and the CDF be clarified;

    - that a new ‘capability board’ with external membership be constituted,
with consideration of delegated powers to ‘approve’ capital acquisitions;

    - that capability procurement and responsibility for through life support
should be merged into a new ‘matériel division’.

10.12 Aurecon also make a number of detailed recommendations relating to the
governance and management of what they call the ‘capability system life-cycle’.
They also consider project management processes, risk assessment and
mitigation, the consolidation of fragmented acquisition functions and the level of
skill and training required of a restructured organisation.

##### Procurement as a Continuous, Joined-up Process

10.13 Both consultants noted that the management of capabilities (especially defence
hardware, weapons and platforms) is a continuous cycle from policy and
capability definition, acquisition, through life operation to disposal. The
consultants agreed that the Defence Act currently imposes discontinuities, in
particular by separating out the acquisition phase. They conclude that this is a
major cause of inefficiencies and disconnects in the current Defence structure.

10.14 To remove these inefficiencies requires a solution that preserves the continuity
of the defence capability life-cycle intact, yet maintains clear lines of
accountability. Aurecon in particular recommended a defence capability group
that was ‘joined-up’ and with a whole-of-life capability focus.

10.15 As with organisational change in general, it is important to bear in mind that not
all the challenges which face defence procurement in New Zealand can be
resolved through altering functions and responsibilities. Michael Wintringham
usefully sets out some of these challenges. In sum New Zealand is largely a
price taker in a global market, its requirements are both small in quantity and
specialised in quality (because of the need to multi-task platforms) and the
timing of replacement is often disproportionately significant because of the
limited number of assets available at any one time. These elements will not
change. They place an even higher premium on good and timely decision
making.


-----

10.16 Despite these systemic challenges, both Michael Wintringham and Aurecon
comment favourably on the manner in which this function has been discharged.
Michael Wintringham observed that New Zealand has, for the most part, bought
useable equipment at a good price, even if at times the transaction costs, for
the Government, officials and the Defence Force, have been high.

10.17 This Assessment accepts the observations made by Aurecon on the need to
strengthen the procurement function, to improve its management and
governance, and to extend its scope to include whole of the life of a capability.
The way in which this might best be done will need to align with other aspects
of organisational reform. It will also involve some detailed implementation work,
since the processes involved are both important and complex. These issues
are discussed further below.

##### Setting the Guidelines for Reform

10.18 Based on the consultants’ recommendations, acceptable options for Defence
reform will need to satisfy these factors.

i Retention of two organisations (the Ministry and the NZDF) as
recommended by Michael Wintringham.

ii Retention of the sole authority and accountability of each chief
executive.

iii Retention of independent streams of advice to Government.

iv Retention of the safeguards of Cabinet authority for all major capability
and fiscal decisions, as well as scrutiny of the capability process (from
central agencies and within Defence), together with ex and post ante
audit and evaluation.

v Establishment of some form of joined up capability group, jointly staffed
and managed, with shared outputs and outcomes as recommended by
the consultants and discussed above.

vi Ensuring the Ministry and the NZDF have access to the information
necessary to enable them to discharge their roles efficiently. Both
Michael Wintringham and Aurecon discussed the requirement for the
Secretary to provide policy advice to Government, including financial
advice, but observed that the Secretary had no statutory access to the
required information held by the NZDF. The NZDF needs similar access
to information held by the Ministry.

vii Establishment of a decision-making environment (especially for defence
capabilities) that requires the membership of independent expert
advisers from outside of defence (such as non-executive board
members as recommended by the Wintringham, Aurecon and Coles
reports).

viii Retention of the existing line of accountability from the Secretary of
Defence to the Minister, without imposing an intervening board.
Notwithstanding this, Ministers may at any time establish boards to
advise them.


-----

##### Options for Structural Reform

10.19 Five options for reform can be considered from a range of possibilities.

i Retain the status quo – This option would retain the present structure
and processes. Both consultant reports are clear that this is not a viable
choice.

ii Minimal change – The reviews conclude that insufficient resources are
being committed to defence capability development and acquisition. A
minimalist option for reform is to address this resource shortage and the
mismatch of skills to requirements. This option will increase acquisition
project costs but these are likely to be offset by improved acquisition
outcomes. It does not address the underlying structural problems and
accountability disconnects that demand reform.

iii Match functions to accountability – Michael Wintringham concludes that
the CDF is in an untenable situation. The CDF is held accountable
under the Defence and State Sector Acts for the capital and operating
expenditure of the Defence Force and for the resources required to
deliver the outputs expected by Government. But the CDF, unlike other
State Sector chief executives, is not responsible for the acquisition of
major capital items, this being a function of the Secretary under the
Defence Act. This sets up a climate of tension and conflict. Michael
Wintringham suggests this mismatch could be resolved by aligning
function to accountability. The Secretary, as principal civilian policy
adviser, should be responsible for defence policy, broadly defined. This
would include the analysis of the future strategic environment, the range
of future capabilities required by that environment, the likely quantum of
funding and the submission to Government of business cases for
defence capabilities. The CDF, as the principal military adviser and the
commander of the armed forces, should be responsible for acquiring and
operating the capability approved by Government. In effect, Michael
Wintringham suggests that capability development would move from the
NZDF to the Ministry, with a parallel move of the acquisition function
from the Ministry to the NZDF.

iv A joint management board – To reconcile the apparent contradiction of
retaining two organisations but operating certain functions as a joint
activity, the Aurecon review recommended that certain functions be
undertaken and managed under a ‘diarchy’ arrangement. This
Assessment proposes the joint discharge of some aspects of policy with
capability development, acquisition and through life support. The
challenge is to create a new body within the defence organisations, with
appropriate authority and accountability for joint tasks, but retaining the
singular accountability of each of the defence Chief Executives for all
other matters.

v Merge the two organisations – Both Michael Wintringham and Aurecon
considered the option of returning to a single Defence entity. There
might possibly be some minor cost savings, but Michael Wintringham in
particular concludes that such a merger would be at the expense of
independent and transparent streams of advice to Government. He is
also concerned about the issues that such a unified body would create in


-----

the New Zealand Public Sector context: should it be headed by a civilian,
a uniformed commander or both? This Assessment concurs with
Michael Wintringham that the costs of a merger, in financial, policy
constraints and constitutional safeguard terms, outweigh the minor cost
savings that might be realised.

10.20 Options (iii) and (iv) both appear to provide feasible solutions suited to the
present circumstances. Option (iii) is not recommended because it perpetuates
the current break in process between the two defence organisations and is
therefore unlikely to overcome the fundamental problem identified by the
consultants. Option (iv) is the preferred way forward. It does offer a feasible
solution, although it also poses challenges in developing authority and
accountability mechanisms that deliver the outcomes sought by the
Government.

##### Proposal to Establish a Joint Management Board (JMB)

10.21 This Assessment proposes the establishment of a joint management board.
This new decision-making body would be constituted under an amended
Defence Act for the purpose of exercising joint management over a specified
range of tasks that need to be undertaken jointly by personnel from both the
Ministry and the NZDF. Principally, these joint tasks are the development of
policy advice, the procurement of military equipment and the development and
management of major defence capabilities. The JMB would comprise the
Secretary and the CDF acting together as single body. This structure would
provide for joint legal authority and joint accountability over particular areas
specified in the legislation, whilst retaining the individual authority and individual
accountability currently exercised by each chief executive for all other matters
pertaining to their organisations.

10.22 This Assessment further proposes that the JMB would have at least two
external advisers or non-executive directors. They would be selected for their
expertise and appointed jointly by the two chief executives. The JMB would
have the power to co-opt other non-executive advisers for specific purposes. It
could also seek specific advice and input to particular decisions as required by
circumstances.

10.23 Although an institution that provides for joint authority and accountability differs
from the approach used elsewhere in the New Zealand public sector, it would
appear to be a workable and pragmatic solution to an otherwise intractable
problem. Officials confirm that it would provide the legal authority needed to
perform the required functions, as well as giving the chief executives the
freedom to control their resources in order to deliver the outputs required by the
Government.

##### Revised Sole and Joint Functions in the Context of a Joint Management Board

10.24 The following tables describe the functions that would be exercised solely by
each chief executive and the functions that would be exercised jointly by the
JMB.


-----

10.25 The sole functions would include:

|Col1|Secretary Sole Functions|CDF Sole Functions|
|---|---|---|
|Usual CE functions|Chief Executive of the Ministry of Defence|Chief Executive of the Defence Force and Commander of the Armed Forces|
||Responsible for preparing the budget, performance criteria, Statement of Intent and Output Plan for the Ministry|Responsible for preparing the budget, performance criteria, Statement of Intent and Output Plan for the NZDF|
||Deliver standard outputs: • Account for MOD financial expenditure and non-financial performance results; • Evaluate MOD output performance and management efficiency;|Deliver standard outputs: • Account for NZDF financial expenditure and non-financial performance results; • Evaluate NZDF output performance and management efficiency;|
|Defence-related functions specific to organisation|Deliver defence policy outputs, including: • Provide defence policy advice to Government; • Provide defence policy advice for responses to security crises; • Undertake defence assessments; • Conduct statutory audits of defence functions, duties and projects; • Evaluate defence contributions to national security outcomes.|Deliver Defence Force outputs, including: • Conduct military operations in accordance with Government direction; • Provide military policy advice to Government; • Recommend to Government options for military responses to security crises; • Introduce into service, operate and maintain new and upgraded equipment and capabilities;|


-----

10.26 The following functions would be exercised jointly by the JMB.

**Secretary and CDF Joint Functions**

   - Conduct reviews and analysis of the future strategic environment.

   - Develop future security scenarios and guidelines.

   - Formulate and update organisational strategies to implement defence policy.

   - Analyse and recommend to Government future military capability requirements.

   - Analyse capability gaps and develop broad capability and military output options.

   - Analyse and advise Government on the policy effectiveness of capability and
military options.

   - Develop for Government consideration a rolling costed future capability (equipment,
personnel and training) development and procurement plan.

   - Provide advice to Government on the likely future costs of Defence – opex and
capex.

   - Develop and submit for Government consideration acquisition proposals (business
cases) according to the approved capability development plan.

   - Prepare and maintain whole of life capability management plans.

   - Acquire equipment and capabilities within the specifications and budget approved
by Government and commission into service.

   - Formulate and deliver international defence relations policy and strategies at
Government and military levels.

10.27 The broad implications of the JMB for the Ministry and the NZDF would be as
follows:

    - The full life cycles of defence capabilities could be managed as a
continuous process, avoiding the discontinuity that currently occurs in
the acquisition phase. This change is important for improved
performance, and is fully in accord with industry best practice. It would
enable the CDF to manage more effectively the NZDF’s considerable
holding of capital assets.

    - Co-location of people who are working to the same tasks, outputs and
outcomes would improve efficiencies and outcomes, especially given
that they would report, directly or indirectly, to the JMB.

    - The joint functions would continue to be funded by separate
appropriations to output expenses in Vote Defence and Vote Defence
Force. However, the descriptions and performance measures of the
output expenses for joint activities would be aligned between the two
Votes. Both chief executives (as the JMB) would be held accountable
jointly and separately for the performance of joint functions.


-----

    - There are likely to be some costs associated with the consequential
restructuring and co-location, although these costs should be minor.
Some new skill sets are likely to be necessary but, according to the
consultant reviews, these should lead to efficiency gains and improved
outcomes.

##### Audit and Evaluation

10.28 It is important from the perspectives of both policy and value-for-money that
outcomes are achieved, outputs are delivered and capabilities are maintained
as required by the Government. It follows that processes need to be put in
place to assess the following things:

i whether the operational activities of the NZDF are contributing
appropriately to the Government’s outcomes and objectives;

ii whether the NZDF has produced the capability and operational outputs
required by the Government to the standards specified by the
Government; and

iii whether the capability and operational outputs of the NZDF are being
produced in an efficient and effective manner.

_Outcomes_

10.29 Michael Wintringham’s recommendations included the need to make explicit
the Secretary of Defence’s role in leading output evaluations and policy
evaluations. He elaborated his recommendation by observing that:

_‘Policy reviews or evaluations are the corollary of the policy and funding_
_advisory roles of the Secretary. They complete the circle by testing whether the_
_policy intent was achieved for the funding provided.’_

10.30 The terminology relating to audit and evaluation is often confusing, since labels
are sometimes used interchangeably. The first of the three aspects listed in
paragraph 10.28 above (generally known as ‘outcome’ or ‘impact’ evaluation) is
the process of testing whether policy interventions achieved the intended
outcome. In other departments, the function is often undertaken by a small unit
of professional evaluators that may form part of that department’s policy
division. The Ministry of Defence has not previously undertaken work of this
nature and would need to develop the capability to do so. However, the history
of the last decade has shown that military deployments and interventions can
continue for many years, and at considerable cost. There is a strong case for
undertaking evaluations that assess whether the Government’s objectives are
being realised.

_Outputs_

10.31 The second aspect, described by Michael Wintringham as ‘evaluation’, is
intended to establish whether the outputs and capabilities directed by the
Government have actually been produced as required. Some work on
evaluating outputs has been undertaken by the Evaluation Division of the
Ministry of Defence. Pursuant to a ‘Memorandum of Arrangements’ reached in


-----

1991 between the Secretary of Defence and the Chief of Defence Force, the
Evaluation Division has not generally undertaken work in the area of
operational preparedness (the readiness of units to be deployed). This work
has been undertaken instead by the NZDF’s Inspector-General. If the
Evaluation Division is to undertake more work on the delivery of required
capabilities, it will mean some enlargement of the usual scope of their work and
recruitment of personnel with the relevant military expertise. New boundaries
may need to be worked out to avoid unnecessary overlap between the work of
the Evaluation Division and the work of the Inspector-General.

_Efficiency and Effectiveness_

10.32 The third aspect, described by Michael Wintringham as ‘audit’, is intended to
establish whether the outputs and capabilities are being produced in an efficient
and effective manner. The Evaluation Division has undertaken work in these
areas since the Ministry was first formed. To improve overall value-for-money,
there is a good case for strengthening the Evaluation Division and extending
the range and depth of the work undertaken.

_Performance of the CDF_

10.33 Michael Wintringham recommended that the performance of the CDF should be
regularly evaluated, as it is with other State Sector chief executives, that the
evaluation should become the responsibility of the State Services
Commissioner, and that the Defence Act 1990 should be amended accordingly.
In his view, having the Secretary of Defence undertake the performance
evaluation of the CDF would be inconsistent with the effective operation of their
respective but cooperative responsibilities to deliver effective military capability
for deployment by the Government of the day.

10.34 The performance of most State sector chief executives (including the Secretary
of Defence) is subject to review by the State Services Commissioner. Some
chief executives, however, are ‘office holders’ by virtue of being appointed
pursuant to specific legislation. The CDF, who is appointed by the GovernorGeneral in Executive Council, falls into this category. The State Services
Commissioner is currently looking at this general issue and Michael
Wintringham’s recommendation should be considered in that context.

##### Defence Science and Technology

10.35 A significant proportion the NZDF’s requirements for science and technology
advice, research and other services are provided by the Defence Technology
Agency (DTA). This is not (as the name might be taken to imply) an
independent agency but a unit of the NZDF, and all its personnel are NZDF
employees.

10.36 Advice and research relating to science and technology issues is an important
input to military capability development and management, particularly in the
early ‘policy’ stages when the specifications for new or enhanced platforms and
equipment are being developed. It is also important for the development of
wider strategic policy that Defence keep abreast of relevant trends and
developments in science and technology. This Assessment has identified


-----

scope for establishing a closer relationship between the work of policy and
capability development and the work of the DTA.

10.37 Aurecon observed that its discussions with stakeholders had indicated that the
majority of the work currently undertaken by the DTA was centred on resolving
technical issues that arose during procurement process. In Aurecon’s view,
this was not a cost effective use of the technical resources and was a cause of
considerable frustration, particularly as some of the issues could either have
been avoided or resolved much more effectively had the DTA been involved at
an earlier stage. In addition, it also diverted resources from research activities
which would otherwise increase the DTA’s knowledge and appreciation of
emerging technologies.

10.38 Aurecon also considered that analysis and management of technological risk
was a critically important function in capability development process, given that
technology half-life is now typically quite short. In the situation where a major
project may span many years between concept and implementation, and
platforms and equipment may be in service for several decades, it is important
to ensure that technologies which are about to be superseded are not specified
and that emerging technologies, which may soon become affordable and
mainstream, are not prematurely rejected.

10.39 This Assessment concurs with those views. It did not, however, examine
issues relating to the organisational form or optimal size of the DTA. Other
organisational forms are possible – for example, as a stand-alone Crown entity,
company or research institute. In such forms, the DTA could adopt a business
model in which it would earn revenue by undertaking research and providing
advice to a range of customers. Recent fiscal pressures have restrained plans
to extend the size of the DTA and other sources of revenue could create more
scope for development. There is a case for examining these issues in more
detail as part of the detailed organisational restructuring proposed in this
section.

##### Independent Advice to the Minister of Defence

10.40 One consequence of undertaking many policy and development tasks jointly is
that advice provided to the Minister of Defence by the Ministry and the NZDF
may be perceived as more closely aligned. The proposals in this Assessment
are intended to preserve the ability of each organisation to provide independent
streams of advice to the Government (see paragraph 10.19 (iii) above).
However, the Minister may wish to supplement the advice received from
Defence officials with other independent advice and counsel.

10.41 There is a range of options for establishing ministerial advisory bodies. For
example, it can be done:

    - By statute, which provides the advisory body with a legal persona and, if
so desired, the status of a body corporate. The statute may also specify
the number and type of members and the process by which those
members are appointed, may prescribe the functions and powers of the


-----

advisory body, and may provide for the engagement and funding of an
independent secretariat.

    - By Cabinet decision, in which the nature, functions and membership
(whether in general or in particular) of the advisory body are specified in
the decision. One consequence of establishing an advisory body
pursuant to a Cabinet decision may be (depending on the specific terms
of the decision) that it could also require another Cabinet decision to
change or disestablish it.

    - By Ministerial decision, which enables the Minister to exercise
considerable flexibility about who is appointed to the advisory body and
what advice is sought.

10.42 Bodies that are established pursuant to a Cabinet or Ministerial decision cannot
acquire or exercise legal powers other than those that can be lawfully conferred
by delegation pursuant to existing legislation.

10.43 This Assessment has concluded that the extant accountability relationships of
the Secretary of Defence and Chief of Defence Force to the Minister under the
existing legislation[1] should continue intact. They should not be confused or
diluted by interposing a body that has decision rights or other executive powers
over the resources or management of either organisation. This implies that the
function of such a body should be confined to the provision of advice. In turn,
this implies that it would be unnecessary to establish the body by statute. It
would be sufficient if it were simply established pursuant to a Ministerial
decision.

10.44 Should the Minister wish to establish an independent advisory body, there is a
range of options relating to its membership. It is likely that the Minister would
wish at least some members to have an in-depth knowledge of defence issues.
In addition, and as Michael Wintringham observed, ‘Ministers require advice on
_our defence capabilities which fits into a national security as well as a foreign_
_policy framework’._ This highlights the need for members who have wider
foreign affairs and security sector expertise. Finally, valuable advice relating to
management and organisational performance can be obtained from appointees
with substantial private sector experience. The membership could therefore
include:

    - Minister(s) in the defence portfolio;

    - A chairperson (who may also be someone in the following categories);

    - Two members with substantial private sector experience;

    - One or two members with substantial policy experience;

    - One or two members who are former senior military officers;

    - One or two members drawn from relevant academic specialties;

10.45 To provide up-to-date information and to help the ministerial advisory body
maintain links with current management intentions, it would generally be

1
Most notably, the State Sector Act 1988, the Public Finance Act 1989 and the Defence Act 1990.


-----

essential that the Secretary and Chief of Defence Force attend meetings,
although they would not be members.

10.46 To avoid any possible confusion, the proposed JMB referred to in paragraph

10.22 is not a ministerial advisory body in the sense that the expression is used
in this section. Unlike the advisory body, the JMB _would exercise executive_
functions. Similarly, the external appointees referred to in paragraph 10.23
would provide advice to the Secretary and Chief of Defence Force and should
not therefore be appointees to the ministerial advisory body (since that would
create a potential conflict of interest).

##### Next Steps

10.47 Further work will be needed to determine the exact form and function of the
JMB and the consequential administrative arrangements. Much of the structure
below the JMB can be determined by the two chief executives, but Ministers
and Cabinet will need to be assured that whatever structure is proposed is
likely to deliver the expected results. Further work is also needed to identify
and draft any necessary changes to legislation, and to develop a detailed
implementation plan.

##### Recommendations

_Organisational Structure_

10.48 That the Ministry of Defence and the NZDF be reorganised on the following
basis:

     - retention of two separate organisations;

     - retention of the sole authority and accountability of each chief executive
for those functions not specifically designated in legislation as ‘joint’;

     - retention of the right of each chief executive to provide independent
advice to Government;

     - the establishment of a Joint Management Board to exercise joint authority
and accountability of those functions specifically designated in the
legislation as ‘joint’, supplemented by the expertise of independent
members from outside Defence;

     - implementation of appropriate administrative arrangements within the
Ministry and NZDF for the joint discharge of joint functions;

     - retention of the safeguards of Cabinet authority for all major capability and
fiscal decisions, as well as scrutiny of the capability process (from central
agencies and within defence), together with concurrent and post
procurement project audit and evaluation; and

     - amendment of the Defence Act 1990 to provide both the Ministry and the
NZDF with statutory rights of prompt access to relevant information held
by the other organisation.

10.49 That the Secretary of Defence and Chief of Defence Force, in consultation with
central agencies, should undertake additional work on the implementation of a


-----

Joint Management Board, including identifying the necessary legislative and
organisational changes, and report their conclusions to the Minister of
Defence.

10.50 That in undertaking the detailed work on the implementation of the Joint
Management Board, the Secretary and Chief of Defence Force should
examine the role of the DTA in the revised structure, and in particular to the
organisational form and size that would best enable it to discharge that role,
and report their conclusions to the Minister of Defence.

_Procurement_

10.51 That, as an integral part of the work relating to the implementation of a Joint
Management Board, the Secretary of Defence and Chief of Defence should
determine how they will strengthen the procurement function, as recommend
by Aurecon, by establishing a defence capability group that is drawn from both
organisations and has with a whole-of-life focus, and report their intentions to
the Minister of Defence.

_Evaluation_

10.52 That the evaluation of the performance of the CDF should become the
responsibility of the State Services Commissioner, and that the Defence Act be
amended accordingly;

10.53 That the evaluation functions of the Ministry of Defence should include the
following aspects:

i determining whether the operational activities of the NZDF are contributing
appropriately to the outcomes specified by the Government;

ii determining whether the NZDF has produced the capability and
operational outputs required by the Government to the standards required
by the Government; and

iii determining whether the capability and operational outputs of the NZDF
are being produced in an efficient and effective manner.

10.54 That the Secretary of Defence, in consultation with the Chief of Defence Force,
should develop proposals for how the current evaluation capabilities of the
Ministry of Defence should be strengthened to discharge these functions and
report accordingly to the Minister of Defence.

10.55 That the Defence Act 1990 be amended to provide for the right of the
Secretary of Defence and Chief of Defence Force to access all information
held by the NZDF and Ministry of Defence respectively to enable the effective
discharge of their responsibilities.

10.56 That the working of the proposed new organisational arrangements be
reviewed after three years following their implementation.


-----

_Ministerial Advisory Body_

10.57 That the Minister of Defence consider whether there is merit in establishing a
(non-executive) advisory committee to provide the Minister with additional
independent advice on defence policy and management issues.


-----

##### Chapter 11
### Summary Of Recommendations

11.1 The Government has reaffirmed the need for a responsive, versatile,
balanced and professional NZDF that is able to conduct a range of
tasks, particularly in the South Pacific, but also alongside friends and
partners further afield, and which is financially sustainable. In
addressing the alignment between New Zealand’s strategic outlook,
military capabilities and funding, the recommendations in this
Assessment, copied below, provide a pathway for doing this.

11.2 The Assessment recommends:

##### Regular Reviews

11.3 That a Defence Assessment be undertaken at regular intervals of least
every five years which:

    - tests current policy settings;

    - updates New Zealand’s international strategic context and outlook;

    - establishes a clear logic linking New Zealand’s strategic
environment with the roles and tasks of the NZDF and the
capabilities required to undertake them; and

    - provides government with advice on any funding and operational
implications.

##### Defence within a National Security Framework

11.4 That an overarching national security strategy for protecting New
Zealand, our people, and our interests be developed which:

    - reflects New Zealand’s core values;

    - responds to the major security challenges and drivers of instability;
and

    - brings together the objectives of all ministries, agencies, and forces
involved in protecting our national security.

##### New Zealand’s Strategic Context and Outlook to 2035

11.5 The Assessment recommends that future decisions around defence
capability should be guided by the following judgements:

    - New Zealand continues to face no direct military threat;

    - the international strategic outlook is for more instability, including in
the South Pacific;


-----

    - the strategic balance in Asia is shifting;

    - international military operations will continue to be more common
than unilateral action;

    - conflict within states is more probable than war between states;

    - inter-state warfare will remain a feature of the international security
environment; and

    - New Zealand’s security interests are best served by strong
partnerships with friendly countries, and an international
environment in which the rules and norms of international behaviour
align with those of New Zealand and are widely accepted.

##### Principal Tasks for the New Zealand Defence

11.6 In order of priority, and based on the assessment of the strategic
environment in Chapter 3, the Assessment recommends that the
principal roles and tasks of the NZDF should be:

    - the protection of New Zealand, our people, land, territorial waters,
natural resources and critical infrastructure;

    - honouring our alliance obligations to Australia;

    - contributing to peace and stability in the South Pacific, including by
being able to take an independent leadership role when necessary;

    - making an appropriate contribution in support of peace and security
in the Asia-Pacific region;

    - protecting New Zealand’s global interests and core values by
contributing to international peace and security, and the
international rule of law; and

    - being prepared to respond to sudden shifts and other disjunctions in
the strategic environment.

11.7 In the protection of New Zealand, the NZDF should:

    - ensure the sovereignty of New Zealand’s EEZ and territorial waters;

    - provide an appropriate counter-terrorist response capability;

    - provide support to civil agencies in a range of tasks, including
disaster relief and search and rescue;

    - contribute to whole of government efforts to promote the economic,
security, environmental, scientific, health, and social objectives of
New Zealand;

    - contribute to whole of government efforts to monitor the strategic
environment; and

    - provide a limited capability to protect our maritime approaches and
territory in the unlikely event of a conventional military threat.


-----

11.8 In meeting our alliance commitments with Australia, the NZDF should:

    - operate with the Australian Defence Force (ADF) to protect
Australia’s territorial sovereignty;

    - work with the ADF in support of a safe and secure South Pacific;

    - examine options for enhancing CDR, including the formation of a
Pacific-focused Ready Response Force; and

    - remain interoperable with the ADF.

11.9 In contributing to peace and security in the South Pacific, the NZDF
should:

    - together with Australia, meet any reasonable foreseeable
contingency, including by:

       - contributing to, or possibly leading, military operations;

       - responding to humanitarian and/or natural disasters;

       - assisting with maritime surveillance and search and rescue;

       - exercising regularly in the region; and

       - supporting the professional development of regional defence
and security forces.

11.10 In the Asia-Pacific region, the NZDF should:

    - make an appropriate contribution in support of peace and security;

    - support regional institutions and process, such as the ARF;

    - continue to play an active role in FPDA activities;

    - continue to develop good bilateral defence relationships;

    - support a continuing US security presence;

    - exercise and train with regional armed forces;

    - support freedom of commerce;

    - support regional efforts to counter terrorism, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, and transnational crime; and

    - provide an appropriate response to humanitarian and natural
disasters.

11.11 Globally, the NZDF should:

    - contribute to international security operations, whether led by the
United Nations, UN sanctioned, or in support of other collective
security arrangements; and

    - provide an appropriate response to humanitarian emergencies and
natural disasters.

11.12 Ten principles will guide Defence in ensuring that the NZDF is able to
perform the roles and task listed above. They are that the NZDF will:


-----

    - be equipped and trained for combat;

    - be deployable (this includes having strategic projection capabilities,
and being self-reliant and flexible once deployed);

    - be interoperable with our principal partners, especially Australia;

    - be held at appropriate levels of readiness;

    - have sufficient depth to sustain force elements for long enough to
achieve the Government’s objectives;

    - be up to date in doctrine and technology (this includes emphasising
‘jointness’ and being ‘networked enabled’);

    - be optimised for intra-state conflict;

    - Retain some capabilities capable of contributing to mid to high
intensity inter-state warfare;

    - base capability decisions on what is essential to meet the
Government’s defence and security objectives in New Zealand’s
maritime zone and the South Pacific, from which military
contributions in Asia and further afield can be drawn; and

    - have cost-effective capabilities.

##### Military Choices

11.13 Defence will prioritise capabilities in the following areas:

    - deployable ground forces in sufficient numbers, and including
supporting elements such as engineers and medics.

    - strategic projection and logistic capacity to get force elements to
where they are needed, and sustain them once there.

    - intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities to
understand and interpret the operational environment, including
maritime patrol tasks; and

    - maintaining combat capabilities (including in the areas above) which
can meaningfully contribute to coalition operations.

11.14 Within the above priorities, the corresponding personnel and equipment
must be embedded in network-enabled command and communication
structures which support:

    - joint activity between the Services;

    - independent action by New Zealand in certain circumstances;

    - interoperability with security partners; and

    - responsiveness to whole of government requirements.

11.15 New Zealand’s broader national security requirements should be taken
into account in the acquisition and use of defence capabilities.


-----

11.16 Based on the strategic context in recommendation 11.5, three
pathways for addressing the future personnel and capability mix of the
NZDF have been identified:

   - the Low pathway would retain the personnel, structure and
platforms of the NZDF, but at declining levels of effectiveness;

   - the Middle pathway would increase personnel numbers in the NZDF
and tackle obsolescence issues inherent in the low option; and

   - the High pathway would build on the middle option and allow
targeted enhancements of the NZDF’s capabilities.

11.17 The three pathways provide choices for the Government in how, and
how quickly, the existing NZDF should be developed. They represent
different intensification and strengthening of capabilities, not a
differently structured force. Indeed, the Government could choose to
retain one option as a longer term goal, while accepting a more
affordable choice in the interim.

11.18 This Assessment recommends that the Middle pathway provides an
appropriate response to the strategic circumstances set out above. It
rebuilds the NZDF so that its utility nationally, regionally and globally is
consistent with the forecast strategic environment.

11.19 Based on the Middle pathway, this Assessment recommends that a
capability plan should be developed that reflects the priority areas
identified above and includes:

   - increased Army strength;

    - enhanced Special Forces;

    - eight NH90 and eight A109 helicopters (five upgraded and possibly
armed);

    - the acquisition of a new shorter range maritime air patrol capability;

    - a more versatile replacement for HMNZS Endeavour in 2013/14;

    - a replacement for HMNZS Canterbury at the end of her life;

    - replacements for the C130 and B757 fleets at the end of their life;

    - P3 Orion fleet enhanced and replaced at the end of the aircrafts life;

    - replacement of the in-shore and off-shore patrol vessels at the end
of their life;

    - the acquisition of an imagery satellite capability; and

    - upgrade of the ANZAC frigates, and replacement at the end of their
life with an equivalent capability.

11.20 Ministers will still have to consider and approve funding for specific
business cases, consistent with Crown-wide budget and capital asset
management approaches.


-----

11.21 The High pathway should serve as a possible pathway for the NZDF
should the fiscal environment allow or the strategic environment
deteriorate.

##### The Total Defence Workforce

11.22 Recognising that the effectiveness of the NZDF depends on the
number and quality of its personnel, both military and civilian, the
Assessment recommends that:

    - as a legislative opportunity arises, the definitions in the Defence Act
1990 relating to territorials and reserves, including the names of the
bodies into which they are enlisted, be amended and updated to
improve clarity and better reflect the roles that they now undertake;

    - the Ministry of Defence and the NZDF, in consultation with the
Department of Labour, should jointly review the current legislation to
determine if amendments can be made that will better facilitate the
ease with which Reserve Forces can be released from their regular
employment so that they can be deployed on operations; and

    - the NZDF should develop new career-transition policies and
initiatives to encourage the re-engagement of Reserve Force and
former Regular Force personnel;

    - in relation to positions that require subject matter expertise,
including management position, the NZDF should adopt the
principles that:

          - all positions should be carefully and critically examined to
determine what expertise, whether military or non-military or
both, is required to discharge the requirements of the position
successfully;

          - positions should only be filled by personnel with the necessary
expertise; and

          - positions should be filled by the person best fitted to do so,
whether or not that person is uniformed or civilian.

    - the NZDF should develop new approaches to senior military
personnel for broader leadership roles; and

    - the NZDF should develop partnerships with other government
agencies in order to facilitate joint training;

    - the NZDF should continue to develop an improved human resource
research, and to research critical areas such as the causes of
attrition, to support fact-based policy development and
organisational decision-making.


-----

##### Financial Context And Costs Of Capability Pathways

11.23 The Assessment recommends that a regime for funding and financial
management be implemented that has the following characteristics:

    - annual re-forecasts of capex requirements for the next 20 years [a
current requirement of CAM];

    - annual re-forecasts of opex requirements for the next 20 years;

    - use of rolling ten-year capex and opex planning profiles that
maintain opex and capex in balance, are updated annually and are
subject to full revisions at intervals of not more than five years in the
course of a Defence Assessment;

    - the annual approval by Cabinet of the NZDF’s expenditure
proposals for the next fiscal year within the context of the rolling ten
year planning profiles;

    - alignment of capex and opex in any capability funding decisions, so
that any decision to approve a capital injection should also address
the opex implications;

    - some flexibility for moving output funding across fiscal years so long
as it remains consistent with the indicative planning profiles; and

    - protection against opex increases arising from asset revaluations.

11.24 That the NZDF, the Ministry of Defence and the Treasury undertake
further work on the detail of how such a regime could work in practice,
and report their conclusions to the Minister of Finance and the Minister
of Defence.

##### Defence Estate and Infrastructure

11.25 That the NZDF adopt the 'progressive' scenario as its strategic
objective for the recovery and future development of the Defence
estate, and move to implement that scenario as quickly as the available
funding allows.

##### Procurement and Organisational Reform

11.26 That the Ministry of Defence and the NZDF be reorganised on the
following basis:

    - retention of two separate organisations;

    - retention of the sole authority and accountability of each chief
executive for those functions not specifically designated in
legislation as ‘joint’;

    - retention of the right of each executive to provide independent
streams of advice to the Government;


-----

    - retention of the right of each chief executive to provide independent
advice to Government;

    - the establishment of a Joint Management Board to exercise joint
authority and accountability of those functions specifically
designated in the legislation as “joint”, supplemented by the
expertise of independent members from outside Defence;

    - implementation of appropriate administrative arrangements within
the Ministry and NZDF for the joint discharge of joint functions;

    - retention of the safeguards of Cabinet authority for all major
capability and fiscal decisions, as well as scrutiny of the capability
process (from central agencies and within defence), together with
concurrent and post procurement project audit and evaluation; and

    - amendment of the Defence Act 1990 to provide both the Ministry
and the NZDF with statutory rights of prompt access to relevant
information held by the other organisation.

11.27 That the Secretary of Defence and Chief of Defence Force, in
consultation with central agencies, should undertake additional work on
the implementation of a Joint Management Board, including identifying
the necessary legislative and organisational changes, and report their
conclusions to the Minister of Defence.

11.28 That in undertaking the detailed work on the implementation of the Joint
Management Board, the Secretary and Chief of Defence Force should
examine the role of the DTA in the revised structure, and in particular to
the organisational form and size that would best enable it to discharge
that role, and report their conclusions to the Minister of Defence.

11.29 That, as an integral part of the work relating to the implementation of a
Joint Management Board, the Secretary of Defence and Chief of
Defence determine how they will strengthen the procurement function,
as recommend by Aurecon, by establishing a defence capability group
that is drawn from both organisations and has with a whole-of-life
focus, and report their intentions to the Minister of Defence.

11.30 That the evaluation of the performance of the CDF should become the
responsibility of the State Services Commissioner, and that the
Defence Act be amended accordingly;

11.31 That the evaluation functions of the Ministry of Defence should include
the following aspects:

i Determining whether the operational activities of the NZDF are
contributing appropriately to the outcomes specified by the
Government;

ii Determining whether the NZDF has produced the capability and
operational outputs required by the Government to the standards
required by the Government; and


-----

iii Determining whether the capability and operational outputs of the
NZDF are being produced in an efficient and effective manner.

11.32 That the Secretary of Defence, in consultation with the Chief of
Defence Force, should develop proposals for how the current
evaluation capabilities of the Ministry of Defence should be
strengthened to discharge these functions and report accordingly to the
Minister of Defence.

11.33 That the Defence Act 1990 be amended to provide for the right of the
Secretary of Defence and Chief of Defence Force to access all
information held by the NZDF and Ministry of Defence respectively to
enable the effective discharge of their responsibilities.

11.34 That the working of the proposed new organisational arrangements be
reviewed after three years following their implementation;

11.35 That the Minister of Defence consider whether there is merit in
establishing a (non-executive) advisory committee to provide the
Minister with additional independent advice on defence policy and
management issues.


-----

### Glossary

- _Airlift (Strategic and Tactical): the capability to transport and deliver_
forces and matériel through air in support of strategic and/or tactical
objectives.

- _Attrition: the loss of personnel and/or matériel._

- _Baseline: the level of funding approved for any given area (i.e. Defence)._
All amounts within baselines are included in the forecasts.

- _Capability: refers to the personnel, equipment, platforms and/or other_
matériel that affect the capacity to undertake military operations.

- _Capability Life Cycle: refers to the ‘life cycle’ that begins with the_
identification of the need to address a capability gap. This need is
progressively translated into a working capability system that is operated
and supported until it reaches the end of its life and is ultimately
withdrawn from service. The management of a specific capability life
cycle implies a whole-of-life capability focus.

- _Capital expenditure: refers to capital used to acquire or upgrade physical_
assets such as military equipment, infrastructure and other capital items.
Also called capex.

- _Coalition: a force composed of military elements of more than one nation_
that have formed a temporary alliance for some specific purpose.

- _Collective security: where a group of sovereign states form a general_
system of organisation designed to maintain peace and security as an
indivisible entity.

- _Combat: military operations where the use or threatened use of force,_
including lethal force, is essential to impose will on an opponent or to
accomplish a mission.

- _Combat service support: the support supplied to combat forces, primarily_
in the fields of administration and logistics (supply, maintenance,
transportation, health services, and other services).

- _Combat support: the provision of fire support and operational assistance_
to combat elements, including intelligence and communications.

- _Command and Control: the exercise of authority and direction by a_
properly designated commander over assigned and attached forces.
Command and control functions are performed through an arrangement
of personnel, equipment, communications, and procedures employed by
a commander in planning, directing, coordinating and controlling forces


-----

in the accomplishment of a mission. A command and control capability
facilitates this. Also called C2.

- _Commercial off-the-shelf: refers to technology and/or equipment which is_
ready-made and available for sale.

- _Counter-proliferation: refers to activities to combat proliferation, including_
diplomacy, arms control, export controls, intelligence collection and
interdiction.

- _Defence Attaché: refers to a military officer based in some New Zealand_
High Commissions and Embassies overseas whose role is to provide
liaison between New Zealand defence and security interests and those
of the nation in which they reside in a way that enhances New Zealand’s
broader interests.

- _Deployability: refers to the extent to which someone or something is_
operationally deployable.

- _Depreciation: refers to the amount by which the value of an asset_
reduces each year over its life due to usage, the passage of time, wear
and tear, and/or other such factors. Depreciation is allocated as an
operating expense.

- _Diarchy: an organisational arrangement in which the Chief of Defence_
Force and the Secretary of Defence jointly manage a single Defence
organisation, reporting jointly to the Minister of Defence.

- _Doctrine: the fundamental principles by which military forces or elements_
guide their actions in support of national objectives.

- _Ex ante and post ante audit: a process for assessing the quality of a_
programme or institution before (ex ante) and after (ex post) it has been
in operation in order to establish strengths and weaknesses.

- _Force element: units which directly contribute to the delivery of defence_
force outputs, and which may form part of an operational force.

- _Force protection: actions taken to prevent or mitigate hostile actions_
against NZDF personnel, resources, platforms and critical information.
Can be defensive or offensive, and passive or active.

- _Independent and Contracted Reviewer:_ Both reviews informing the
procurement and organisational reform component of this Defence
Assessment were independent. The ‘Independent Reviewer’ (Aurecon),
however, was selected independently of Defence.

- _Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance: refers to the capability to_
collect, process, exploit and disseminate accurate and timely information


-----

that provides force elements with the situational awareness necessary to
successfully plan and conduct operations. Also called ISR.

- _Intensity of conflict (high, medium, low): refers to the overall tempo,_
degree of violence and technological sophistication of the violence
employed and/or encountered. The rate of consumption of resources
can also be a measure of intensity. The intensity of a conflict is **high**
when the violence is continuous or when encounters between
combatants are particularly violent; **medium when violence is frequent;**
and low when violence is occasional. The intensity may vary during the
course of a particular conflict and across parts of an operational theatre.
It will also vary for individual participants, depending on their particular
role or function.

- _Interoperability: the ability of systems, units, or forces to provide services_
to, and accept services from, other systems, units, or forces and to use
the services exchanged to enable them to operate effectively together.

- _Inter-state conflict: refers to conflict or warfare between states, and_
involving opposing regular armed forces.

- _Intra-state conflict: refers to conflict or warfare between organised groups_
within the same nation state. Intra-state conflict can be high-intensity,
and often involves both regular and irregular armed forces. It can result
in large numbers of casualties and/or the mass displacement of civilians
within the area of conflict.

- _Joint activity: refers to activities, operations and/or organisations, in_
which elements of more one Service – a joint force – from the same
nation participate.

- _Jointness/Joint effect: an integrated approach which allows more than_
one force element to become more than merely the sum value of its
components.

- _Networked enabled capability: refers to the ability to link sensors,_
decision-makers and weapons systems so that information can better
deliver a military outcome.

- _Non-combat operations: military operations where weapons may be_
present, but their use or threatened use is for self-protection purposes
and not essential to the accomplishment of the mission.

- _Operating expenditure: Defence operating expenditure is categorised_
under four labels – _personnel, which includes human resource costs;_
_depreciation_ (see above); _capital charge, which is a fee charged from_
departments by the Crown for holding capital (analogous to interest on
borrowed money); and _other operating, which includes everything else._
Also call opex.


-----

- _Operational tempo: the rate or rhythm of military operations. Can be low,_
medium, or high.

- _Peace support operations: a generic term describing operations that_
make use of diplomatic, civil and military means to restore or maintain
peace. Such operations may include conflict prevention, peace making,
peace-enforcement, peace keeping, and peace building.

- _Platform: any vessel, vehicle, aircraft, and/or other delivery system from_
which weapons, personnel, and/or matériel can be deployed.

- _Public Private Partnerships: usually involve a contract between a public_
sector authority and a private party, in which the private party provides a
service or project and assumes the financial, technical and operational
risk for it.

- _Regional security architecture: refers to a regional format for preventive_
diplomacy. It is a means of getting nation states together, including at a
senior political level, on a routine basis to discuss defence and security,
and to encourage familiarity and transparency.

- _Sealift: the capability to transport and deliver forces and matériel by sea_
in support of strategic and/or tactical objectives.


-----

**Annex A**

### Terms of Reference Defence Review 2009

1. The Secretary of Defence, in consultation with the Chief of Defence Force
and other stakeholders, will undertake a defence assessment as prescribed
by Section 24(2)(c) of the Defence Act 1990 and will also review and report
on the other matters specified in these Terms of Reference. This exercise
will be known as the Defence Review 09 (the Review).

2. The Review will report to the Government its analysis and conclusions and
the outcome of the consultation processes required in these Terms of
Reference. Upon receipt of the Review report, the Government will finalise
its defence policy. That policy will be published in the form of a Defence
White Paper early in 2010.

3. These Terms of Reference have been approved by Cabinet.

##### Scope

4. The purpose of these Terms of Reference is to provide guidance for the
Review in respect of its context, scope, method, deliverables, and
timeframe.

5. The Review is required to allow major issues currently facing Defence to be
addressed via a process that seeks wide input and provides options that will
contribute to Government policy. The major issues are:

  - How does the present and potential future strategic environment impact
on the security of New Zealand?

  - How does Defence contribute, and may in future contribute, to the
security of New Zealand, Australia, the South Pacific, the Asia-Pacific
region and globally.

  - How does Defence advance New Zealand’s foreign policy and the
relationship between Defence and other Government agencies to
enhance a ‘whole of Government’ approach?

  - How well do the current Defence outputs meet the actual needs now
and in the near future, and how are the actual capabilities including
those under consideration or development, aligned to those outputs?


-----

  - Looking to the medium and longer term, what are the capabilities
needed against requirements in the future and what are the implications
arising from that analysis?

  - What are the key issues around Defence personnel, including training,
retention, recruitment and the role of Reserves?

  - What is the best organisational structure for the Ministry of Defence and
the New Zealand Defence Force?

  - When and how should military capabilities be used for non-military
purposes to support the work of other (civilian) government agencies?

  - How best can procurement, defence infrastructure and real estate be
managed?

  - What are the best financial management procedures to meet the long
term defence funding requirements?

6. The Review period is characterized by two differing imperatives. Due to the
long service life of major acquisitions, the Review will consider the period
from 2009 until at least 2035. However, the next decade will require the
Government to address the fact that some Defence platforms and systems
are reaching the end of service life and therefore, the Review is to focus in
more detail on the immediate period from 2009 to 2016.

7. The overall objective of the Review is to provide advice that will enable the
Government to meet its commitment to publish a White Paper in its first year
of Government.

8. The White Paper will set out a framework for the defence of New Zealand
through addressing New Zealand’s vital strategic interests including the
security of its sovereign territory and exclusive economic zone, its special
relationship with Australia, the need to build security in the South Pacific, its
relationships in the wider Asia-Pacific region and its contribution to the global
community.

9. Further overarching objectives will be to maintain a broad base of support
within New Zealand, show how New Zealand will continue to make a useful
and credible contribution to our security partnerships and set out a practical,
achievable and sustainable plan and planning processes that address the
major issues identified in these Terms of Reference.

10.During the period of the Review itself, the Associate Minister of Defence will
lead concurrent companion studies into:

  - New Zealand’s Defence Industry, examining options for economic
improvement in the sector;

  - The role of the NZ Defence Force in Youth Programmes and the NZ
Cadet Force; and


-----

  - Voluntary National Service, including examining future options for a
whole of Government strategy.

##### Context

11. The last comprehensive defence assessment undertaken in accordance with
the Act, _The Shape of New Zealand’s Defence, was published in 1997._
Defence policy since that time has been informed by The Foreign Affairs,
Defence and Trade Committee of Parliament Inquiry into Defence Beyond
2000. and the May 2001 Government Defence Statement: A Modern,
Sustainable Defence Force Matched to New Zealand’s Needs.

12. Both the National Party and the ACT Party had pre-election commitments to
produce a defence White Paper within one year of taking office.

13. Over the last decade there has been a growing acceptance of the need for a
multi-party approach to defence policy development. This has been coupled
with a similar acknowledgement of where New Zealand's strategic interests
lie. Beyond our shores, our first priority is regional security. New Zealand, in
partnership with Australia, needs to be able to deal with any reasonably
foreseeable contingency within the region. The second priority is a broader
engagement outside our region. In this case, New Zealand’s capability is
limited and is drawn largely from the capabilities acquired for our regional
role.

14. The Government acknowledges that the necessity for a review is confirmed
by the changes in the global security environment over the last decade, the
significant challenges facing Defence (including operational tempo,
personnel and capital procurement) and the increased role of Defence in
supporting whole of government goals.

15. The review process will take account of wider policy and economic
imperatives, including fiscal sustainability. The current relative level of
defence spending will be used as the baseline scenario.

##### Procedure

16. In accordance with Section 24(2)(c) of the Defence Act 1990, the Secretary
will undertake a defence assessment in consultation with the Chief of
Defence Force.

17. Recognising the desirability of maintaining both a political and public
consensus on New Zealand’s broad security interests, the Secretary will
draw on input from independent experts and public consultation with key
stakeholders including the Royal New Zealand Returned and Services
Association and other ex-service groups, the New Zealand Defence Industry
and New Zealanders and New Zealand-based groups with an interest in


-----

Defence. This consultation will involve producing a Discussion Document
based on the current status of Defence to inform public consultation. The
public consultation will be completed in time to inform the development of
the options contained in the review.

18. The leadership and initiation of the public consultation process will be
undertaken by both Ministers. The Associate Minister will be responsible for
the ongoing organisation, communication and management of the public
consultation process, although both Ministers will be actively involved in
public discussion forums.

19. In undertaking his assessment, the Secretary will be supported by a panel of
three independent advisers (the Panel) to be appointed by the Minister of
Defence. These advisers have been selected for their experience in
international relations at the political level, military matters, commercial
affairs, management and organisational change. The Panel comprises:

  - Mr Simon Murdoch Secretary of Foreign Affairs

  - Mr Martyn Dunne Comptroller, New Zealand Customs Service

  - Mr Robert McLeod Managing Partner, Ernst and Young.

20. The Panels mandate will cover the entire Terms of Reference including
strategic context, structures, organisation, capabilities and procurement

21. The Secretary will consult with and invite input from the Panel throughout the
conduct of his assessment. The Panel will also communicate its views on
any matter directly to the Minister of Defence, and will consider issues put to
it by the Minister.

22. The Panel will be supported by staff provided by the Ministry of Defence
and/or the New Zealand Defence Force. Subject to the agreement of the
Minister of Defence, the Panel may also engage expert or consultancy
assistance, as it considers necessary, to inform its deliberations.

23. The Secretary of Defence and the Chief of the Defence Force will ensure the
Panel has the full cooperation of the Ministry and the New Zealand Defence
Force. The Minister of Defence will decide on matters of process that arise
during the review.

24. The Government places a particular priority on ensuring that the
procurement and budget procedures within the Ministry of Defence and the
NZDF are cost effective, efficient and meet best international and
commercial practice. The Secretary shall engage independent expert advice
with recognised competencies in these areas to analyse and review existing
capabilities and procedures and make recommendations on how best to
implement reform.


-----

25. Throughout the review, the Secretary will consult as required with other
departments that may be affected including, in particular, those represented
on ODESC, and will brief ODESC on the progress of the review at least
monthly.

26. The Secretary may consult as necessary with New Zealand’s security allies,
partners and friends to address the issues within the scope of the Review,
with particular reference to New Zealand’s defence relationship with
Australia.

27. Before concluding the Review, the Secretary will brief and confer with the
Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Committee of Parliament.

28. In undertaking his review, the Secretary must seek to clarify and resolve
differences of view. Where unresolved differences remain that materially
affect either the policy direction or capability mix, these must be made
explicit and alternative recommendations must be developed for Ministers’
consideration and resolution.

29. All costs of the Review will be a charge against Vote: Defence.

##### Deliverables

30. The Review will provide a report to the Minister of Defence that includes
advice, options and supporting background material

31. Throughout the review process, the Secretary of Defence will update the
Minister of Defence on the progress of the work as part of normal officials’
meetings.

##### Timeline and Completion

32.The Review will report to the Minister according to the following timeline:

|Date|Review Process|
|---|---|
|30th April|Overall plan for Review including all consultation phases submitted to Ministers|
|29th May|Release of public Discussion Document and launch of public consultation process|
|30thJuly|Completion of analysis of New Zealand’s Defence objectives including military capabilities and statement of those objectives for approval by Ministers. Submission to the Cabinet Strategy Committee.|
|30th September|Completion of public consultation|


-----

|30th November|Analysis (including financial implications) of the options for structure, organisation and capabilities that might meet New Zealand’s Defence objectives. Submission to the Cabinet Strategy Committee.|
|---|---|
|29th January|Review Complete|
|26th February|White Paper Submission to the Cabinet Strategy Committee.|
|30th March|White Paper Released|


-----

##### Annex B

### The Three Capability Pathways

B.1 This Annex sets out in more detail the military capability pathways set
out in Chapter 5.

##### Low Pathway

_Land Forces (including Helicopter support and Special Forces)_

B.2 **Combined** **Arms** **Task** **Groups** **built** **around** **Manoeuvre**
**Companies. The Army would have a ceiling of 4,900 personnel. This**
size would allow the deployment of a combined arms task group (500600 personnel) on operations up to mid-intensity for 12 months, after
which it would have to draw down to a smaller force (up to 250
personnel). An additional reserve infantry company could be deployed
for low intensity operations, although legislative changes to permit
compulsory call-up, and protect their existing jobs would be needed to
secure the numbers necessary. The reorganisation of the Army
deployment structure would better reflect the varying nature of
deployments and the physical ability to only meet smaller outputs
without an increase in size (known as the Army Transformation
Programme).

B.3 One of the Companies would be trained with a wider range of skills to
enhance its combat effectiveness (known as Tier Two, equivalent to
the US Rangers). The Tier Two Company would be able to operate
as a regular infantry company, undertake some more demanding tasks,
and support Special Forces operations.

B.4 **Land Combat. LAV numbers reduced, and the fleet would be**
reconfigured to provide different variants, such as battlefield
ambulances and protected command and control vehicles. A fleet of
up to 90 LAVs would enable a deployment of up to 30 to be rotated
(with crews), whilst maintaining training in NZ. Under this pathway, a
small number of LAVs would receive a single upgrade of their running
systems, missions systems and protection levels to maintain a
deployable capability. Their effectiveness in a higher-intensity
environment would, however, degrade over time due to the lack of
further upgrade investment.

B.5 The new helicopter fleet will represent a step change in the rotary air
support to land forces. The NH90 will be the primary tactical troop
transport aircraft, with A109 conducting lighter roles. The NH90 will be
fitted with self-protection systems but the A109 will not; this will restrict
operational use of the A109. The personnel ceiling would dictate that
the Air Force reorganise in order to generate operational crews for the
A109.


-----

_Naval Combat_

B.6 A partial self-defence upgrade of the **ANZAC frigates would remedy**
obsolescence issues.

B.7 The ANZAC frigates would be replaced with two combat-capable
vessels in the late 2020s. Potentially more affordable war-fighting
vessels with the necessary range, endurance and sea-keeping
qualities might be available by that time, as various navies respond to
cost pressures.

B.8 The Seasprite helicopter would be upgraded to improve serviceability
and maintain effectiveness, and then eventually replaced with a naval
helicopter with similar sensor, weapon and self-protection capabilities.
Naval helicopters will continue to provide the extended reach
surveillance and air delivered weapon capabilities (air-to-surface
missile and anti-submarine torpedo) for the frigates.

_Maritime Patrol_

B.9 The capability provided by the six current P3K2 Orion aircraft would be
replaced with an equivalent level of capability, manned or unmanned,
in about 2025. Studies closer to this date will determine the types of
replacement platform. The **Offshore Patrol Vessels and Inshore**
**Patrol Vessels would be maintained, although their availability would**
be limited by the reduced number of crews imposed by the personnel
ceiling.

_Strategic Projection: Air and Sea Lift_

B.10 The capability provided by the current C130H Hercules aircraft would
be replaced at end of life (approx 2020) with an equivalent or better
capability. The B757 fleet would be replaced by 2025. Studies closer
to replacement time will determine the most appropriate airlift fleet mix
and ownership models.

B.11 The **sealift ship (CANTERBURY) would receive remedial work. The**
ship would later be given a midlife upgrade, and be replaced with a
similar capability at end of life.

_Command and Control (C2)_

B.12 An ad-hoc only deployable C2 capability is maintained.

_Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR)_

B.13 A new ship would combine the capabilities of the two ships which are
currently used for **diving, mine counter measures and military**
**hydrographic operations. The new ship will enable the NZDF to**
conduct a rapid assessment of a littoral area of operations prior to the
arrival of the main force.


-----

_Joint Logistics_

B.14 The current **Fleet Replenishment Ship (ENDEAVOUR) would be**
replaced after 2013 with a similar capability to supply fuel, water and
stores to NZDF frigates, OPVs and the naval vessels of coalition
partners, so that they can remain on task for a sustained period. The
current ship is a single hull tanker which will not be compliant after
2013 with international maritime regulations requiring the carriage of
bulk fuel in double hull tankers.

B.15 The current **Land Combat Service Support Groups would be re-**
balanced within the existing personnel ceiling to provide tailored
support to the reorganised land force. The re-balancing would
increase efficiency of support elements and improve ‘teeth to tail’ ratio
and reduce costs.

_Joint Health_

B.16 Although there would be no change to the structure of the NZDF
medical services, new measures would be put in place to secure the
services of civilian health specialists (e.g. surgeons and anaesthetists)
to improve stabilisation surgical capability, and to conduct evacuation
to out-of-theatre medical facilities. A Life and Limb saving capability is
essential to safeguard and preserve capability of NZDF deployed
personnel.

##### Middle Pathway

_Land Forces (including Special Forces)_

B.17 The Army would increase in size to boost the sustainability and scale
of deployments. There would be sufficient depth to sustain a
maximum output of an 800-person strong land force on deployment for
up to three years – a level the Assessment considered was the
minimum required. This would also allow the Army to adopt a three
grouping organisational structure across most functions, to best
facilitate ongoing operational rotation. The LAV fleet would be
progressively upgraded to ensure that a small number remain effective
in a higher-end environment.

B.18 Three additional **A109 helicopters would be acquired, but as**
Commercial-Off-the-Shelf (cheaper than the military standard). These
would be used for training, freeing up the military A109s for greater use
on operations. The military A109s would be fitted with self protection to
enhance their operational role, and possibly armed. A growth in Air
Force personnel would enable the generation of the requisite number
of A109 crews.


-----

B.19 Further development of the Special Forces capability is anticipated in
this pathway. This should improve sustainability of Special Force
contributions.

_Naval Combat_

B.20 The ANZAC **frigates would receive a more effective self-defence**
upgrade which would allow them to make a meaningful contribution in
mid-intensity operations.

B.21 A review would determine whether upgrading or replacing the
Seasprite helicopters offers a more cost-effective choice.

_Maritime Patrol_

B.22 The **wide-area surveillance gap requires additional capability. A**
partially-owned or leased ISR Satellite capability would be introduced.
This would provide a sustained and longer-range wide-area
surveillance capability, enhancing New Zealand’s overall ISR picture.
This would allow existing maritime patrol assets to be more effectively
targeted on areas of interest.

B.23 **P3 Orions would be fitted with self-protection and anti-submarine**
sensors, improving their combat capability, and utility for robust global
contributions.

B.24 A number of regional operational tasks, both for defence and other
agencies, could be performed more efficiently in a **smaller**
**surveillance aircraft with short takeoff and landing capability, and**
sufficient range. A new lower-cost aircraft capability would therefore be
acquired. This would increase both EEZ and South Pacific surveillance
capacity. Depending on the system chosen, this could also offer some
tactical transport capacity.

B.25 **OPV and IPV availability would be improved through the growth in**
Navy personnel allowing all vessels to be crewed.

_Strategic Projection: Air and Sea Lift_

_B.26_ No change.

_Command and Control (C2)_

B.27 A shadow-posted, trained and equipped **deployable headquarters**
**capability would be created to provide a ready response command**
and control capability.

_Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR)_

_B.28_ No change.

_Joint Logistics_


-----

B.29 As part of restructuring the land force an **additional Land Combat**
**Service Support Group would be established to mirror the land**
combat organisation.

_Joint Health_

B.30 Steps would be taken to increase the use of civilian health specialists

(e.g. surgeons and anaesthetists) to produce a more sustainable
stabilising surgical capability and to improve evacuation to out-oftheatre surgical assistance for severe and chronic cases. Additional
equipment would also be procured.

##### High Pathway

_Land Forces (including Special Forces)_

B.31 The Army would increase to 6,300. This would allow a step-change in
the use of LAVs, with one manoeuvre unit primarily focused on LAVmounted combat. The LAVs would receive an upgrade of their running
systems, fire control systems and protection levels to remain effective
in a higher-end environment. The other two manoeuvre units would
each be increased, to a total of four regular infantry companies,
reducing reliance on **Reserves for sustained operations. This would**
provide much greater flexibility in the land deployment pathways
available to Government.

B.32 The **engineer** capability would be increased, and reorganised into
three composite engineer squadrons. This would reflect operational
experience: a wide range of engineering skills is required to support
security and stability operations. A deployable **Explosive Hazard**
**Clearance Team** would be formed rather than being generated from
existing positions.

B.33 Depending on further analysis, the five military specification **A109s**
would be armed with demountable rockets and guns. Although not
designed for an attack role, this would enhance their utility in support of
both conventional and special force operations, especially until groundbased fires are available.

_Naval Combat_

_B.34_ A replacement naval helicopter would be purchased.

_Maritime Patrol_

B.35 **Maritime patrol capabilities would be further enhanced to better**
ensure all EEZ contingencies are insured against, especially multiple
incidents. The appropriate mix of unmanned and manned platforms
would need to be determined. Depending on confirmation after further
analysis, the P3 Orions would be armed with air-to-surface missiles
and precision guided munitions to further improve their combat


-----

capability, and utility for robust global contributions.

_Strategic Projection: Air and Sea Lift_

B.36 The B757s would be fitted with self protection to operate in a threat
environment.

B.37 An additional **sealift ship with under-way replenishment capabilities**
would be purchased to replace the ENDEAVOUR and supplement the
capability provided by CANTERBURY. The additional capability would
both support the deployment and sustainment of land forces and the
frigates and Offshore Patrol Vessels. Two sealift ships would enable
the deployment of the required combined arms task group in a single
voyage, and provide a constant supporting presence to land forces
ashore (known as seabasing). It would mitigate the risk attached to
unavailability of only a single sealift ship.

_Joint Logistics_

B.38 The Land Combat Service Support Groups would be re-balanced to
provide more tailored support to the deployed land force, especially for
LAV-mounted operations.

_Joint Health_

B.39 A sustainable medical capacity would be generated, ensuring NZDF
could provide consistent ‘level two’ support for the full duration of its
operations.


-----

**ANNEX C**

### Personnel Characteristics and Trends

##### Personnel Numbers

C.1 The numbers employed by the NZDF as at 31 March 2010 are shown in the table
below. Regular Force and Reserve Force personnel who are posted to NZDF
Headquarters or Joint Force Headquarters are included in the total of their
respective Services. The total for Reserve Forces includes only Active Reserves.
The Civilian figures primarily comprise those employed in the Services, the
corporate element of the Headquarters New Zealand Defence Force and the
Shared Services[1] function. The Shared Services functionality has personnel
throughout the NZDF providing support to all of NZDF across the country. In
addition, as at 31 March 2010, 287 civilians were filling Military designated posts
across the NZDF allowing Regular Force personnel to be used in front end
outputs.

REGULAR FORCE 31/03/2006 31/03/2010 CHANGE

NAVY 1976 2197 221

ARMY 4541 5040 499

AIR FORCE 2362 2599 237

TOTAL 8879 9836 957

**Table 1. NZDF Regular Force headcount as at 31 Mar 2006 and 2010**

RESERVE FORCE 31/03/2006 31/03/2010 CHANGE

NAVY 305 335 30

ARMY 1920 1803 -117

AIR FORCE 205 194 -11

TOTAL 2430 2332 -98

**Table 2. NZDF Reserve Force headcount as at 31 Mar 2006 and 2010**

CIVILIANS[2 ] 31/03/2006 31/03/2010 CHANGE

NAVY 465 397 -68

1
Shared Services include Communications and Information Systems, Defence Technology Agency,
and the Joint Logistic Support Organisation.

2
Civilians - Shared Services - A number of these areas were populated as a result of transfers out of the
Single Services, hence their reduction in numbers. Civilians – Other is comprised of Headquarters Joint
Force New Zealand, VANZ and Youth Development Unit. Growth in VANZ has come primarily from the
legislated transfer of personnel from the Ministry of Social Development.

143

|REGULAR FORCE|31/03/2006|31/03/2010|CHANGE|
|---|---|---|---|
|NAVY|1976|2197|221|
|ARMY|4541|5040|499|
|AIR FORCE|2362|2599|237|
|TOTAL|8879|9836|957|

|RESERVE FORCE|31/03/2006|31/03/2010|CHANGE|
|---|---|---|---|
|NAVY|305|335|30|
|ARMY|1920|1803|-117|
|AIR FORCE|205|194|-11|
|TOTAL|2430|2332|-98|

|CIVILIANS2|31/03/2006|31/03/2010|CHANGE|
|---|---|---|---|
|NAVY|465|397|-68|


-----

|ARMY|790|716|-74|
|---|---|---|---|
|AIR FORCE|408|417|9|
|Civilians – HQNZDF|315|403|88|
|Civilians – Shared|211|619|408|
|Civilians - Other|30|123|93|
|TOTAL|2219|2675|456|


**Table 3. NZDF Civilian numbers as at 31 Mar 2006 and 2010**

TOTAL NZDF 31/03/2006 31/03/2010 CHANGE

TOTAL 13528 14843 1315

**Table 4. Total NZDF numbers as at 31 Mar 2006 and 2010**

C.2 Since 2006 the Regular Force has increased by 958 personnel (10.8%).
Conversely, Reserve Forces have experienced a decline over the period, down by
98 personnel (4.0%). The total civilian headcount increased by 456 (20.5%)
across the NZDF mainly in the now centralised Shared Services. Overall, funding
increases have enabled the NZDF headcount to grow modestly by 1315 (9.7%)
over the period 2005/06 to 2009/10.

C.3 As at 31 March 2010, of the total number of specified positions within the NZDF
(the “establishment”), 83% were filled.

##### Key Demographic Characteristics

C.4 In the Regular Force, as at 31 March 2010, officers comprise 21% and other
ranks 79% of total personnel numbers. The proportions have remained
approximately the same for the last 5 years.

C.5 In terms of age, the averages have increased generally by a year over the last
five years and currently are:

**Category** **Average Age**

Regular Force 31 years

Reserve Forces 35 years

Civilian 47 years

C.6 The age characteristics reflect differences in employment patterns. For example,
Regular Force personnel are typically recruited at a young age and their
employment is subject to a term contract, whereas the employment civilian
employees may continue without a fixed term.

144

|TOTAL NZDF|31/03/2006|31/03/2010|CHANGE|
|---|---|---|---|
|TOTAL|13528|14843|1315|

|Category|Average Age|
|---|---|
|Regular Force|31 years|
|Reserve Forces|35 years|
|Civilian|47 years|


-----

C.7 In terms of gender ratios, the NZDF is still predominantly male. Proportions have
remained approximately the same for the last 5 years. The breakdown is:

**Category** **% Male** **% Female**

Regular Force 83 17

Reserve Forces 83 17

Civilian 52 48

C.8 In terms of ethnicity, the percentage breakdown is:

**Category** **European** **Maori** **Pacific** **Asian** **Other[3 ]**

Regular Force 46 18 3 1 28

Reserve Forces 40 11 3 2 34

Civilian 52 7 2 4 29

Excluding the classification change that altered the proportion of “European” and
“Other”, these proportions have remained approximately constant over the last 5
years.

##### Trends in Regular Force Personnel Numbers

C.9 As a result of a changed emphasis in the policies of successive governments, the
overall Regular Force personnel numbers declined significantly from 1990 until
2004. Between 2005 and 2008, increased funding was provided to enable
numbers to grow again. The numbers of personnel deployed operationally over
the period remained the same or was greater (during early East Timor
deployments from 1999 to 2002). This means that the same deployment
capability has been achieved with fewer personnel, albeit with attendant
pressures on the NZDF.

|Category|% Male|% Female|
|---|---|---|
|Regular Force|83|17|
|Reserve Forces|83|17|
|Civilian|52|48|

|Category|European|Maori|Pacific|Asian|Other3|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Regular Force|46|18|3|1|28|
|Reserve Forces|40|11|3|2|34|
|Civilian|52|7|2|4|29|


3


Of note is the high percentage of personnel reporting as ‘Other’. In 2006, Statistics New Zealand changed its
classification rules so that those who reported themselves as ‘New Zealander’ or ‘Kiwi’ were classified as
‘Other’. This classification change accounts for the high incidence of the ‘Other’ ethnicity.

145


-----

NZDF Total Regular Force Headcount Numbers from 1990 to 2009.

**Figure 2. NZDF Total Regular Force Headcount Numbers Since 1990**

C.10 As at 31 March 10 there were 9779 Regular Force personnel[4]. Of these:

    - 7905 RF personnel were trained, available, ‘effective’ and contributing to
Outputs;

    - 1057 personnel were conducting initial induction or initial-trade training;

    - 422 personnel were undertaking advanced training; and

    - 395 were administratively unavailable on leave without pay, were sick,
were overseas on projects, or were on secondment.

C.11 For Regular Forces over the last five years, there has been an increase in the
number of personnel with 1- 4 years of service (now comprising over 35% of the
NZDF) and those over 20 years (now comprising 12%, up a full percent on last
year). The loss of experience over the last five years in personnel with the 9-20
years of service has been substantial and reduces the experience level of
personnel in a number of important mid-level command and trade positions. This
situation will be corrected, however, if the currently reduced rates of attrition
continue.


4


This figure excludes 57 Reserve Force personnel who were deployed as Regular Force.


146


-----

##### Trends in Reserve Force Personnel Numbers

_Composition_

C.12 As at 31 March 2010, the numbers of active Reserve Force personnel were as
follows:

**Service** **Number**

Navy 335

Army 1803

Air Force 194

**Total NZDF** **2332**

C.13 As shown in the graph below, and reflecting the same changed policy emphasis
that affected Regular Force numbers, there has been a steady decline in the
number of active Reserve Force personnel since 1990.

**t showLinginumber onf Reseerve Force cPersonne**

.

2009

90 to

om 19

DF fr

in NZ

l

r

##### Trends in Civilian Personnel Numbers

C.14 Reflecting the same policy changes that resulted in a Regular Force numbers,
there was a decline in the number of Civilian personnel between 1990 and 2000.
This trend has reversed in the period from 2000 to 2010, reflecting two influences:
first, the need to rebuild some corporate capabilities of the NZDF and, second, a
move to ‘civilianise’ a number of positions previously undertaken by uniformed
personnel.

147

|Service|Number|
|---|---|
|Navy|335|
|Army|1803|
|Air Force|194|
|Total NZDF|2332|


-----

148


-----

