## NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY 

### FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA

##### DECEMBER 2019


-----

-----

# NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY 

#### FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA

###### DECEMBER 2019


ii


-----

###### FOREWORD

At the inception of my administration in 2015, Nigeria was at a defining moment in her
history. Acts of terrorism perpetrated by Jama’atu Ahlus Sunna Lidda’wati Wal Jihad,
otherwise known as Boko Haram were at their peak and constituted an existential threat.
The group occupied large swathes of territory in the North East region and was
threatening to seize more areas to consolidate its dominance and project its evil ideology.
The economy was in a precarious state and soon regressed into recession. Corruption was
subverting our institutions, society and eroding public confidence in the government. Our
country was in despair, bereft of self-confidence and in dire need of repositioning.
Consequently, we promised to pursue progressive change on three fronts: security,
economy and the fight against corruption.

On security, we proceeded to immediately strengthen our international partnerships,
particularly our participation in the Multi-National Joint Task Force and to consolidate
our collaboration with the Regional Intelligence Fusion Unit. Internally, we initiated a
major reorganisation of the Counter-Terrorism and Counter-Insurgency operation,
codenamed LAFIYA DOLE and moved the Military Command and Control Centre to
Maiduguri in Borno State, the epicenter of the insurgency. We also facilitated improved
funding, procurement, operations, training, logistics and welfare for the security agencies
to ramp up security operations across the nation.

Mindful of the strong connections between the economy and national security, we
launched the four-year Economic Recovery and Growth Plan 2017-2020. The Plan
focuses on agricultural transformation, food security, power and petroleum products
efficiency, improved transportation infrastructure, job creation, youth empowerment and
a sustainable industrialised economy. We also strengthened the implementation of the
Bank Verification Number programme and the Treasury Single Account initiative. These
programmes and structures for improved national economic fundamentals have also been
complemented by an aggressive fight against all forms of corruption on many fronts.

I am pleased to state that our consolidated efforts have yielded remarkable results. Under
the relentless onslaught of our Armed Forces and allies, Boko Haram has been
substantially degraded and is now unable to mount sustained operations. Areas previously
occupied by the terrorists in the North East have also been freed and Internally Displaced
Persons are voluntarily returning to their homes. In the Niger Delta, we have consolidated
the peace for the longest stretch of time in recent years. I seize this opportunity to thank

iii


-----

the men and women of our Armed Forces, other security and law enforcement agencies
for their sacrifices to keep Nigeria safe and secure. I also wish to commend local leaders
who have contributed enormously in establishing peace by cooperating with our law
enforcement authorities in the affected areas.

Economic results have also been remarkable. We have been able to exit economic
recession and record significant improvements in key economic indices. We have
achieved macro-economic stability as demonstrated by improved fiscal and monetary
performance. For the first time in our recent history, we achieved remarkable
improvements in local rice production, and we are promoting this success to showcase
our overall progress towards food security. Food prices have generally fallen, and a large
number of farmers have gone back to productive farming. Our focus on national
productivity is gaining traction and we have recently improved our international rating on
the global Ease-of-Doing-Business index. Our social safety net initiatives such as the
School Feeding, Conditional Cash Transfer and the Anchor Borrowers programmes have
provided socio-economic relief and created employment for millions of Nigerians.

It is our conviction that graft weakens our institutions, destroys our people’s faith in
government and undermines our capacity to deliver public goods that guarantee the safety
and the welfare of the people. To this extent, corruption is a threat to national security,
and we are committed to entrenching accountability, due process and ensuring drastic
consequences for malfeasance. The implementation of the Bank Verification Number and
Treasury Single Account schemes has helped to streamline vital identity data and to
safeguard public finances. The whistle-blower policy has also proven to be very useful in
the fight against corruption. Indeed, the conclusion of some high-profile corruption cases
has helped to entrench the belief that there are no sacred cows in our fight against graft.
On the whole, grand corruption is in retreat.

In addition to the aforementioned achievements, we have made remarkable progress in
promoting good governance. In particular, this government is committed to upholding
democratic values such as the rule of law, human rights and quite significantly, the
respect for electoral choices of our people freely given in credible elections. To drive
contemporary and future development, we believe that we must make sustained capital
investments in critical national infrastructure. We have, therefore, resuscitated the rail
sector and made massive investments in road transportation across the nation and in
particular, we have made substantial progress in the construction of the second Niger

iv


-----

Bridge. These strides have helped to renew and strengthen the aspirations and vision of
Nigeria as a secure, progressive and prosperous nation.

We live in an interconnected world and must proactively respond to the challenges of
both the local and global security environment. Recent events in the world, buoyed by
globalization, already impact or could potentially impact our national security. These
include the defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, the emergence of the Islamic
State in West Africa Province, the spread of Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, the
unpredictability of global stock markets as well as the unending global search for new
sources of non-fossil energy. On the domestic front, some previously existing security
challenges have grown in intensity while other significant challenges have emerged.
These include ethno-religious conflicts which continue to prey on our historical and
socio-political fault-lines, conflicts between pastoralists and farmers, banditry,
kidnapping, cyber-crimes and politically motivated violence.

In the circumstances, the virulence of previous and emergent security threats immediately
calls for a confluence of ends, ways and means of overcoming them. This is an urgent
existential imperative. However, our vision of sustainable national security goes beyond
reaction to physical threats. We must ensure clarity in our understanding of the dynamics
of Nigeria’s security environment and address them in a comprehensive manner. We
must optimize the effectiveness of the security sector by evolving systems and structures
that encompass societal and governmental contributions. We must admit the evolution of
new methodologies and technologies in contemporary national security systems. We will
build national consensus to guide the implementation of the values and principles of our
national security. Lastly, we live in a globalized world, so we must project our national
security interests in a manner that promotes regional and international confidence and
cooperation. These are the rationales for the review of the National Security Strategy
2014.

The implementation of all the principles and ideas expressed in this document is crucial
to our national security and general well-being. Concerted efforts will therefore be made
to implement the National Security Strategy 2019. The implementation will be driven
systematically, transparently and accountably to ensure that all Ministries, Departments
and Agencies key into it and deliver expected measurable outcomes designed to enhance
our resilience, stability and national strategy. This process will involve relevant
Ministries, Departments and Agencies, Civil Society Organisations, Development

v


-----

Partners, the Armed Forces, Police, Security and Para-military organisations as well as
the general public.

The National Security Strategy 2019 and other related instruments capture my renewed
bond with Nigerians to ensure the nation’s security and welfare. I therefore commend the
document to all Nigerians, stakeholders and key players, as the overarching policy and
strategic basis for protecting, preserving, promoting and projecting our core national
values and interests in the face of internal and external threats.

**MUHAMMADU BUHARI**
President, Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces
Federal Republic of Nigeria

vi


-----

###### PREFACE

The National Security Strategy of Nigeria outlines the major security concerns of the
nation for which policies and strategies have been articulated and how the government
plans to deal with them. The document is general in content and its implementation
depends on other national strategic documents such as the National Counter Terrorism
Strategy, Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy, the National Defence Policy and the
Economic Recovery and Growth Plan.

The National Security Strategy underscores the belief and generally acknowledged view
that security is the cornerstone of development and progress in a free society, and that
security is a guarantee of the well-being of citizens and stability of the state. The notion
of security adopted here however reflects the contemporary paradigm shift away from the
state-centric focus of security to one which is comprehensive and emphasizes human
security.

Nigeria published its maiden National Security Strategy in 2014 and since then the
security environment has continued to evolve, giving rise to emergent challenges, thus
necessitating a review. While significant progress has been made on multiple fronts
between 2014 and 2019, the nature of security challenges facing Nigeria today is more
complex than in the past. There has been an intensification of pastoralists-farmers
conflicts in many states of the Federation. Banditry has escalated and become a major
feature of the security environment. Similarly, there has been a significant upsurge in
kidnapping and other crimes.

On the international scene, especially in West Africa, there was a resurgence of political
instability. There were also violent demonstrations in a few countries in Sub-Saharan
Africa. There has been a dramatic increase in the levels of poverty, unemployment and
disillusionment among people across the globe. The rise in populist right-wing political
parties and resistance to migration in Europe and some other parts of the world are some
of the recent events affecting global security. As the forces of globalization draw
countries even closer on multiple fronts, and as increasing advancement in information
and communication technology facilitates the accelerated connectivity of socio-economic
and political developments, the potential for instability in the world is likewise being
accentuated. The policies of the world’s major economic powers and blocs have been
shifting in reaction to their own domestic and international challenges. The on-going USChina trade war, BREXIT, the volatility of international capital markets, among others,

vii


-----

continue to adversely affect the commitment to a functional, liberal and global economic
order as well as multilateral commitments and support for international developmental
issues. The increasing incidence of xenophobia and anti-migrant policies stymies global
human capital mobility and development; and increases the likelihood for international
friction.

The aforementioned challenges call for a robust, dynamic and proactive national security
framework and infrastructure capable of dealing with these growing threats in real time.
The National Security Strategy 2019 aims at ensuring that Nigeria’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity, national interests, the well-being of the people and the country’s
institutions are preserved, protected and enhanced. The Strategy provides a
comprehensive vision of National Security, premised on the understanding that a
responsible society aware of its security is better poised to address today’s challenges.
Thus, it is essential to encourage the involvement of citizens and collaboration between
the public and private sectors.

Our Mission is articulated through a strategy that defines a global and all-embracing form
of reference in security matters. The Strategy envisages the unique characteristics of the
risks and threats we face in a world that is constantly undergoing changes. In other
words, a strategy that orients state action towards current and perceived future challenges
by using available resources flexibly and efficiently. The Strategy will also enhance our
prevention, protection and response capabilities to security threats in an increasingly
complex environment. Nigeria is a member of the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union with a unique and strategic geopolitical location. This
particular attribute defines our specific strategic objectives. On the basis of defending our
interests and values, Nigeria’s strategic projection is aimed at pursuing regional,
continental and global peace, stability and security.

In formulating the National Security Strategy 2019, the views of the relevant government
and non-government experts, the security establishment and other key stakeholders were
sought and integrated, as much as possible. It is believed therefore, that going by the
breadth and depth of experiences and inputs that were brought to bear on the process, this
National Security Strategy will facilitate our short, medium and long term security
aspirations. Chapter 1 of the document presents the national values, interests and
objectives, while Chapter 2 gives an overview of Nigeria’s geo-strategic environment.
Recognising the myriad of security challenges since 2014, Chapter 3 examines the
current and future threat environment of the country. Chapters 4 to 7 consider appropriate

viii


-----

strategies to ultimately ensure peace, prosperity and security in the country. Considering
the constant flux in the domestic and international security environment, the document
will undergo a continuous process of revision at appropriate intervals of 5 years or as
may be necessary.

**BABAGANA MONGUNO**
Major General (Retired)
National Security Adviser to the President
Federal Republic of Nigeria

ix


-----

###### ACRONYMS

ABP Anchor Borrowers Programme

ACJA Administration of Criminal Justice Act

AFN Armed Forces of Nigeria

AFRIPOL African Union Mechanism for Police Cooperation

APS African Partnership Station

AQIM Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb

AU African Union

BHT Boko Haram Terrorists

BVN Bank Verification Number

CBN Central Bank of Nigeria

CBO Community Based Organisation

CBRNE Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear and Explosive

CCR Central Criminal Registry

CCTV Close Circuit Television

CEN-SAD Community of Sahel-Saharan States

CNAI Critical National Assets and Infrastructure

CNII Critical National Information Infrastructure

CONOPS Concept of Operations

COPAZ Co-Prosperity Alliance Zone

CPPA Cybercrimes (Prohibition, Prevention, etc.) Act

CSO Civil Society Organisation

CT-COIN Counter-Terrorism and Counter-Insurgency

DSA Defence Space Administration

ECOWAS Economic Community of West African States

EEZ Exclusive Economic Zone

EFCC Economic and Financial Crimes Commission

EIA Environmental Impact Assessment

EIMS ECOWAS Integrated Maritime Strategy

EITI Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative

EPI Environmental Performance Index

ERGP Economic Recovery and Growth Plan

FAAN Federal Airports Authority of Nigeria

FBO Faith Based Organisation

FOCAC Forum on China-Africa Cooperation

x


-----

GoG Gulf of Guinea

HDI Human Development Index

HIPC Highly Indebted Poor Countries

HSOP Harmonised Standard Operating Procedures

ICAO International Civil Aviation Organisation

ICC Intelligence Community Committee

ICT Information and Communications Technology

IDP Internally Displaced Person

IED Improvised Explosive Device

IHR International Health Regulations

INET Investments in New Energy Technologies

IoT Internet of Things

ISWAP Islamic State in West Africa Province

ISO International Standard Organisation

JIB Joint Intelligence Board

MACA Military Aid to Civil Authority

MACP Military Aid to Civil Power

MCCC Military Command and Control Centre

MDA Maritime Domain Awareness

MDAs Ministries, Departments and Agencies

MFA Ministry of Foreign Affairs

MIC Military Industrial Complex

MLAILPKC Martin Luther Agwai International Leadership and Peace Keeping
Centre

MNJTF Multi-National Joint Task Force

MOD Ministry of Defence

MOJ Ministry of Justice

NACTEST National Counter Terrorism Strategy

NAF Nigerian Air Force

NAMA Nigerian Airspace Management Agency

NAP National Action Plan

NAPTIP National Agency for the Prohibition of Trafficking in Persons

NASRDA National Space Research and Development Agency

NCAA Nigerian Civil Aviation Authority

NCMC National Crisis Management Centre

NCPS National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy

xi


-----

NCS Nigeria Customs Service

NDC National Defence Council

NDLEA National Drug Law Enforcement Agency

NEC National Economic Council

NEMA National Emergency Management Agency

NFIU Nigerian Financial Intelligence Unit

NGO Non-Governmental Organisation

NIMASA Nigerian Maritime Administration and Safety Agency

NIMET Nigeria Meteorological Agency

NME Nigerian Maritime Environment

NPF Nigeria Police Force

NRC Nigeria Railway Corporation

NSC National Security Council

NSCDC Nigeria Security and Civil Defence Corps

NSS National Security Strategy

NYSC National Youth Service Corps

OPV Offshore Patrol Vessel

PSO Peace Support Operation

RIFU Regional Intelligence Fusion Unit

SALW Small Arms and Light Weapons

SBS Special Boat Service

SCIPC Strategic Communication Inter-Agency Policy Committee

SDG Sustainable Development Goals

SIP Social Investment Programmes

SLOC Sea Lines of Communication

SME Small and Medium-scale Enterprise

SRE Surveillance, Response and Enforcement

SSS State Security Service

STEM Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics

STI Science, Technology and Innovation

TAC Technical Aid Corps

TICAD Tokyo International Cooperation for African Development

TOC Transnational Organised Crimes

TRACON Total Radar Coverage of Nigeria

TSA Treasury Single Account

TSMS Total Spectrum Maritime Strategy

xii


-----

UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle

UBE Universal Basic Education

UN United Nations

UNMIL UN Mission in Liberia

UNSC United Nations Security Council

YES-P Youth Entrepreneurship Support Programme

xiii


-----

###### CONTENTS

**FOREWORD** iii

**PREFACE** vii

**ACRONYMS** x

**VISION AND MISSION** xvii

**CHAPTER 1**

**NATIONAL VALUES, INTERESTS AND OBJECTIVES** 1

National Values 1

National Interests 1

National Objectives 2

  - Protect Nigerian People and Territory 2

  - Promote Nigeria’s Prosperity and Sustainable Development 2

  - Promote National Unity and Peaceful Co-Existence 2

  - Promote Our Regional and International Interests 3

**CHAPTER 2**

**OVERVIEW OF NIGERIA’S GEO-STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENT** 4

**CHAPTER 3**

**NATIONAL SECURITY THREATS** 8

Terrorism and Violent Extremism 8

Armed Banditry, Kidnapping, Militancy and Separatist Agitations 9

  - Armed Banditry and Kidnapping 9

  - Militancy and Separatist Agitations 9

Pastoralists and Farmers Conflicts 9

Transnational Organised Crime 10

Piracy and Sea Robbery 11

Porous Borders 11

xiv


-----

Cybercrimes and Technology Challenges 12

Socio-Political Threats 12

Fake News and Hate Speech 13

Environmental Threats 14

Public Health Challenges 14

Economic Challenges 15

  - Energy Deficit 15

  - Crude Oil Related Crimes 15

  - Unemployment and Poverty 16

  - Global Economic Challenges 16

Regional and Global Security Challenges 16

**CHAPTER 4**

**PROTECT NIGERIAN PEOPLE AND TERRITORY** 18

Promote Crisis Response and Resilience 18

National Defence 20

Internal Security 21

Combating Terrorism and Countering Violent Extremism 23

Preventing and Combating Kidnapping, Armed Banditry
and Militia Activities 25

Promote Cybersecurity Development 25

Promote Research and Development in Space Technology 26

Combating Transnational Organised Crime 27

Critical National Assets and Infrastructure Security 28

Maritime Security 29

Airspace and Aviation Security 31

Land Transportation Security 32

Securing Ungoverned Spaces 33

Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear and Explosives Security 33

Strategic Communication 35

**CHAPTER 5**

**PROMOTE NIGERIA’S PROSPERITY AND SUSTAINABLE**
**DEVELOPMENT** 37

Economic Security and Opportunities 37

Energy Security 38

xv


-----

Prioritize Research in Science, Technology and Innovations 39

Food security 40

Labour Security 41

Health Security 42

Education Security 43

Environmental Security 44

**CHAPTER 6**

**PROMOTE NATIONAL UNITY AND PEACEFUL CO-EXISTENCE** 47

Political Security 47

Social Security 48

Gender Sensitivity and Security 51

Cultural, Religious and Traditional Institutions 52

  - Cultural Institutions 52

  - Religious Institutions 54

  - Traditional Institutions 54

Youth Strategy 55

**CHAPTER 7**

**PROMOTE REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL INTERESTS** 58

Economic Community of West African States 59

Gulf of Guinea Commission 60

Community of Sahel-Saharan States 60

African Union 61

United Nations 61

Promote Engagement of Nigerians in Diaspora 61

Contribution to International Security 62

Sustain Development Assistance 62

Defence Engagement 63

**CHAPTER 8**

**CONCLUSION** 64

xvi


-----

**VISION**

Our overarching vision is to make Nigeria a secure, safe, just, peaceful, prosperous and
strong nation.

**MISSION**

The inherent mission is to apply all elements of national power to ensure physical and
human security, a just society, peaceful co-existence, national unity, prosperity and
sustainable development while promoting Nigeria’s influence in regional, continental and
global affairs.

xvii


-----

###### CHAPTER 1

**NATIONAL VALUES, INTERESTS AND OBJECTIVES**

Our nation is founded upon certain values which undergird our way of life and the pursuit
of our collective prosperity and progress. They inform our strategic interests and are the
guiding principles of our engagement with the world. We recognize that our national
security is hinged on the defence and propagation of these values.

**NATIONAL VALUES**

The Federal Republic of Nigeria is committed to the ideals of freedom, equality and
justice. We consider the sanctity of human life to be paramount and are committed to
enhancing human dignity and ensuring that our actions are humane. Our peace, security
and prosperity rest upon the foundational values of democracy, the rule of law, free
enterprise, respect for human rights including women and minority rights. We recognize
the need to create an enabling environment for the full expression of the potentials of our
people in the form of political inclusion, economic empowerment, social integration, as
well as equal opportunity and access to justice. Other areas are the promotion of a united
and inclusive society, empowerment of women and the girl child, preservation and
promotion of our cultural diversity and the sustainable exploitation of our natural
resources.

**NATIONAL INTERESTS**

Our interests are the preservation of Nigeria’s sovereignty, territorial integrity, security
and the welfare of her people. We will preserve democracy, guarantee human security
and combat all threats to peace in our territory. As a stakeholder in the global space,
Nigeria will continue to contribute to the maintenance of international peace, security and
cooperation as well as the prevention and resolution of intra-state, inter-state, regional
and international conflicts. These will be achieved through the mechanisms of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), African Union (AU), United
Nations (UN) and the norms and standards of international law. The observance of
democratic values and their promotion in Africa and beyond as well as the enhancement
of cooperation in bilateral, regional and multilateral economic spheres are also in our
national interest.

1


-----

**NATIONAL OBJECTIVES**

**Protect Nigerian People and Territory**

The Government of Nigeria is committed to protecting its people, economic interests,
infrastructure and way of life. This entails deploying the full spectrum of national power
to ensure a safe and secure nation. To this end, we will continue to strengthen our
security and law enforcement agencies as well as upscale our overall national resource
endowment to comprehensively and decisively address all domestic and external threats
to Nigeria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. We will foster a culture of preparedness
within our strategic institutions and build the resilience of our communities against the
risks and hazards that pose the greatest threats to the Nigerian people while actively
reducing our vulnerabilities.

**Promote Nigeria’s Prosperity and Sustainable Development**

National security is inextricably linked with and inseparable from economic security. We
recognize that Nigeria’s greatest resource is her people and that the truest measure of our
progress lies in the degree to which access to opportunities for empowerment and selfactualization are provided. Our objective is a broad-based prosperity that leaves no one
behind while providing social security investments that protect the poor, vulnerable and
unemployed to ensure a just and equitable distribution of wealth. Consequently, we will
promote free enterprise, inclusive economic growth and continue to aggressively pursue
the diversification of the economy with emphasis on developing our human capital. We
will ensure that the exploitation of our natural resources is undertaken in a manner that
serves the common good of our people, while guarding against the emergence of
disparities and inequalities. We will continue to deepen partnerships between the public
and private sector and actualize the socio-economic rights of Nigerians.

**Promote National Unity and Peaceful Co-existence**
Our ethnic, linguistic, religious, and cultural diversity are sources of national strength.
Harnessing this strength and reinforcing our social cohesion is one of the cardinal
requirements of our national security and remains a priority for the nation. Guided by the
values of inclusion, tolerance and respect for universal human rights, we will fortify
unifying institutions such as the Federal Character Commission and the National Youth
Service Corps (NYSC) that enhance our integrative potential by promoting the equality
of every citizen, and combating discrimination and prejudice in all forms. We will also
continue to encourage ties among persons of different ethnicities, creeds and cultures. We

2


-----

will safeguard democracy and the socio-cultural pluralism that provides expression for
our heterogeneity while promoting a national consciousness and identity.

**Promote our Regional and International Interests**
Nigeria is an active member of the international community and will continue its tradition
of dynamic engagement with other nations. In the context of a globalized world, threats
to national security, whether posed by terrorism, climate change, epidemics and hostile
non-state actors possess transnational implications and can only be effectively confronted
by strong transnational partnerships. Nigeria remains an advocate of such cooperation
and will continue to energetically participate in bilateral and multilateral institutions that
undergird international order. We will continue to promote cooperation and partnerships
with our neighbours and friends and remain true to our international commitments. We
will also pursue relationships that enhance our long-term security and prosperity. Nigeria
prefers and will continue to advance an international order founded on respect for
international law, obligations to treaties and peaceful resolution of conflicts and disputes
as well as mutually beneficial free and fair economic relations with other nations.

3


-----

###### CHAPTER 2

**OVERVIEW OF NIGERIA’S GEO-STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENT**

The ever-changing international security landscape aggravated by the conflicting interests
of states demand continual and informed analysis of the geo-strategic environment. This
analysis begins with an assessment of our domestic situation followed by an appreciation
of the security issues and challenges in the regional, continental and global environment.

Nigeria has over 250 ethnic groups and three predominant religions (Christianity, Islam
and traditional worship). These constitute platforms for competition that find expression
in perennial challenges of divisive ethnic loyalties, religious intolerance, violent
extremism and political acrimony which impede development. The recognition of this
reality makes it necessary to forge bonds beyond ethnicity and religion in pursuit of
strength in our diversity. Our population of about 201 million, out of which 55.9 per cent
are between the ages of 15 and 64, presents remarkable potentials for socio-economic
development. However, the under-utilization of this potential coupled with inadequate
opportunities results in high rate of unemployment and poverty. This has huge security
implications needing urgent and sustainable solutions.

Nigeria’s landmass is about 923, 763 sq km, out of which 37.33 per cent is arable and has
favourable weather for farming. These present a clear potential for self-sufficiency in
food production and export. Though we have significantly improved our agricultural
production and are steadily reducing food imports, our agricultural potential has not been
fully harnessed.

Several threats exist in our domestic environment which undermines the well-being of
our citizens. These challenges, such as terrorism driven by violent extremism, banditry
and militia activities are perpetrated in the form of kidnapping, armed robbery and cattle
rustling. Others include separatism and resource-based conflicts that engender
environmental and related agitations. Socio-economic challenges that manifest in poverty
also lead to vandalism of critical national infrastructure, crude oil theft, attacks on
farmsteads and illegal bunkering that threaten the security of Nigeria.

The North East region, which shares international boundaries with Cameroon, Chad and
Niger Republics, is potentially rich in solid mineral and water resources, especially
around the Lake Chad. However, the Lake is shrinking, thus constituting a theatre of
conflict due to the scramble for the diminishing water resources. Additionally, sectarian

4


-----

and resource-based conflicts as well as the challenges of climate change, engender
environmental and related agitations that form the threat patterns confronting the nation’s
progress as exemplified by the activities of Boko Haram Terrorists (BHT) and Islamic
State in West Africa Province (ISWAP).

Nigeria is a littoral state with a coastline of about 420nm, an Exclusive Economic Zone
(EEZ) of 200nm and a sea space of about 84,000sq nm to exploit and protect. This area is
rich in natural resources which are essential for our economic survival. The maritime
environment of Nigeria is at the heart of the Gulf of Guinea (GoG) and associated with a
range of infrastructure and economic activities related to the maritime domain. These
include ports, coastal infrastructure, shipping, fishing, seaborne trade, offshore energy
assets, undersea pipelines and cables as well as numerous seabed resources. Increasing
attention has also been drawn to our Sea Lines of Communication (SLOC) as there has
been greater movement of trade as well as goods by sea, along with a higher dependence
on energy imports for sustaining our developmental goals in the last few decades.
However, our maritime space is vast and largely under-policed and as such is vulnerable
to piracy, poaching, sea robbery and other transnational organised crime as well as
marine pollution. It is therefore imperative that these maritime resources and associated
activities are adequately protected.

The West African region is important to our national security interests. The states in this
region have cultural affinities and historical linkages implying that stress in one country
can be easily transmitted to others. Also, several countries in the region manifest political
and socio-economic frailties indicative of ongoing conflicts and environmental disasters
such as drought and famine in some states. These weaknesses have been exploited by Al
Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), ISWAP and their various affiliates to spread
terrorism in the region.

The GoG spans 17 states with a total coastline of about 2,874nm, covering an estimated
area of 574,800 sq nm. This constitutes an important frontier in our national security
calculations. The GoG is experiencing growing trends of transnational organised crime
underscoring the need to address the challenges through collective security mechanisms.
Additionally, maritime boundaries in the area could also cause disputed claims which
could lead to conflicts. Furthermore, global interests in the energy resources in the GoG
have been on the increase over the years. These factors evoke both opportunities and
threats and indeed justify our national security interests in the GoG.

5


-----

The African continent remains the focus of our national security and diplomatic interests.
The impact of colonial rule continues to manifest in socio-political distortions and
security challenges in many states. Moreover, Africa is now experiencing a renewed
scramble for resources and influence by foreign powers which could threaten her
cohesion. Meanwhile, contemporary socio-political struggles exacerbated by governance
challenges have plunged some African countries into protracted and debilitating armed
conflicts. Consequently, many African states are classified as Least Developed Countries
and dominate the world’s list of Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC). This condition
undermines our strategic aspirations.

On the global stage, Nigeria remains non-aligned as we were in the Cold War era. In the
post-Cold War globalized world, all nations seek to exploit opportunities and are also
susceptible to the insecurities therefrom. Our interactions with the developed and
developing nations; the world’s governing institutions; information revolution and social
media; the activities of non-state actors, as well as global warming and climate change
present both opportunities and challenges to us. These show the dynamics of global
systems and the consequences of globalization especially for Nigeria. Considered
together, the geo-strategic realities of the climate change, globalization and information
revolution present multi-dimensional challenges for our national security.

Nigeria’s geostrategic environment is characterized by the increasing influence of
international terrorist networks, the defeat of ISIS in Syria and the dispersal of
combatants to other conflict zones, the frailty of nations in the region, the influx of
foreigners and threats in cyberspace. Although the Armed Forces of Nigeria and other
security services have remained a bulwark and stabilizing force for internal security, the
overall security architecture needs retooling. Nigeria’s geostrategic analysis depicts
substantial but largely untapped strengths amidst critical vulnerabilities. It is therefore
imperative that we devise strategies to enhance our national capacities for growth,
security and progress.

Nigeria’s over-dependence on crude oil for foreign exchange earnings and her long-term
inability to diversify her revenue base has resulted in the contraction of economic
opportunities, thus fueling desperation of the youth to emigrate. However, our core
strength remains our wealth of natural resources and our resilient and vibrant population
which can creatively exploit these resource endowments to transform Nigeria into a
globally competitive country. Our population is also a wide and deep market and offers

6


-----

incentives for aggressive production and trade. On the whole, diversifying our economy
entails exploiting the vast opportunities presented by the ICT sector and the maritime
economy.

7


-----

###### CHAPTER 3

**NATIONAL SECURITY THREATS**

Nigeria faces a rapidly changing world with a diverse range of threats. The threats are
multifaceted and less predictable with blurred boundaries between external and internal
risk factors. Threat factors that manifest at the global, regional and domestic levels are
usually mutually reinforcing. Therefore, they require an integrative national strategy and
cooperation within a framework of regional as well as international organisations and
institutions.

Several challenges are likely to drive Nigeria’s security priorities in the next five years
with both short and long-term implications. These challenges can be grouped under the
following security threats: terrorism and violent extremism, armed banditry, kidnapping,
militancy and separatist agitations, pastoralists- farmers conflicts, transnational organised
crime, piracy and sea robbery, porous borders, cybercrimes and technology challenges.
Others are socio-political threats, fake news and hate speeches, environmental threats,
public health challenges, economic challenges, regional and global security challenges.

**TERRORISM AND VIOLENT EXTREMISM**
The threat of terrorism and violent extremism has continued to challenge our security
forces over the last decade. The splintering of BHT into two factions has compounded the
complexity of the threat environment. The objective of the factions is to undermine the
public trust in government. This is in consonance with the rise in global terrorism as a
strategic threat with significant increase of its logistical, financial and operational
capabilities. While the activities of terrorists have largely been degraded by the combined
efforts of the Armed Forces of Nigeria and other security agencies as well as the MultiNational Joint Task Force (MNJTF), there are still concerns that these terrorist groups
remain a threat. The potential use of disruptive and emerging technologies remains a key
concern considering growing advances in this field and the possible attack on Critical
National Information Infrastructure (CNII).

The BHT and ISWAP have continued to carry out intermittent attacks on isolated targets
with the ultimate aim of creating an Islamic Caliphate in the North East. The effects of
this terror campaign include mass displacement and migration, creation of a large number
of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), undermining governance, rule of law, national
cohesion and economic activities. Others include destruction of infrastructure and human

8


-----

rights violations. The defeat of ISIS in Syria has the potential to strengthen linkages
between foreign based terror cells and terror groups in the North East. This has created
additional concerns to the ongoing counterterrorism/ counterinsurgency efforts to rid
Nigeria of terrorists/insurgents. The threat by BHT and ISWAP will require a
comprehensive approach in collaboration with our contiguous neighbours and
international partners.

**ARMED BANDITRY, KIDNAPPING, MILITANCY AND SEPARATIST**
**AGITATIONS**

**Armed Banditry and Kidnapping**
The criminal activities of armed bandits and kidnap gangs are the preeminent threats
confronting us today. Their major activities include kidnapping and cattle rustling which
are on the increase due to the high economic pay-off in terms of derivable financial
benefits. They also thrive on the twin elements of fear and surprise and constitute a grave
threat to personal security. Trend analysis suggests a correlation between armed banditry,
militia groups, kidnapping and cattle rustling, in what appears to be a convergence of
various illegal networks. This has led to loss of lives and property and ultimately
undermines peace with grave implications for human security.

**Militancy and Separatist Agitations**
Militancy in the Niger Delta and separatist agitations in the South East as well as other
places have persisted and become significant security concerns. Separatist agitations
threaten our national cohesion. These agitations have specific regional and national
security implications, including the chance that the mobilization of protesters could
potentially escalate into armed violence. Appropriate strategies need to be articulated to
nip the challenges in the bud.

**PASTORALISTS AND FARMERS CONFLICTS**
Violent conflicts between pastoralists and farmers are widespread with severe
consequences in terms of loss of lives, property and disruption of the normal functioning
of society. These conflicts undermine the fabric of our corporate existence as they
exacerbate the various fault lines with grave implications. At the heart of these conflicts,
are the quest for land, grazing routes, water and other resources. Climate change,
population explosion and growth of new settlements are veritable sources and causal
factors of most of these conflicts. The significant threat posed by pastoralists-farmers
conflict makes it a critical issue that needs to be addressed quickly and comprehensively.

9


-----

**TRANSNATIONAL ORGANISED CRIME**
Transnational organised crime such as illicit financial flow and money-laundering, drug
and human-trafficking, proliferation of Small Arms and Light Weapons (SALWs) as well
as proliferation of Chemical, Biological, Radiological,  Nuclear and Explosive (CBRNE)
weapons have a direct impact on our national security. Illicit financial flows and other
crimes remain a major concern as they are increasingly linked to terrorism. This is
despite the determined efforts of relevant institutions saddled with the responsibility of
protecting the economy and its financial institutions and systems from misuse or abuse.

The proliferation of SALWs is a global phenomenon arising from conflicts across the
globe. According to a survey conducted by the Geneva based Small Arms Survey, it is
estimated that more than 857 million SALWs are currently in circulation aside from
twelve billion rounds of ammunition produced annually. Of these, ten million SALWs are
estimated to be in Africa with one million of these in Nigeria. This is not unconnected
with past and on-going conflicts in West and North African countries such as Liberia,
Sierra Leone, Cote d'Ivoire, Mali and Libya. Proliferation of SALWs aid non-state actors
like BHT and armed bandits, while undermining state monopoly of instruments of
coercion. The threats posed by proliferation of SALWs are of such magnitude that a
security strategy which contemplates the monitoring of their flow and use is required.

The proliferation of CBRNE weapons and their means of delivery, the spreading of
technological skills required for their production and the possibility of their use constitute
a threat to our security. Although the implementation of international agreements and
export control regimes hinder the proliferation of CBRNE and their means of delivery,
the risk of such weapons and materials being acquired by terrorist groups and reaching
states providing support for terrorist groups cannot be overstated. Terrorist groups, such
as ISIS, are believed to have sought to possess CBRNE weapons. BHT's affiliation to
ISIS and their willingness to use any deadly weapon at their disposal increases the
possibility of a CBRNE attack in the future thereby underscoring the need for a counter
strategy.

**PIRACY AND SEA ROBBERY**
Sea robbery in Nigerian territorial waters and piracy in adjoining seas in the Gulf of
Guinea (GoG) constitute a menace to international shipping. These include the hijack of
merchant oil tankers and fishing vessels, the kidnap of mariners as well as increased
piracy along major shipping routes and Sea Lines of Communication (SLOCs). These
incidents have resulted in a negative global assessment of the Nigerian Maritime

10


-----

Environment (NME). Indeed, Nigerian waters and the adjoining GoG have been
designated as a ‘High Risk Area’ and one of the most troubled global waterways.

In response to these challenges, the Nigerian Navy in collaboration with other maritime
security agencies, embarked on heightened maritime operations including the
employment of maritime domain awareness capabilities around identified hotspots. These
efforts have generally reduced the incidence of piracy, but the state of maritime insecurity
still gives cause for concern. The inherent lesson in this trend is that increased availability
and sophistication of maritime domain awareness complemented by credible interdiction
capabilities could reduce the rate of piracy in future.

The milieu of maritime insecurity in the NME points to a couple of critical socioeconomic factor inputs. These include: the high rate of unemployment among the youth
in the Niger Delta; and the absence of robust coastal economic activities along the littoral
states to engage most of the unemployed youth. Maritime insecurity in the NME and the
GoG are fueled significantly by Nigeria’s socio-economic vulnerabilities. Therefore, our
maritime security strategy must encompass a comprehensive multi-sectoral approach that
exploits kinetic and non-kinetic measures as well as public and private resources.

**POROUS BORDERS**
Nigeria's extensive land and maritime borders continue to be a major source of concern
as they are largely porous and inadequately manned. This has aided irregular migrations
and other transnational organised crimes. In the East along the Nigeria/Cameroon border,
there has been an upsurge of refugees from the restive Cameroon Anglophone region
crossing into Taraba, Benue, Cross-River and Akwa Ibom States. Along the same axis,
criminal gangs and pirates  actively operate within the border areas. In the North, cattle
rustlers and bandits operate freely across the international borders contiguous to Zamfara,
Sokoto, Katsina, Adamawa and Taraba States. Additionally, the porous border areas
between Nigeria and Benin Republic in the South West are known for smuggling
vehicles and food commodities which undermines our economy. Tackling illicit cross
border activities and strengthening border security are critical to addressing the threats of
terrorism and transnational organised crime.

**CYBERCRIMES AND TECHNOLOGY CHALLENGES**
Nigeria uses information technology and networked capabilities in the quest for national
development and is thus vulnerable to cyber-attacks. Cyber threats are inherently
asymmetrical with an increasing range of actors engaged in espionage and warfare. The

11


-----

proliferation of such actors both within and outside Nigeria has heightened the threat
profile and demands increased security measures. This will require technical and
intellectual capacity and the protection of systems and structures against all forms of
cyber-attacks.

The four major areas of cyber threats with significant capability to cause considerable
damage to our security and economy include: cybercrime, cyber espionage, cyber conflict
and cyber terrorism. These threats have serious implications for the nation's stability. The
country's readiness in securing its cyberspace requires coordinated efforts from all
stakeholders at various levels.

The potential use of emerging technologies such as Artificial Intelligence, Internet of
Things (IoT), Big Data, Blockchain Technology and Cloud Computing could change the
shape of future cyber threats. As a nation, we must be prepared for the disruptive impact
of these emerging technologies, particularly as regards possible implications for our
socio-economic development. The threat of disruptive technologies and innovation
require a government-led approach in close collaboration with the organised private
sector.

**SOCIO-POLITICAL THREATS**
Socio-political threats to national security are best understood within the context of sociopolitical cohesion, demography, health and educational developments. Political stability
and social cohesion are envisioned as prerequisites for sustainable socio-economic
growth. This explains the constitutional provisions to ensure an indivisible, united and
stable nation. Threats to constitutional order manifest as political intolerance, electoral
malpractices and violence. Deliberate and concerted efforts to grow and strengthen
national institutions have been made but challenges remain. These challenges undermine
our dream of a united and prosperous nation as they breed political instability and
insecurity which require the formulation of a proactive and inclusive solution.

A key aspect of Nigeria’s socio-political profile is her demographic trajectory which
carries both opportunities and risks. Our population is one of the fastest growing in the
world with a current estimated figure of 201 million and the demographics reveal an
estimated 70 million youth between 15 and 34 years or 35 per cent. This very large youth
population is impacted substantially by poverty, inadequate health and education
services. In spite of modest improvements across a number of health indicators, life
expectancy at birth is still 55.2 years for all sexes which gives Nigeria a global ranking of

12


-----

178. Also in the educational sector, about 38 per cent of Nigerians are still illiterate.
Given these conditions, the opportunity for gainful employment is low as indicated by
average youth unemployment rate of 35.83 per cent in 2018. These deficits engender
restiveness and criminality among our impressionable and vulnerable youth.

Governance challenges also manifest in communal and ethno-religious conflicts. These
conflicts revolve around the issue of citizenship rights, land ownership, human and
gender rights and resource control, which are yet to be adequately addressed, hence the
need for a viable strategy to mitigate the challenges.

**FAKE NEWS AND HATE SPEECH**
Recently, Nigeria has witnessed an increase in fake news and hate speech which are
exploited to distort socio-political, cultural and economic relationships. They consist of
deliberate misinformation spread via print and electronic media sowing distrust and
inflaming our fault lines. The increasing incidence of fake news especially as
disseminated through social media has undermined journalistic norms and become a
potent force of misinformation. Fake news spreads quickly due to its mode of
propagation, thus constituting a threat to national security. This is particularly evident in
the on-going counter-terrorism operation in the North East as well as the activities of
hostile non-state actors. Hate speech and fake news promote prejudice and hate which
undermine social cohesion. Thus, it is imperative for Nigeria to mitigate the propagation
of fake news and hate speech.

**ENVIRONMENTAL THREATS**
Our environmental threats stem from prevailing systemic defects in overall
environmental factor management such as population explosion and unplanned human
settlements, periodic environmentally induced human conflicts among which are
pastoralists-farmers conflicts and water resource conflicts as well as environmental
disasters caused by natural and human factors.

The most prominent threat factor is climate change with the associated global warming
which causes high sea levels, ocean surges and coastal floods. Climate change is
associated with environmental degradation. Desertification in the North and both erosion
and floods in the South threaten food security. Desert encroachment is partly responsible
for the loss of grazing reserves and obliteration of grazing routes, which is directly linked
to pastoralists-farmers conflicts. Climate change has also contributed to excessive
flooding across the country causing huge human and economic losses. Natural and man
13


-----

made hazards including natural disasters, pollution and related threats from within and
neighboring countries constitute national security threats. Although Nigeria is not located
within the major seismic zones of the world, over the years, several earth tremors have
occurred across the country with the latest happening in Mpape-Abuja in September
2018. These environmental threats undermine national security and underscore the need
for adequate containment strategies and contingency plans.

**PUBLIC HEALTH CHALLENGES**
The global impact of climate change has altered the dynamics of disease patterns and
incidences across the world with the resurgence of viral hemorrhagic fevers such as
Ebola, Lassa fever and Monkeypox, among others. Nigeria’s prompt and robust response
to the Ebola outbreak of 2014 in West Africa remains a watershed in the management of
public health emergencies in the world. Nigeria, being an attractive destination for
commerce, is therefore not isolated from global pandemics which occur with some
degree of unpredictability.

The global trends of anti-microbial resistance and substance abuse exacerbated by influx
of counterfeit drugs remain a potent threat to Nigeria. This phenomenon is further
reinforced by the activities of fake drug cartels and globalized criminal networks. We will
continue to promote the ideals of International Health Regulations (IHR) while working
with relevant agencies to stem the tide.

**ECONOMIC CHALLENGES**
Our country is faced with a broad spectrum of economic threats ranging from global
economic uncertainties to internal developments. Economic challenges such as energy
deficit, crude oil related crimes, unemployment and poverty and global economic
challenges pose threats to our economic security.

**Energy Deficit**
Energy security is critical to economic growth and prosperity of Nigeria. The nation is
endowed with large oil, gas, hydro, wind and solar energy resources but does not
generate, transmit and distribute enough electricity to sustain rapid development. In spite
of huge investments in the sector, energy deficits continue to undermine the economy and
well-being of the citizens. Given the development of shale oil and electric vehicles by
developed countries, we need to continue to plan for a future without crude oil. Energy
security is affected by our inability to harness the potential of our gas, solar, hydro and
wind resources to produce a well-balanced energy mix. Investments in nuclear,

14


-----

renewable and other innovative technologies could serve as new sources of energy
though emphasis remains on oil and gas and hydro power. We need to emplace
sustainable measures to diversify our sources of energy supply.

**Crude Oil Related Crimes**
Crude oil related crimes such as illegal bunkering and refining, pipeline vandalism, as
well as crude oil theft pose a threat to Nigeria's economy. However, measures put in
place over the last four years have improved safety in the industry and production levels
of our crude oil. Nonetheless, crude oil related crimes persist. Our national security
strategy will therefore focus on ways to curb and eliminate these crimes for improved
economic well-being of our country.

**Unemployment and Poverty**
Unemployment and poverty render the affected population susceptible to crime with
attendant implications for national security. Unemployment confronts the youthful
populace with devastating psychological and economic consequences. According to the
National Bureau of Statistics, unemployment rate for 2018 was 23.1 per cent. However,
efforts have been made through empowerment programmes like the N-Power, Youth
Entrepreneurship Support Programme (YES-P) and the Anchor Borrowers Programme,
amongst others, to address unemployment, but the challenge remains. It is therefore
imperative to consider a comprehensive effort to reduce poverty in order to enable our
country realize the first objective of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) which is
the eradication of unemployment, extreme poverty and hunger.

**Global Economic Challenges**
The Nigerian economy remains vulnerable to internal and external shocks. Due to the
high cost of domestic production, our local industries have been unable to compete
favourably in the globalized economy. External developments also affect our economy.
These include international trade wars such as the US-China trade dispute; geopolitical
realignments such as BREXIT; evolution of extra-territorial financial instruments such as
crypto-currencies; development of new technologies and energy sources; and lastly
global commodity price instability. For instance, crude oil remains our major source of
revenue but is susceptible to the volatility of the international market. The events in
recent times that resulted in global slump in oil price impacted directly on our economy
and country. Therefore, our national economic security strategy needs to factor in these
external economic and trade events that impact low income countries such as Nigeria.

15


-----

**REGIONAL AND GLOBAL SECURITY CHALLENGES**
Nigeria is not immune to regional and global risks and challenges considering her active
participation in the global system. The perpetual competition between nation states in
pursuit of their national interests and objectives creates potential for conflict. Our
external security is based on our ability to defend our territory from invasion, deter
military aggression and project force when absolutely necessary to ensure our
sovereignty and political independence.

The benefits in areas of economic and security cooperation are undermined by the
growing role of criminal non-state actors and rogue elements which undermine regional
security and development. The African Union (AU) has developed and promoted
cooperation and partnership arrangements with some countries such as the US, South
Korea, Turkey, China (Forum on China Africa Cooperation), Japan (Tokyo International
Conference on African Development), India (India-Africa Forum Summit) among others.
Nigeria will align her bilateral and broader multilateral commitments under the auspices
of the AU to drive the pursuit of her national interests.

Nigeria's external threats have been shaped by the interplay of global alliance systems
which demand that we marshal collective responses in conjunction with our allies. The
interests of major powers have continued to evolve, thereby presenting threats and
opportunities for our country. With our expanding ties to many countries and the
opportunity for national development therein, our major concern remains their effects on
Nigeria's economy, sustainability of our developmental efforts and debt service
obligations.

The possibility of direct military confrontation with other countries is low. However,
conflicts and instability within the region have consequences for our security particularly
the possibility of evacuating Nigerians from conflict zones and managing inflows of
refugees. Despite the low risk of a conventional military attack by another state, we must
remain vigilant to the possibility of violation of our sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Attacks on our border communities due to unresolved water, land and other resource
disputes remain a possibility. Other likely threats are arms buildup and foreign military
presence in our sphere of interest, violent manifestation of transnational crime and the
spread of international terrorism.

Some internal threats in Nigeria have external dimensions which must be carefully
identified and addressed in a holistic manner. This is as applicable to BHT as it is to

16


-----

transnational organised crime and other threats. Our major security threats like terrorism
and transnational organised crime can only be tackled effectively in close collaboration
with our neighbours and allies. To achieve this, we need to exploit our bilateral and
multilateral relationships by leveraging our membership of ECOWAS, the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, the Co-Prosperity Alliance Zone (COPAZ) and the Multi National
Joint Task Force (MNJTF).

17


-----

###### CHAPTER 4

**PROTECTING NIGERIAN PEOPLE AND TERRITORY**

Nigeria’s vital national interest is the preservation and protection of her sovereignty and
territorial integrity. This core national interest embodies the primary purpose of all tiers
of government which is to guaranty the security and welfare of the Nigerian people.
Historically, the constitutional responsibility of protecting Nigerian people and territory
has been carried out by the Armed Forces of Nigeria (AFN) and the Nigeria Police Force
(NPF). However, contemporary and emergent security challenges have compelled urgent
re-calibration of the institutional responses to national threats. Based on the dominant
themes in our national security threat analysis, the National Security Strategy (NSS) is
focused broadly on all categories of security threats. These include terrorism and violent
extremism; armed banditry, kidnapping and militancy; cybercrimes; transnational
organised crime; insecurity in other domains; potential threats from Chemical, Biological,
Radiological, Nuclear and Explosive (CBRNE) agents; and national disasters. The
national responses to these threats must be comprehensive and coordinated.

**PROMOTE CRISIS RESPONSE AND RESILIENCE**

The primary responsibility for crisis response and management lies with various tiers of
government until such responsibility is transferred to a higher authority or a Presidential
declaration is made in accordance with Section 305 (1) of the Constitution of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria (CFRN) 1999 (as amended). In the event of a national emergency,
the Federal Government will discharge its responsibilities for crisis response through
statutory organs such as the National Security Council (NSC), National Defence Council
(NDC) and the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) for security and
defence emergencies as well as national disasters.

The NSC oversees the management of national crisis situations through the
instrumentality of security and intelligence agencies statutorily empowered to carry out
designated functions. The overall national crisis and emergency response and
management system is aided by inputs from designated agencies in the form of early
warning, intelligence gathering and analysis, strategic decision-making, early and
effective responses as well as effective leadership and coordination. In the particular
instance of a national defence crisis, the President exercises command and control of the
AFN in accordance with extant provisions of the Constitution. However, in the event of

18


-----

national disasters, NEMA is empowered to provide both strategic and operational
leadership, guidance and coordination in all national disaster relief efforts.

The national crisis response and management system is guided by certain fundamental
crises management principles such as early warning and early response, effective
communication, establishment of focused objectives and unified command and control.
Others are interdisciplinarity, multi-tasking and flexibility of remedial options and
overarching imperative to deliver impactful remedies and reliefs on time.

The objectives of the national crisis response and management system are to coordinate
Ministries, Departments and Agencies in all tiers of government as well as domestic and
international State and Non-State actors. The objectives seek to prevent crises; establish
an effective management structure to respond to a threatened or actual crisis; apply a
multi-sectoral approach to crisis management; and lastly, build national resilience. These
objectives will continue to be promoted through certain thematic approaches.

In recognition of our political structure, we will continue to apply a crisis management
philosophy of collective but differentiated responsibility that recognises the tenets of our
federalism as well as coordinate jurisdiction. This will undergird full scale crisis
management responsibilities for containment, response, stability and recovery. We will
promote continuous, integrated technology-enabled environmental scanning, monitoring,
early detection and analysis, and initiate public advisories, alerts, warnings and
engagements as necessary.

In the event of crisis, we will institutionalise the establishment of case-specific strategic
level crisis management teams in addition to time-bound objective-driven multidisciplinary and inter-agency crisis intervention outfits with unified command, control,
intelligence, communication and coordination structure. To build institutional capacities
and public resilience, we will promote continuous education, orientation, mobilisation as
well as emergency preparedness and drills. Importantly, we will leverage public-private
partnerships for national emergency response and management. Lastly, we will continue
to improve on the legal and regulatory frameworks and platforms for both international
assistance and domestic civic responsibility in crisis response, management and
resourcing.

19


-----

**NATIONAL DEFENCE**
The defence of the people and territory of Nigeria from both external aggression and
internal insurrection is a statutory function of the AFN. Over the years, the AFN has
patriotically discharged this onerous responsibility to underscore the imperative of a
strong military as the bedrock of national defence. However, due to the increasing
frequency of asymmetric threats to national defence, security is no longer the exclusive
preserve of the military. It is therefore instructive, that going forward, all national defence
efforts accommodate mandatory mobilisation and application of all instruments of
national power, in a comprehensive and coordinated whole-of-nation approach.

Our shift in approach to national defence requires concomitant consolidation of the
attitudes, capacities, concepts of operation as well as conduct and application of the AFN
to national defence in diverse ways. Our strategic response rests on three layers of
defence crisis management namely constructive engagement, application of soft power
and combat engagements. In other words, the first option in the resolution of fledgling
national defence threats, will be to adopt non-kinetic measures. As a rule, we will explore
the opportunities of defence diplomacy, as expedient, to leverage the comparative
resource endowments of friendly nations, allies and international partners. When military
engagements become inevitable, we will apply domestic and international legal
frameworks to promote national defence. We will also mobilise domestic political,
economic and social institutions through statutory Civil-Military Relations structures.

The military will be deployed in accordance with its defined roles and responsibilities in
the Constitution. In cases of humanitarian and internal security operations, the AFN will
provide Military Aid to Civil Authority (MACA) and Military Aid to Civil Power
(MACP), while deferring to the supremacy of civil authority and the primacy of the
statutory agencies such as the Nigeria Police Force in such operations.

All military efforts will be geared to detect, deter, degrade or decisively defeat threats to
national defence and provide stability within the shortest possible time. The AFN may
also be used for power projection abroad in the national interest, if and when such
situations arise. In all cases, the envisioned Military Strategy, Rules of Engagement
(RoE) and Concept of Operations (CONOPS) will, without any exception, conform with
the established principles of combined, inter-agency, joint, special and domain specific
operations as required and applicable.

20


-----

To effectively mobilise intelligence for operations, we will pursue the aspirations for
consolidated technology-aided fusion systems. Also, intelligence sharing capacities will
be expanded through bilateral and multilateral partnerships and engagements. In all
operations, we will promote niche information operations targeted at significant
audiences as well as winning the hearts and minds of the people. In the long term, we will
develop a comprehensive National Information Security System to effectively protect
electronic and non-electronic information.

The AFN is being transformed and modernised to improve its capabilities as a credible
defence force. The improvements in its defence capabilities will deliberately exploit the
full range of a nation-wide Military Industrial Complex (MIC), national productive
capacities and allied capacities of friendly nations. In view of insecurity along our
international borders and outlying ungoverned spaces, the AFN will deploy to ensure
deterrence and protection along the nation’s borders and in other identified ungoverned
spaces in collaboration with other statutory agencies.

We will promote the development of the MIC as a deliberate national economic security
option. To promote self-reliance and credible national defence capability, funding of the
AFN and its transformation will be treated as national capital investments. In terms of
performance assessment and national resource accountability, the AFN will be subjected
to a two-yearly defence review and Presidential inspections of its overall capabilities.

**INTERNAL SECURITY**
The goal of Internal Security is to create a safe and secure environment for the pursuit of
peace, personal well-being, prosperity and development. Internal security is a complex
multi-sectorial national endeavour which calls for concerted, proportionate, open, flexible
and effective application of political, economic, social, informational, diplomatic,
intelligence, law enforcement and military responses where they become inevitable. In
specific terms, internal security will be promoted by an enabling political environment
hinged on good governance, rule of law, human rights and both credible and peaceful
political transitions. Others are enabling social security environment; security
consciousness; credible alternative dispute resolution mechanisms; viable technology
enabled intelligence infrastructure; law enforcement, effective criminal justice system as
well as a viable and sustainable system of funding and resourcing. To improve our
overall resilience for Internal Security, we will strengthen security in specific
environmental domains such as territorial, border, maritime, aviation, and National
Critical Infrastructure security.

21


-----

Internal Security is the responsibility of all Nigerians, but it is the statutory duty of a
large number of security and intelligence agencies in Nigeria. However, the Joint
Intelligence Board (JIB) and Intelligence Community Committee (ICC) working in
concert with the National Crisis Management Centre (NCMC) will continue to coordinate
intelligence and information analysis required for strategic decision making by the
National Security Council.

The roles of law enforcement and the criminal justice system are paramount in Internal
Security. These roles are carried out by all security agencies but principally by three
critical institutions namely, the Nigeria Police Force (NPF), the judiciary and the
Nigerian Prisons Service (NPS). Additionally, without prejudice to the work of the JIB
and ICC, the State Security Services (SSS) is the foremost intelligence agency in Internal
Security matters.

Recognising the statutory roles of the NPF, the judiciary and the NPS in Internal
Security, there is the need to promote capacity building in these institutions. The NPF in
particular, is responsible for crime detection, prevention and general constabulary
functions. Statutorily, it has collaborative leadership role in Internal Security operations
and will continue to do so. However, it will transfer authority and effect transitions to
other agencies as and when necessary. To meet the challenges posed by serious crimes to
Internal Security, we will improve the intelligence-gathering, logistical, technological,
forensic and rapid response capabilities of the NPF. In specific terms, the NPF will be
upscaled in five key areas namely recruitment, training, platform and equipment
modernisation, data collection, management and retrieval as well as technology-driven
command, control, communication and intelligence networks to meet modern standards.

Criminal intelligence will be based on cooperation between the public and the Police to
balance enforcement with preventive and proactive measures as a departure from reactive
responses to insecurity. We will also enhance the capacity of the Central Criminal
Registry (CCR) for large scale identity capture to promote data-driven approaches to
preventing and investigating crimes. To promote this intelligence-driven approach, the
NPF will deepen its commitment to community policing by implementing operational
and organisational strategies that foster new ways of cooperation between residents of
communities and the Police. Already, the Police at all levels are mandated to engage in
active partnerships with the armed forces, security agencies, citizens, non-governmental
organisations, government agencies, traditional institutions, faith-based organisations,
educational institutions and businesses to collaboratively solve problems of crime, reduce

22


-----

the fear of crime, maintain public safety and apply proactive measures that address antisocial behavioural patterns before they evolve into more serious forms of criminality. We
will continue to strengthen these partnerships.

Additionally, we will promote comprehensive and systematic capacity building of the
Judiciary to fast-track the trial processes in line with the aspirations of the Administration
of Criminal Justice Act (ACJA). Furthermore, we will promote ongoing reforms in the
NPS to enable it effectively discharge its important roles in the criminal justice system. In
particular, we will promote: infrastructure expansion; facility improvement; provision of
equipment such as customised vehicles; establishment of a unified command, control,
communications and intelligence network linked to a viable prison data-basemanagement system; as well as the training and retraining of personnel. These aspirations
are pursuant to the goals of decongesting and modernising the Nigerian prisons and
reaffirming its reformative function in the criminal justice system to reduce recidivism.

On the whole, the state of internal security in Nigeria will be measured by improved
public perception of security, public confidence and trust in the security agencies
particularly the Nigeria Police Force, drastic reduction in the incidence of crime and all
forms of insecurity.

**COMBATING TERRORISM AND COUNTERING VIOLENT EXTREMISM**
Since 2009, terrorism has constituted a major national security challenge in Nigeria. In
responding to the threat posed by terrorism, Nigeria enacted the Terrorism Prevention
Act 2013, developed the National Counter Terrorism Strategy 2016 (NACTEST) and
established the Counter Terrorism Centre to coordinate our national counter terrorism
efforts. In furtherance of our national security objectives, we will sustain a Whole-ofGovernment approach through strong inter-agency platforms and mechanisms at strategic
and operational levels to ensure the realization of counter terrorism mandates. Under
these special platforms, we will conduct timely threat analyses and share information at
home and with our partners. We will also promote international cooperation and
collaboration in the fight against terrorism. This is in view of the international affiliations
of terrorist groups in Nigeria to global terrorist networks.

In more specific terms, we will strengthen national finance systems in collaboration with
international finance systems to prevent and disrupt terrorist financing. We will also
deploy strategic communication in aid of our security operatives to counter terrorism
efforts and narratives. We will partner with domestic and international information

23


-----

technology companies to counter violent extremism narratives online. In recognition of
the critical role of criminal justice in counter terrorism, we will strengthen our criminal
justice system including investigation, evidence collection and prosecution to bring
terrorists to justice. We will upgrade border, maritime, aviation and cybersecurity
measures.

In view of the nexus between violent extremism and terrorism, Nigeria adopted a Policy
Framework and National Action Plan for Preventing and Countering Violent Extremism
in 2017. The Framework emphasizes human security and people-centred approaches in
dealing with insecurity. We will therefore, strengthen our capacity to implement the
Framework against violent extremism. Intergovernmental, inter-agency and governmentcivil society platforms will be mobilised to implement ‘Whole-of-Society’ approaches in
dealing with violent extremism. A key tool will be to strengthen knowledge through
research on violent extremist phenomena and determine how best to address it. We will
build the capacity of Ministries, Departments and Agencies to execute their mandates.

In recent years, a number of notable initiatives have been employed in the fight against
terrorism with positive results. We have, for instance, initiated programmes to encourage
defections from terrorist groups as well as promoted the rehabilitation and reintegration
of repentant terrorists. We will continue to strengthen these initiatives in addition to
reinvigorating strategic communication to prevent and counter violent extremism through
the media. In partnership with civil society, we will curb subversive religious activities as
well as hate speech and ethno-religious extremism in the mainstream media, social media
and cyberspace. Finally, we will continue to produce Annual Reports on Combating
Terrorism and Countering Violent Extremism for Nigeria in furtherance of national and
international accountability in counter terrorism.

**PREVENTING AND COMBATING KIDNAPPING, ARMED BANDITRY AND**
**MILITIA ACTIVITIES**
Kidnapping, armed banditry and militia activities have become very serious threats to
Nigeria’s national security. Collectively, they constitute about 40 per cent of incidences
of national insecurity in Nigeria. To prevent the incidence of kidnapping, armed banditry
and militia activities, we will proactively activate systems for early warning and early
responses established in the national crisis response mechanisms. We will address
disputes and conflicts through regular dialogues by exploiting traditional, faith-based and
state structures of peace building and alternate dispute resolution before they trigger crisis
and violence. Communal assets for human intelligence gathering and proactive conflict

24


-----

interventions have been largely underutilized. These will be integrated into the crime
response infrastructure.

In addition to these critical measures, we will sustain special inter-agency security outfits
to conduct special operations in conjunction with state and local authorities. The outfits
will be enabled by the provision of technology driven intelligence and communication
assets. To improve the overall effectiveness and efficiency of intervention measures, we
will develop doctrines for inter-agency coordination and collaboration. These measures
will be taken in addition to the up-scaling of the NPF through the innovative
transformation of its policing methodologies and equipment and the expeditious
dispensation of criminal justice.

**PROMOTE CYBERSECURITY DEVELOPMENT**
Nigeria developed the National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy (NCPS) 2015 in
response to increasing cybersecurity threats. The document outlines how we will ensure
our preparedness for threats in cyberspace. It also addresses the willingness to build
comprehensive capability to protect Critical National Information Infrastructure (CNII)
and mitigate cyber risks. The NCPS gained traction with the subsequent promulgation of
the Cybercrimes (Prohibition, Prevention, etc.) Act (CPPA) in the same year. The Act
provides the comprehensive legal framework for cybersecurity as well as the prohibition
and punishment for cybercrimes in Nigeria. To meet the requirements for cybersecurity,
Section 41 (b) of the Act provides for the formulation and effective implementation of the
NCPS.

Protecting CNII and cyberspace from cybercriminals, including terrorists, is a shared
responsibility that requires active collaboration between government and all stakeholders.
In furtherance of this Strategy, the national objectives will be to monitor and enforce the
implementation of the legislative frameworks regulating cybersecurity in Nigeria in line
with international standards and best practices. Government will also continue to promote
security and build trust for the use of the Internet, e-government and e-commerce services
to enhance service delivery and facilitate economic development through ICT
innovations and advancement.

In order to enhance national defence through cybersecurity, government will develop a
national strategic framework dedicated to cyber defence that recognises various threat
levels. Furthermore, we will develop a national framework for cybersecurity manpower
development anchored on public-private partnership towards building local capacity to

25


-----

fill the gap in manpower requirements for cybersecurity in Nigeria. This will include
comprehensive capacity building programmes for military and law enforcement
personnel, prosecutors and judges to investigate and prosecute cybercrimes. Additionally,
we will establish academic centres of excellence with defined objectives to carry out
coordinated research and development activities in cybersecurity issues. Considering that
cybercrimes can occur across international jurisdictions, government will exploit both
local and global collaborative mechanisms to deter and mitigate the use of cyberspace for
activities detrimental to national security. We will also create awareness and sensitization
among our populace to foster a culture of cybersecurity vigilance against financial scams
and other related cybercrimes.

**PROMOTE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT IN SPACE TECHNOLOGY**
Space holds a number of exciting opportunities and many nations around the world have
integrated programmes to exploit space for the advancement of military and peaceful
purposes in furtherance of their national security and development. Nigeria is committed
to exploiting the opportunities offered by space for peaceful purposes. In furtherance of
this national objective, Nigeria established the National Space Research and
Development Agency (NASRDA) in 2001 and launched a number of satellites into space
for the purposes of disaster monitoring, information and communications as well as
satellite meteorology.

In 2016, we established the Defence Space Administration (DSA) to support the AFN
with relevant space products necessary for national defence. We intend to develop
significant capacities to exploit the space-based potential for improvements in overall
national security preparedness and responses.

Consequently, the NSS envisions the following:

   - Generation of a critical mass of academic interest in the use of space through
funding in designated Nigerian universities and other initiatives.

   - Development of human capital for space science, drawing on the intellectual
capital of strategic partners and effective local institutional collaboration.

   - Promotion of collaboration between NASRDA and DSA for joint
development of indigenous space technologies.

   - Promotion of deliberate programmes to develop advanced communications
and surveillance capabilities and other scientific uses of space technology and
knowhow.

   - Development of proprietary space infrastructure.

26


-----

   - Establishment of geo-spatial laboratories across the country for data
processing and provision of data to support strategic planning.

**COMBATING TRANSNATIONAL ORGANISED CRIME**
Transnational Organised Crime(TOC) include proliferation of Small Arms and Light
Weapons (SALWs), smuggling, piracy and sea robbery, drug and human trafficking as
well as illegal oil bunkering. Some key factors fueling TOC are armed conflicts in
neighbouring countries, weak border security management systems, spread of extremist
religious ideologies and weak legal and policy frameworks for prosecution and
conviction of perpetrators of TOC.

Mindful of the impact and implications of TOC, Nigeria has enacted the Advanced Fee
Fraud Act 2006, the Miscellaneous Offences Act 2004 and the Cybercrimes Act 2015
amongst others, to combat the phenomenon. These laws have been complemented by the
establishment of relevant agencies such as the National Drug Law Enforcement Agency
(NDLEA), Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC), Nigerian Financial
Intelligence Unit (NFIU), National Agency for the Prohibition of Trafficking in Persons
(NAPTIP) and the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) Surveillance Unit. Due to the
international interconnectedness and complexity of TOC, a number of international
organisations such as the INTERPOL, World Bank, International Monetary Fund and the
African Union Mechanism for Police Cooperation (AFRIPOL) are now actively involved
in combating the menace of TOC.

We will actively promote a number of specific measures to combat TOC. The Ministry of
Justice (MOJ) will continue to coordinate the implementation of legislation to combat
TOC and strengthen the relevant legal frameworks and judicial system. We will also
develop Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for collaboration and cooperation with
local and international agencies responsible for various forms of TOC.

In recognition of the nature and impact of TOC, we will promote shared access to
domestic and external intelligence and the development of synergies among relevant
agencies. This will include access to common national criminal databases as well as the
development of common procedures and protocols for the disposal of the proceeds of
TOC.

27


-----

**CRITICAL NATIONAL ASSETS AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY**
The key objectives of identifying, classifying and prioritizing Critical National Assets
and Infrastructure (CNAI) are to determine appropriate levels of protection required for
each CNAI or groups of CNAI; enhance the resilience of CNAI to hazards; and minimise
the effect of attacks or disasters on CNAI. The lead agency statutorily responsible for
protecting all CNAI is the Nigerian Security and Civil Defence Corps (NSCDC). The
critical nature of these assets and infrastructure underscore the need to conduct periodic
reviews, audits and risk assessments to ensure their protection and resilience. To this end,
we will develop a CNAI Protection Response Plan that designates roles and
responsibilities for all stakeholders such as the Nigeria Police Force, Federal Fire Service
as well as other security and intelligence agencies, MDAs and the general public. This
will involve the design and development of institutional capacity, systemic resilience,
physical protection and contingency plans for CNAIs by all MDAs.
Allied to these measures, will be the development of a Geographical Information System
(GIS)-based decision support tool that networks all stakeholders with contingencies and
emergency responses to CNAI protection. It will also involve the development and
activation of response protocols at the National Crisis Management Centre for national
security breaches that imperil CNAI. Finally, we will conduct periodic inspection and
certification of security preparedness of CNAI.

Institutional arrangements shall be put in place to coordinate the activities of the Federal
Government with those of States and local governments. The NCMC, established in
ONSA will coordinate CNAI protection, policy development and ensure implementation
and liaison across all levels of government and industry. State and local governments are
to set up corresponding structures to liaise with the NCMC at the national level to
coordinate activities and request for assistance where necessary. A robust response and
coordination system will be put in place between NCMC and state and local government
structures.

**MARITIME SECURITY**
Maritime security requires measures that are potent and supported by a strong balanced
naval fleet as well as an integral shore based maritime air power. This needs to be fully
supported by an effective Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) Infrastructure.
Consequently, the Nigerian Navy has responded to challenges in the maritime domain by
strengthening its strategic and operational capabilities.

28


-----

Maritime security requires strong inter-agency collaboration especially with other
maritime security stakeholders such as the Nigeria Maritime Administration and Safety
Agency (NIMASA), SSS, Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) and the
Nigeria Police Force. Indeed, the need for sustained collaboration between naval
operations and commercial operations to attain effective naval power in Nigeria is very
important. This would provide actionable intelligence critical to tracing illicit finances
derived from maritime crimes. We will strengthen the legal and policy frameworks of the
maritime security environment to secure prosecutions and convictions that are both
punitive and deterrent in nature.

At the regional level, the Nigerian Navy has worked with allies to achieve necessary
synergy to curb maritime crimes. Collaboration with the African Partnership Station
(APS) under the auspices of the United States of America and Western allies has
provided several maritime security engagements through sea exercises. Efforts towards
securing the maritime domain have also been advanced through the GoG Commission
and the Yaoundé Declaration. However, the ECOWAS Integrated Maritime Strategy
(EIMS) will be strengthened, through stronger collaborations within the Navies in the
West African Region including issues relating to intelligence sharing.

The GoG has witnessed a rapid and extensive development of its security architecture
and collaboration over the last 6 years. Accordingly, ECOWAS, Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) and GoG Commission have developed a robust
framework that has broken the region into five maritime zones. Collaboration already
exists between zones but needs to be complemented by regular combined sea patrols and
exercises, while allowing the principle of hot pursuit across international maritime
boundaries. There is also need for regular advocacy for the development of the other
maritime security zones. Our maritime security objectives in specific terms will also be
further enhanced through the following measures:

  - Implementation of the Harmonised Standard Operating Procedures (HSOP) for
the Arrest, Detention and Prosecution of Vessels and Persons in Nigeria’s
Maritime Environment.

  - Effective administration and safety of Nigeria’s maritime environment in
compliance with international conventions and protocols.

  - Provision of an enabling environment to overcome maritime ‘sea blindness’ and
promotion of our ‘blue economy’ and projecting the nation as the regional
maritime hub.

29


-----

  - Integration of all maritime intelligence assets for maritime surveillance, domain
awareness, enforcement as well as Search and Rescue.

  - Expansion of the maritime security infrastructure as well as development of
human and institutional capacities.

  - Implementation of the provisions of the International Ship and Port Facility
Security Code, especially with respect to Flag and Port State control functions.

**AIRSPACE AND AVIATION SECURITY**
Efforts to secure the Nigerian airspace will be led by the Nigerian Air Force (NAF) in
collaboration with other relevant agencies. Considering the vulnerability of the airspace,
the NAF will emplace preventive and protective measures to guard against airspace
violations through enforcement of international and national air laws. In addition, the
NAF will deploy its resources to ensure the integrity of Nigerian airspace is maintained at
all times. This will include conduct of aerial surveys and delineation of security zones
and liaison with appropriate agencies towards the completion of the Total Radar
Coverage of Nigeria (TRACON) project to ensure effective monitoring and airspace
security.

An evolving phenomenon in airspace security is the preponderance of drones which
constitute safety challenges such as air misses and mid-air collisions with manned aircraft
and security challenges such as air space violation, penetration of prohibited airspaces,
threat to VIP security, terrorism and espionage. Others are law enforcement challenges
such as drug trafficking and proliferation, which are all inimical to national security. To
mitigate the threat posed by drones, the NCAA, NAF and NAMA will continue to work
in synergy with the Office of the National Security Adviser and other relevant agencies,
to closely monitor, control and set safety and security standards to regulate Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAV) operations within the country’s airspace and aviation industry.

The primary stakeholders principally concerned with safety and security in the aviation
sector include the Nigerian Civil Aviation Authority (NCAA), Nigerian Airspace
Management Agency (NAMA), the Federal Airports Authority of Nigeria (FAAN) and
the NAF. Others are the Nigeria Immigration Service (NIS), the National Agency for
Food and Drug Administration and Control (NAFDAC), National Drug Law
Enforcement Agency (NDLEA), Nigeria Police Force (NPF), Nigeria Customs Service
(NCS), Nigeria Meteorological (NIMET) Agency and the SSS.

30


-----

The role of these agencies will be coordinated and enhanced in line with extant
legislation and policy on Nigerian Aviation Security. They will also continue to comply
with International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) standards and recommended
practices to guarantee the safety of our air space, its users and the security of airport
facilities. To this end, government will ensure the continuous provision of modern and
up-to-date equipment as well as the promotion of effective training and professionalism
of various agencies handling different aspects of aviation security. Additionally, we will
develop Standard Operation Procedures to streamline the roles and responsibilities of the
various agencies in order to optimize their performance and enhance the cohesion of their
personnel. Furthermore, we will ensure the development of common safety protocols and
resilience to protect critical aviation information infrastructure against cyber-attacks to
enhance aviation security.

**LAND TRANSPORTATION SECURITY**
Land transportation is a vital aspect of the socio-economic well-being of Nigeria. It is a
major facilitator of growth and development and promotes manufacturing, food security,
industrial development, tourism, education, health and socio-economic development.
Based on this, the transportation sector is accorded high priority in Nigeria and its
effective functioning is considered a major enabler of national security. The land
transportation system covers about 204,000km of roads and accounts for over 80 per cent
of the national transportation needs. On the other hand, rail transportation covers all rail
lines, railway equipment and infrastructure constructed or operated by the Nigerian
Railway Corporation (NRC) for the conveyance of passengers, animals, farm produce,
freight and merchandise as well as for the rendering of services.

As road and rail transportation systems expand, there are concerns about the safety and
security of commuters and merchandise. In recent times, the spate of armed robbery,
kidnapping and other vices on Nigerian roads have informed the urgent need to
implement measures to address insecurity in this sector. Although rail transportation
currently offers an alternative to the insecurity on the road, it is equally vulnerable to
some extent. Therefore, the promotion of security measures for rail and land
transportation becomes imperative. We will review and expand all extant legal and policy
frameworks guiding both rail and land transportation to adequately capture safety and
security of the transportation system. Government will ensure that all stakeholders
involved in land and rail transportation are coordinated to enhance safety and security of
the transportation systems.

31


-----

**SECURING UNGOVERNED SPACES**
Ungoverned spaces especially around our international boundaries, forests and game
reserves provide opportunities for criminal networks to fester and generally promote
crime. They constitute a critical fragility in Nigeria’s national security and are antithetical
to the nation’s security system. In order to dominate and protect these ungoverned spaces
along our international boundaries, we will ensure effective presence of governance in
such areas. In particular, we will ensure the state monopoly of force in border and frontier
communities by establishing more military units to provide credible presence to support
border security operations by other statutory agencies. The Nigeria Police Force will be
enabled to strengthen their presence at border communities in conjunction with other
statutory security agencies to consolidate law and order. We will ensure that forests and
national game reserves are closely monitored by forest guards to prevent them from
becoming safe havens for criminal gangs. In terms of development we will ensure and
facilitate basic infrastructural penetration by both public institutions and corporate
organisations. We will also influence the development of licit and viable local economies
by facilitating Small and Medium-scale Enterprises (SME); and lastly, promote actions to
influence favourable local demographics.

**CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL, RADIOLOGICAL, NUCLEAR AND EXPLOSIVE**
**SECURITY**
The proliferation of Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear and Explosive
(CBRNE) weapons and means of delivery, constitute threats to international peace and
security. The potentials for non-state actors to carry out criminal or intentional
unauthorized acts involving or directed at CBRNE material or their associated facilities
and activities is also an ongoing global concern. There are known incidents of the use of
explosive precursors such as ammonium nitrate, by Boko Haram to make improvised
explosives devices (IED) in Nigeria, as well as incidents of loss of radioactive materials
by oil prospecting companies in the Niger Delta.

Accidental dispersal of materials with CBRNE components can compromise public
safety and security. Large quantities of diverse CBRNE related material exist and are
used in various sectors such as health, petroleum, industry, agriculture, security, energy,
education and research as well as other emerging opportunities intended to improve lives
and property. Ensuring the safe, secure and authorized usage, storage, transport, and other
related activities involving CBRNE material is a matter of national security that require
the building of strong institutions with capacity to regulate and implement best practices.

32


-----

The overall objective of the strategy is to deter, detect, prevent and respond to CBRNE
incidents. Mitigating the risks associated with CBRNE and related activities require a
coordinated and integrated global approach. To improve our internal resilience and
preparedness for CBRNE threats and challenges, we will:

  - Build capacity for criminal-justice and law enforcement personnel to
implement relevant legal frameworks.

  - Improve physical protection measures for facilities with CBRNE and related
material.

  - Develop national policies and strategies on CBRNE detection and
implementation.

  - Carry out national risk and threat assessment for CBRNE material and
facilities.

  - Provide strong national coordination using inter-agency/inter-ministerial
committees to ensure cooperation and collaboration.

  - Improve detection capacity and equipment distribution including provision of
personal protection kits.

  - Ensure adequate implementation of strict measures on storage, transport,
import and export of CBRNE material.

  - Improve response systems and measures for CBRNE emergencies including
the establishment of early warning systems.

Nigeria is a signatory to a number of international instruments on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and the peaceful uses of CBRNE material and related
activities. We will pursue these obligations and commitments to ensure international
peace and security. We will also cooperate and collaborate on capacity building for
criminal-justice and law enforcement agencies.

**STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION**
We will integrate Strategic Communication in all priority areas in order to achieve our
national security objectives. These include public relations, public diplomacy,
information operations and psychological operations in advancing our national values,
interests, and in dealing with social, political, economic and security threats. Therefore,
we will ensure that an audit of all our communication assets is conducted and our
strategic communication capabilities upgraded. Indeed, Strategic Communication as a
cross-cutting function will be mainstreamed to implement the NACTEST, Cybersecurity
Policy and Strategy, National Defence Policy, Policy Framework and National Action

33


-----

Plan for Preventing and Countering Violent Extremism, and other current or future
government policies, programmes, strategies and economic plans.

Violent non-state armed groups have continued to rely on media and communication
platforms to target our national values and people. We will therefore, seek to dismantle
illegal communication platforms through appropriate laws and partnerships. In all our
communications, we will emphasize our core national values and the promotion of the
national interests in diverse ways.

In particular, the work of the Strategic Communication Inter-Agency Policy Committee
(SCIPC) will be strengthened to meet our national security objectives. Furthermore, the
SCIPC will continuously:

  - Identify, assess and strengthen government communication assets and ensure
mobilisation of such assets in support of the national security interests.

  - Strengthen the capacity of government communication staff to effectively align
their tasks to national strategic goals and objectives through training and
capacity building.

  - Develop and share content across MDAs that amplify positive narrative while
delegitimizing negative themes, messages and narratives.

  - Assist in utilizing the social media for positive ends while countering negative
voices online.

  - Identify opportunities for government to partner with civil society, private
sector, research and academic institutions, media, international entities and
religious and cultural groups in the national security interest.

  - Promote security consciousness and education.

  - Promote the Annual Reporting on mainstreaming strategic communication
capabilities in Ministries, Departments and Agencies.

34


-----

###### CHAPTER 5

**PROMOTE NIGERIA’S PROSPERITY AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT**

Our agenda for prosperity and sustainable development recognizes the need to harness
economic opportunities arising from our human and natural resource endowments,
promote Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) and invest in human development
especially education and healthcare in furtherance of national security. We are also
committed to advancing environmental sustainability as well as energy, food and labour
security.

**ECONOMIC SECURITY AND OPPORTUNITIES**
Our overall national security agenda, including sustainable development, prosperity and
external influence is dependent on a viable and prosperous economy. We will integrate
our economic potential and opportunities with other components of national security for
the prosperity of our people.

We aspire to have a rapidly growing economy with diversified sources of growth,
increased opportunities for our people, and a socially inclusive economy that reduces
poverty and creates jobs for the millions of young people entering the labour market
annually. The development and protection of critical infrastructure inclusive of
transportation and reliable power supply are also urgent imperatives. We will uphold the
principle of free enterprise; and create equitable business environment to promote an
efficient, dynamic and self-reliant economy.

We are currently diversifying our economy as captured in our Vision 20-2020 which is
gradually winding down. In driving this vision in the present dispensation, an Economic
Recovery and Growth Plan (ERGP) has been developed for this purpose. The ERGP
focuses on restoring growth, investing in our people and building a globally competitive
economy. In the coming years, we will review the Vision and re-evaluate the ERGP to
accommodate emerging domestic and global economic trends and consolidate on
achieved gains to advance our economic goals, aspirations and prosperity for our people.

We acknowledge the need to invest more in our people to reduce poverty. To this end,
our approach will focus on mainstreaming the needs of the poor in programme planning
and execution in poverty reduction measures through the expansion of the Social
Investment Programmes (SIP) and other rural development initiatives. We will continue

35


-----

to create supportive initiatives to encourage local production in all sectors of the
economy including providing easy access to financing Micro, Small, and Medium Scale
Enterprises (MSME) in order to build entrepreneurial capacity and create employment
opportunities for our people.

To promote economic growth and prosperity, we will seek to maximize our trade
relations, partnerships and opportunities based on mutually beneficial economic terms
including exports and Foreign Direct Investments, by creating a favourable business
environment. We have been improving our ranking in the World Bank’s Ease of Doing
Business Index and this will be sustained. Our economic security measures must leverage
diplomacy, strategic communication and other elements of national power to achieve the
desired end state of economic prosperity for our people.

All relevant Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) or institutions established for
national economic management will collaborate to ensure effective and efficient
implementation of the economic objective of this Strategy. The National Economic
Council (NEC) will continue to advise the President on economic affairs particularly in
the coordination of economic planning and programmes in Nigeria. Similarly, the states
are encouraged to establish their own economic and development councils. The
attainment of our economic security will be measured by our ability to eliminate, mitigate
and overcome unfavourable changes in the economic environment, diversify our
economy, record improvements in energy production, meet critical economic growth
indicators and make progress on the Human Development Index (HDI).

**ENERGY SECURITY**
Promoting energy security is fundamental to our economic growth and development.
Nigeria’s future economic growth will depend on availability of energy from sources that
are affordable, accessible and environmentally sustainable. Nigeria aspires to attain a
well-rounded energy mix which combines renewable energy with non-renewable fossil
fuels. To this end, we will develop our capabilities and infrastructure to maximize the
efficiency of our hydro power stations and establish more power plants driven by our
natural gas resources, as well as harness wind and abundant solar potential for power
generation.

We will sustain the development of the upstream and downstream sectors of the
petroleum industry. As a crude oil exporting nation, we will put in place systems to
optimise our local refineries and develop modular refining capacities. We are committed

36


-----

to strengthening compliance with the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiatives (EITI),
in order to ensure prudence, transparency, accountability, sustainability and serve as a
catalyst for growth and development in the oil and gas sector. We will make deliberate
efforts to enhance our energy security through investments in new energy technologies.

To expand our energy stock, we will focus on our renewable energy potential. Given
Nigeria’s solar potential, solar terminal applications for which technologies already exist
will be prioritised in order to advance rural electrification required for economic activities
that will stem rural-urban migration. Investments in bio-mass technology through wasteto-wealth programmes will also be intensified. We will establish renewable energy
business incubators at selected research institutions that will develop energy technologies
with attendant benefits. Additionally, we will adopt financing models including the
involvement of banks and NGOs that would contribute to diversifying the energy sector,
stimulating renewable energy development and providing affordable energy for our
people. We will fast track the nation’s development by intensifying the participation of
the private sector in energy security planning.

**PRIORITIZE RESEARCH IN SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION**
The global economic landscape is experiencing rapid changes in Science, Technology
and Innovation (STI) which drives globalisation, thus creating considerable new
opportunities and challenges. This is exemplified in breakthroughs in biotechnology,
space research, energy development, and Information and Communication Technologies
(ICT) among others. It is therefore obvious that given our human and natural
endowments, we need to conduct aggressive research into STI and integrate the research
findings into our national socio-economic development in order to successfully transform
the economy.

To effectively foster research in STI, we will strengthen structures for coordination,
promotion and management of interactions within the relevant MDAs. We will forge
synergies among various research institutions to proffer solutions to common problems.
In doing this, we will support creation and maintenance of an up-to-date, reliable and
accessible database of our STI resources for sound economic planning and policy
making. The success of the economic transformation blueprint will require the institution
of STI culture at all levels from small businesses to all tiers of government.

We will prioritize the application of STI for the growth of Small and Medium Scale
Enterprises, agricultural, health, oil and gas, mines, space research, power generation and

37


-----

poverty reduction. We will establish and strengthen organisations and structures to
undergird a modern national innovation system. We will promote the creation of
innovative enterprises utilising our indigenous knowledge and technology to produce
globally competitive goods and services. We will create and sustain reliable mechanisms
for adequate funding of STI activities, while strengthening strategic bilateral and
multilateral cooperation across all sectors of the economy.

**FOOD SECURITY**
Ensuring sustainable access to affordable and nutritious food constitutes a major pillar of
our food security strategy. We recognize our farmers as the bedrock of this strategy,
hence we will prioritise a range of measures to enhance their productivity. We have one
of the most conducive environments for food production. With the drastic reduction in
food importation, we will continue to develop our agricultural potentials to attain selfsufficiency in food production as well as exportation. We will also endeavour to
overcome further challenges such as climate change, land conflict, land degradation,
rapid urbanization and insurgency.

We will consolidate investment in agricultural mechanization and irrigation infrastructure
to mitigate the risk and uncertainty occasioned by seasonal rainfall. We will develop
value chains of major agricultural commodities for which Nigeria has comparative
advantage; improving and sustaining investment in agriculture through public private
partnerships that will make agricultural inputs more affordable and accessible. We will
also initiate investment and risk-sharing frameworks to facilitate the flow of private
equity and debt capital from financial institutions and investors in agriculture. In tandem
with these measures, we will entrench policies that protect local farmers from unhealthy
external competition.

We will expand our network of storage facilities for agricultural produce and intensify
the delivery of extension services to farmers. We will apply modern techniques to
improve beef and dairy production and consolidate our strategic food reserves to ensure
that the nation is prepared for major emergencies and shortages. Our food security
strategy also requires support for initiatives that protect long-term leaseholds on farmland
and the institution of clear property rights as well as promote national sufficiency in
strategic commodities and increase access to markets through massive rehabilitation and
construction of rural infrastructure.

38


-----

**LABOUR SECURITY**
The main thrust of the labour security strategy is to create jobs for Nigerians, enhance
productivity and ensure dignity of labour. We will concentrate on the formal and informal
sectors of our economy to improve growth and investment, enhance efficiency and
promote industrial peace and harmony. We will continue to ensure that the minimum
wage is reviewed regularly in line with economic realities of the time. We will
discourage payments through intermediaries allowing the worker to receive full
entitlements and strengthen policies and institutions to enable the average Nigerian attain
and maintain a decent standard of living.

To unlock the largely untapped potential of our informal sector, we will ensure that its
operators and entrepreneurs are captured in national labour data sets. We will also create
frameworks for quality assurance and standardization of skills and services in the sector
to raise our competitiveness in a globalized economy. We will strengthen and expand our
national network of technical education and vocational skills training institutions to
broaden the pool of expertise and qualitative service delivery across all sectors of our
economy. We will tailor programmes of skill development drawing inspiration from
indigenous apprenticeship schemes. To this end, we will advance the access of private
entrepreneurs and vendors to formal credit support structures and institutions.

We will continue to welcome Foreign Direct Investment, while ensuring the
implementation of local content policies to enable Nigerians fully benefit from the
opportunities provided by such investment. We will also ensure that Nigerians operate in
safe and humane working environment by enhancing industrial peace and harmony and
protecting workers through the promotion of dialogue and inclusiveness. This requires
strengthening alternative dispute resolution mechanisms to mediate industrial disputes
while promoting improvements in the working conditions of Nigerians in accordance
with international labour standards. We will build the regulatory oversight capacities of
the relevant MDAs to ensure compliance with labour standards.

**HEALTH SECURITY**
The overarching goal of health security is to promote and establish a health system based
on primary healthcare that is preventive, restorative, rehabilitative and protective at the
macro level for every Nigerian. The objective is to deliver health services that are
affordable, universally available, accessible and acceptable within our socio-cultural
context so that individuals and communities are assured of productivity, social well-being
and optimal standard of living. We will continue to expand and consolidate on the gains

39


-----

of the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS) to provide effective, efficient, quality,
accessible and affordable health services including mental healthcare that will improve
the wellbeing of all Nigerians. We will continue to view public health security as a core
pillar of human development as emplaced in our National Action Plan for Health Security
(2018-2022) and Second National Strategic Health Development Plan (2018-2022).

We will strive to attract and retain skilled manpower to drive our aspirations for a world
class healthcare system. We will continue to strengthen civil structures and our overall
national capacity to prevent and respond to public health emergencies as well as promote
capacity building in our security agencies to complement these structures. We will also
institute mechanisms to integrate service delivery towards ensuring that adequate funds
are available and allocated for accessible, affordable, efficient and equitable healthcare
provision at local, state and federal levels.

We recognise the growing link between criminality and substance abuse among the youth
globally. Some of these substances are readily accessed from poorly supervised value
chains of these drugs and chemical products. To this end, we will continue to empower
the NDLEA, NAFDAC and relevant professional bodies to enforce control so that drugs
that are prone to abuse are limited to legal uses such as for research and medical
purposes.

We acknowledge the changing landscape of health burdens that are closely associated
with trans-border mobility of goods and services. In order to foster collective health
security, we will continue to provide enabling environment for effective integrated
disease surveillance and health management using international best practices with
sustained monitoring and evaluation. This will be anchored on institution-wide,
community participation and ownership. In order to consolidate the efforts of
government, we will continually pursue research-based implementation of the National
Health Policy goals by the relevant agencies.

**EDUCATION SECURITY**
Education is intrinsically linked to national progress and security, hence holistic
intellectual, emotional and cognitive development of the Nigerian child is at the heart of
our efforts. Nigeria will prioritize the development of a curriculum that adequately
prepares our children for the challenges of the 21[st] century. We will improve the quality
of all aspects of education by ensuring excellence in measuring learning outcomes and

40


-----

equipping Nigerians with competencies in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) skills to compete favourably in the global economy.

The goal of our education strategy is to provide quality education at all levels, improve
learning, teaching infrastructure, and prioritize STEM as well as technical and vocational
education. The Government will broaden access to free and compulsory Universal Basic
Education (UBE) for all segments of our population especially vulnerable and
disadvantaged children. To meet the demands of increased school enrolment, we will
expand the school system and continue to train, attract and retain well-qualified, certified
and licensed teachers to fill the requirements of educational institutions at all levels.
Nigeria will reduce gender-based and occupational disparities in the attainment of
primary and secondary education particularly itinerant communities involved in farming
and herding.

Our recent experiences have clearly reinforced the imperatives of education security for
the attainment of our national security objectives. We believe education security is
essential in preventing radicalization. Formal and non-formal education plays critical
roles in our approaches to Preventing and Countering Violent Extremism. We are
committed to ensuring that our children undertake their studies in a safe environment. We
will therefore promote measures to ensure that our schools, at all levels, function in a
climate of safety and security with emotional, psycho-social support and guidance. We
will intensify efforts to promote implementation of the measures that address the factors
which accentuate the vulnerabilities of young Nigerians.

**ENVIRONMENTAL SECURITY**
We recognize that the environment is a strategic resource that should be optimally
harnessed to achieve stability, prosperity, social harmony and the well-being of society.
Our mission is to protect and conserve the environment by preventing and mitigating
natural and anthropogenic threats to environmental security and sustainability. This we
will seek to achieve by exploiting environmental resources through international best
practices in a sustainable manner and protecting Nigeria’s unique biodiversity.

Erosion and flooding have destroyed communities, agricultural lands and other critical
infrastructure across the country thereby threatening lives and livelihoods. To mitigate
these problems, we will continue to adopt, as well as to deepen a Whole-of-Government
approach, while collaborating with the private sector and civil society. We will strengthen
our early warning mechanisms to preempt and control anticipated problems, thereby

41


-----

minimizing or preventing loss of human lives and property. Government will intensify
current efforts in building resilient communities, effective and adequate water channels in
mitigating erosion and flooding problems. Additionally, we will continue to strengthen
our education and enlightenment strategies to minimize both natural and human induced
erosion and flooding. At the Federal level, NEMA will continue to coordinate interagency intervention efforts in disaster management, while SEMAs will coordinate
intervention at the State levels.

Desertification has continued to threaten food security and aggravate land and resource
based conflicts in the North. To this end, we will intensify our land reclamation strategies
as well as strengthen the capacities of the National Agency for the Great Green Wall and
other agencies combatting desertification. We will also ratify and domesticate all
international protocols and conventions to curb climate change and its effects on the
environment; as well as encourage afforestation through aggressive enlightenment
campaign, emplacing punitive measures against illegal loggers, and supporting measures
towards the provision of alternative sources of fuelwood for domestic and industrial uses.

Our forests, in particular, are a critical national asset with immense ecological, economic
and pharmaceutical potential. They also constitute a natural environmental buffer against
most ecological disasters. Consequently, forest conservation is a strategic necessity.
However, conservation is threatened by deforestation, unregulated logging, population
growth, forest fires, overgrazing, bio-piracy, farming, wildlife poaching, unregulated
industrial exploitation of timber, weak institutional regulatory capacity at all levels of
government and the presence in forests and forest reserves of criminal gangs and armed
groups.

We will encourage broad-based partnerships that accommodate private sector investment
and participation by local communities, Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) and
Community Based Organisations (CBOs) in the management of our forest resources.
Actively engaging with local communities around forests and forest reserves will drive
their much-needed involvement in reforestation and conservation efforts. Our aim is to
balance sustainable production, protection and conservation with the dependence of local
communities on forest resources. Accordingly, we will undertake measures that mitigate
the dependence of the rural population on fuelwood for their energy needs by developing
alternative energy sources to gradually reverse the adverse trends triggered by
unsustainably high fuelwood demand. We will promote the reforestation of degraded

42


-----

sections of forests and forest reserves and drive a public awareness campaign to revitalize
tree planting across Nigeria.

To address forest crimes, we will deepen the partnerships between the Federal Ministry
of Environment, the National Park Service, Forest Rangers and all relevant stakeholders
in forest management and law enforcement to better secure forests and forest reserves.
We will build the capacity of state and local authorities to secure forested areas in their
jurisdictions, and intensify operations to permanently dislodge criminal elements and
armed groups from forests. Beyond improving the security of our protected areas, we will
build the capacity of local communities to participate in economic opportunities
generated by rejuvenated forest management and conservation activities.

Nigeria is committed to global and regional cooperation in our approach to achieving
environmental security and sustainability. We will encourage initiatives on use of
renewable energies and development of sustainable habitations. We will also promote
environmental management linked to population and demographics, land use, housing,
climate change, resource and waste management including electronic waste. We will
develop appropriate legal and policy frameworks including standard measurements and
evaluation, Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) regulations and enforcement to
attain environmental security goals.

As part of the environmental strategy, we will raise awareness and stimulate advocacy on
environmental security and safety. We will also ensure participatory, technology-based
environmental information management, as well as early warning systems which will be
integrated into our national security architecture.

We will integrate environmental pollution into national crisis and disaster management
mechanisms. This will be achieved by adopting a Whole-of-Nation approach to
environmental security and sustainability. We will in particular, create incentives for the
private sector to harness opportunities in the renewable energy sector. To this end, our
progress will be measured by improvements on our International Standard Organisation
(ISO) 14000 environmental management standards and Environment Performance Index
(EPI) and sustainable development.

43


-----

###### CHAPTER 6

**PROMOTE NATIONAL UNITY AND PEACEFUL CO-EXISTENCE**

Achieving peace, security and development in Nigeria requires effective management of
the nation’s diversity in various areas. These are the political, socio-cultural and gender
related issues. Others include managing our religious diversity, traditional institutions as
well as reinforcing strategies to harness the prowess of the youth for national
development.

**POLITICAL SECURITY**
The nexus between political stability and economic prosperity calls for appropriate
measures to be taken to ensure the political security of Nigeria. Accordingly, the
objective of political security is to aggregate and unify the  aspirations of individuals and
groups in the Federation through reasonable distribution of power as well as wholesome
generation and equitable distribution of resources. To achieve this objective, we will
ensure the exploitation of the opportunities provided by our endowments in terms of size,
resources, population and strength inherent in our diversity. We will equally foster the
interdependence of our people, while taking deliberate measures to overcome the
challenges of managing diversity. Consequently, our political security measures will
encompass the following multi-sectoral responses:

   - Promote unity and national cohesion by fostering a culture of civility and

inclusive public discourse;

   - Ensure political stability based on multi-party democracy, grassroots political

participation, political inclusiveness, strong democratic and political institutions
and a free, fair and credible election process devoid of all kinds of violence;

   - Enhance good governance based on development, accountability, zero tolerance

for corruption at all levels, sound regulatory mechanisms, due process, rule of
law and human rights;

   - Promote non-discrimination among all Nigerians irrespective of gender, religion

or ethnic origin;

   - Ensure sound fiscal federalism as a deliberate socio-economic strategy;

   - Promote a mixed economy that encourages creativity, entrepreneurship and

innovation in wealth generation while ensuring equity in resource distribution;

44


-----

   - Ensure freedom of information, national orientation, de-radicalization and

political education of the populace as a political strategy to facilitate citizens’
commitment to our national security goals;

   - Strengthen law enforcement institutions and uphold the independence of the

judiciary to check political impunity and related crimes in order to further
entrench democracy;

   - Engage sectional and factional groups in constructive dialogue to address

agitations;

   - Identify and address the root causes of politically motivated conflicts;

   - Promote national interests in our foreign relations and interactions with

international political structures, international agencies and organisations as
well as International Non-Governmental Organisations.

The Federal Government of Nigeria will drive the implementation of our political
security measures under the principle of delineation and distribution of responsibility
among the different tiers of government. To this end, we will employ all national
strategic assets to coordinate the achievement of our national political security goals.
Additionally, the National Council of States will continue to advise the President on
political security matters of the nation. Political stability in Nigeria will be measured in
terms of power devolution mechanism, inclusive political process, crisis free political
succession and leadership transition.

**SOCIAL SECURITY**
Our social security will primarily promote the collective vitality of our society as well as
protect the uniqueness and vulnerabilities of the individual. Our various societies
recognize the importance of collectivism as a means of societal survival and healthy
living. Modern notions of society however admit individualism in social relations.
Consequently, our national social security envisions the application of all elements of our
national power to safeguard and build the capacity of the individual and collective human
resources upon which our survival and progress both at present and in the future squarely
rest.
Nigeria’s social security strategy will ensure policies and programmes to harness the
strengths of our people to leverage on our resources for collective development and attain
their full potentials. This includes a national framework to prevent and deter identified or
perceived threats to our way of life, ability to promote holistic societal improvements,
safeguard our culture, traditions and customs. Our national social security focus will be
to:

45


-----

  - Promote social stability through national unity, cohesion, integration, social
justice, gender equality, equitable representation, diversity, inclusiveness, equal
opportunities, healthy competition and excellence as well as eliminate all forms
of discrimination, favouritism and preferential treatment in our national life;

  - Promote human dignity as well as protect and cater for the vulnerable in society
including the young, unemployed, women and children, the infirmed, the
physically challenged, the retired, the aged and other special interest groups;

  - Adopt collective responsibility in the funding of social security and
consequently, promote appropriate public and private contributions for its
implementation;

  - Promote a comprehensive social security policy that institutionalizes,
consolidates and expands current social safety net programmes and
interventions that protect our most vulnerable citizens.

  - Ensure that social programmes are also targeted at rebuilding conflict affected
communities as a demonstration of our commitment to peacebuilding.

  - Promote a deliberate policy of socio-economic parity to bridge the gap between
the rich and the poor;

  - Develop a national integrated information system and technology-aided
nationwide database;

  - Adopt deliberate information, educational and lifelong orientation strategies to
continuously promote our culture, national values and identity, exploit the social
processes of globalization as well as protect the nation from foreign
acculturation and subtle media attacks;

  - Conduct periodic strategic review and provide real time intelligence input to the
national social security decision making process;

  - Promote integrated community-based law enforcement, justice and correctional
systems that recognize the challenges of social security threats and the need to
deal with them empathetically but decisively.

Promoting national cohesion and social inclusion is a fundamental responsibility of
government. Nigerians desire inclusive growth hence government initiatives will be
aimed at ensuring social inclusion and strengthening of national cohesion. Ensuring that
every citizen has the opportunity to work and take part in developing their communities is
essential to creating a harmonious, progressive and stable country.

46


-----

The principle of Federal Character enshrined in the 1999 Constitution (as amended) will
continue to be adhered to, to ensure that appointments into public service institutions
fairly reflect the linguistic, ethnic, religious and geographic diversity of the country.
Equitable distribution of socio-economic infrastructure to ensure macro-economic
stability nationwide will be ensured.

In line with the Constitution, efforts will be directed at ensuring remarkable reduction in
the level of poverty and inequality, creating employment opportunities and enhancing
national development. We will also encourage and institutionalise local ownership in our
developmental strides. This will be targeted at the increasing youth population mainly in
the area of skill acquisition in various fields of human endeavour, empowerment and
other necessary support to enhance self-sufficiency.

Meanwhile, social security arrangements will continue to remain shared responsibility
through collective remedies against adversity and deficiencies, ranging from pensions to
disability compensations, death benefits as well as healthcare and educational
interventions. The Nigeria Social Insurance Trust Fund (NSITF) and other programmes
will be made more functional and accountable. We will continue to improve on these
with a view to enhancing the livelihood and dignity of Nigerians.

The responsibility for implementing social security programmes cuts across all tiers of
government. The overall performance improvement of our social security will be
measured by improved economic indicators and Human Development Index (HDI).

**GENDER SENSITIVITY AND SECURITY**
Nigeria recognises that development is endangered if it is not engendered. Therefore,
gender sensitivity and security will be mainstreamed into public policy to create
opportunities for the advancement of women and children’s rights as well as gender
equality. It is imperative to engage women as agents of development to ensure social
inclusion, sustainable peace and the security of all segments of the society.

In demonstrating our commitment to the ratification of the United Nations Security
Council Resolution 1325 (2000) on gender mainstreaming, Nigeria developed a National
Action Plan (NAP) built on five important pillars; prevention, participation, protection,
promotion and prosecution. These are important pillars that would strengthen gender
responsive conflict management and prevention frameworks in Nigeria. The resolution
reaffirms women participation in preventing and resolving conflicts, peace negotiations,
and humanitarian response. The reality however is that women are largely excluded from

47


-----

many formal peace processes. In the terrorism affected states, women and children
constitute the largest internally displaced persons and refugees across the border. Women
are not just victims of war; they are also agents of peace. Appropriate legislation will be
adopted to enhance gender security with a view to promoting inclusiveness across various
sectors of the economy.

To this end, the strategic approach will be to:

  - Empower women through training, mentoring and other initiatives;

  - Promote gender awareness among security personnel towards effective
management of gender related issues;

  - Integrate gender issues and increase the participation of both sexes, especially
women in security-coordinating bodies;

  - Build the capacity of women’s organisations on security policy issues, including
advocacy and oversight;

  - Conduct gender-responsive assessments of security needs across federal, state
and local government levels, including the different security needs and
resources of men, women, boys and girls;

  - Allocate sufficient resources, towards effectively preventing, responding to and
addressing gender specific initiatives such as gender-training, especially in
response to security concerns in the local communities;

  - Influence public policy through advocacy regarding new policies and laws on
gender and related issues.

  - Build capacity of the media for accurate coverage and reportage on gender and
peace-building issues;

  - Deepen the commitment to gender sensitivity and justice of security policy
makers within the executive, legislative, judicial and political parties’ platforms
through gender training, mentoring, information distribution and lobbying;

  - Enhance the capacity of civil society organisations to participate effectively in
security policy-making processes;

  - Promote equal career opportunities for women and men and to guarantee equal
pay for equal work;

  - Create equality of access for women and men with regard to political
representation and participation; and

  - Ensure the protection of women and girls from all forms of aggression and
violence.

48


-----

**CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS AND TRADITIONAL INSTITUTIONS**

**Cultural Institutions**
Nigeria is endowed with a rich and diverse cultural heritage spread across the over 250
ethnic groups. It is also endowed with cultural resources which are of universal
recognition. We envisage culture as a cornerstone for building a strong nation where the
citizens will see their cultural diversity as a source of strength and unity. Consequently,
we will use culture as an instrument for enhancing our national cohesion.

This strategy will employ tangible elements of our cultural heritage including artistic
creations, buildings and monuments, theatres, galleries, instruments, objects, artifacts,
cultural spaces and cinemas to promote national unity. We will also leverage our cultural
intangibles comprising practices, representations, expressions, knowledge and skills,
including oral traditions, performing arts, local knowledge, traditional skills and the
reinforcement of our core values to promote national patriotism and pride.

The objectives of Nigeria’s cultural strategy include the following:

  - Addressing national security challenges through affirmation of Nigeria’s core
cultural values;

  - Projecting the international status, profile and image of Nigeria as a richly
endowed nation of diverse cultures, languages and religions;

  - The Nigerian music and film industries are veritable tools of promoting the
understanding of our cultural heritage. They also link Nigeria to people who
value our culture. Therefore, we will continue to support positive development
of the Nigerian creative arts industry through infrastructure and content
development.

  - Contributing to national development through diversification of the economy,
wealth and employment creation using cultural resources; and

  - Developing institutions and industries that reflect the constant processes of
change in Nigerian culture and way of life.

  - Preserving and protecting our cultural identities such as language, dances,
beliefs, dressing, food, among others.

To this end, the following strategies will be pursued by relevant MDAs:

  - Promote the finest and richest aspects of our nation’s culture;

  - Providing cultural infrastructure supportive of creativity and self-actualization
of the people;

49


-----

  - Promotion by all tiers of government and Nigerians in the Diaspora of skills in
cultural industries crafts, arts, pottery, painting, sculpture, weaving and carving;

  - Promoting the revival of the history and values of Nigeria;

  - Enforcing and strengthening the extant laws relating to piracy and syndicated
theft of Nigeria’s intellectual property and artifacts.

  - Promoting cultural tourism.

  - Pursuing the repatriation of our illegally acquired cultural and historical
artifacts.

**Religious Institutions**
We recognize the importance of religion and religious institutions, their inherent values
and influence on our collective existence. Nigeria will remain a secular state as enshrined
in the Constitution and appreciate the role of religion as a veritable tool for national
cohesion and development. Considering their large religious followership and closeness
to the grassroots, faith-based institutions have played a vital role in promoting cohesion
and unity in Nigeria. They have also assisted in averting and resolving intra and inter
religious crises including promoting other important national peace initiatives.

To this end, we will continue to pursue and promote religious harmony and tolerance
through mechanisms and initiatives such as religious institutions, associations and interfaith dialogues to enhance national unity and integration. Nigeria will ensure effective
coordination of the activities of religious institutions to strengthen societal values and
curb moral decadence, drug and substance abuse and violent extremism. The nation will
promote freedom of religious beliefs and practice in peaceful and orderly manner without
intimidation, victimization and molestation. We will continually promote all the good
values of religion as important factors to development and advancement of good morals
among our people.

**Traditional Institutions**
Traditional institutions are critical to national cohesion and stability. They play pivotal
roles in the preservation of our cultures, traditions, values, morals and beliefs. They serve
as first line vanguards in handling communal conflicts and crises, thereby advancing
peaceful coexistence amongst our diverse citizenry. They are also effective in ensuring
inter-ethnic understanding and are better placed to handle inter-ethnic relations, as well as
inter and intra-religious relations within their various domains. The roles that traditional
authorities play in the process of good governance can broadly be separated into three
categories:

50


-----

   - Advisory role to government, as well as their participatory role in the
administration of their domains;

   - Their developmental role, complementing government’s efforts in mobilizing
the population for implementing development projects, sensitizing them on
health issues such as HIV/AIDS, promoting education, encouraging economic
enterprises, inspiring respect for the law and urging participation in the
electoral process; and

   - Their role in conflict resolution, an area where traditional leaders across
Nigeria have demonstrated success. As such, they are a resource for nationbuilding which need to be harnessed.

To this end, the following will be pursued by the coordinating MDAs:

   - Engender active participation of traditional institutions in matters pertaining to
the maintenance of peace and security in their communities, given their
unique knowledge and time-tested system of information and intelligence
gathering and management;

   - Traditional rulers, as brokers of peace, will be encouraged to deploy their
traditional conflict management skills to resolve many lingering conflicts
within and outside their domains;

   - Identify specific areas in which the application of traditional institutions of
governance has significant transformative impact.

**YOUTH STRATEGY**
The youth constitute over 63 per cent of Nigeria’s population. Addressing the critical
challenges facing them is an urgent priority if social and economic development efforts
are to succeed. Every country is expected to benefit from increase in the population of the
working group relative to other age groups. Nigeria is witnessing demographic changes
and will experience a significant rise in the population of young adults. These trends
present potential economic benefits and inherent challenges.

Government policies will focus on overcoming the challenges such as unemployment,
poverty, illiteracy and extremist indoctrination that expose our youth to deviant
tendencies with associated negative violent outcomes. Our socio-economic weaknesses
will be tackled through youth empowerment and other demographic dividends such as
targeted investments in agricultural and agro-allied industries and intensification of the
Economic Recovery and Growth Plan (ERGP). We will also invest and expand the

51


-----

available opportunities for skills acquisition in specialist and artisanal fields to effectively
bridge the employment gap and profitably engage the nation’s youth.

The major objectives include:

  - The development and improvement of entrepreneurial skills and competencies
with a view to increasing employability of the youth;

  - Strengthening of youth participation in decision making process at the local,
state and national levels of governance;

  - Strengthening family systems, institutional and legal framework for youth
development; and

  - Promoting national unity through social integration of youth and facilitating
socio-economic development.

To this end, the strategy will seek to:

  - Strengthen vocational, technical and skills acquisition for the youth. This will be
achieved through increase in the technical and vocational schools and provision
of adequate equipment for the schools as well as massive training for the tutors;

  - Encourage and develop the leadership potential of the youth through the
establishment of functional leadership and development centres in all local
government areas;

  - Ensure effective collaboration between government and Non-Governmental
Organisations (NGOs), Community Based Organisations (CBOs), Faith-Based
Organisations (FBOs) and other relevant agencies to further reduce incidences
of HIV/AIDS, drug and substance abuse, cultism and other vices among the
youth.

  - Upgrade facilities for effective mobilization of youth corps members and
resuscitation of the NYSC pilot farms and empowerment of corps volunteers
under the war against poverty programme;

  - Improve access to capital for the youth;

  - Create an enabling environment for the youth to creatively express themselves
in productive ventures.

Our overall aim is to rekindle the confidence of young Nigerians in themselves and in
their nation. We will address the root causes of current security challenges confronting
the youth by tackling gaps in opportunity, development and infrastructure. We will
leverage our cultural and sports prowess as tools to gainfully engage and reinforce the
competitive strengths of our youth. Line MDAs responsible for the economy, youth,

52


-----

sports and culture will be required to synergize and present a holistic response to the
challenges associated with youth development.

53


-----

###### CHAPTER 7

**PROMOTE REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL INTERESTS**

This chapter sets out how the Government will deepen Nigeria’s relationship with
regional and global partners, strengthen regional and global institutions, support and
achieve favourable outcomes in bilateral and multilateral relations and promote her
regional influence.

Nigeria’s foreign policy is focused on her relationship with regional and global partners
and their alignments with our overall national interests. Foreign policy often manifests in
three important components: the domestic environment; relations with the external
environment, as well as national aspirations in the international arena. Maintaining the
linkages between these components is critical to strengthening our relationship with
regional and global partners in order to achieve our foreign policy objectives.

Our diplomatic network remains crucial to strengthening relationships with regional and
global partners. We will continue to extend the reach of our diplomacy to nurture existing
partnerships and alliances while building new ones. This will be guided by our foreign
policy approaches which include:

  - The pursuit of external relations based on constructive engagement with all
nations in furtherance of our national interests and objectives;

  - Commitment to internal peace and progress of our neighbours and other nations;

  - Optimization of our comparative national advantages to promote our national
image and competitiveness abroad; and

  - The continuation of a policy of non-aggression with our neighbours while
ensuring preparedness to defend our national interests by all legitimate means.

The extension of our diplomatic reach and network will be underpinned by optimization
of the contributions of our foreign missions to our domestic aspirations. We will also
adopt an open, participatory engagement with the Nigerian public on foreign policy
issues and initiatives; and periodic reviews of foreign policy goals.

Tackling terrorism and violent extremism is paramount to our national interest and can be
effectively achieved through bilateral and multilateral collaboration. In furtherance of
this, we will continue to support the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF)
headquartered in N’Djamena-Chad, with regional sectors in Niger, Nigeria and

54


-----

Cameroon, in its efforts to counter terrorism and violent extremism. To give wider
coverage to the fight against terrorism and other forms of transnational organised crime
in the Sahel region, we will also encourage the MNJTF to collaborate with other regional
Task Forces, including the Sahel G5 Force established by Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and Niger Republic.

In addition to military measures, fighting terrorism and violent extremism requires soft
power approaches including dialogue, mediation, as well as gathering and dissemination
of timely and actionable intelligence. Consequently, to improve operational efficiency of
our armed forces, we will sustain support to the Regional Intelligence Fusion Unit
(RIFU) comprising Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Benin Republic with strategic
support from US, UK and France to procure timely and actionable intelligence against
terrorist groups.

Nigeria will continue to promote bilateral and multilateral economic, scientific and
technical cooperation to boost trade and economic relations with friendly nations towards
economic prosperity. We will, therefore strengthen existing bilateral and multilateral
economic relations with regional and international partners such as Nigeria-China
bilateral trade and strategic cooperation, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the
existing Co-Prosperity Zone (COPAZ) cooperation among Nigeria/Benin/Togo. We will
also strengthen economic and scientific relations with China, USA, UK, France and
European Union for our mutual benefits.

**ECONOMIC COMMUNITY OF WEST AFRICAN STATES**
Some countries in the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) region
have political and socio-economic challenges. To this end, as the leading regional
multilateral institution, ECOWAS is mandated to address these challenges using all
protocols and institutions at its disposal. We will continue to support the Community’s
objectives of regional integration, good governance, peace and stability as well as trade
and economic integration among member states. We will equally seek to streamline the
implementation of the ECOWAS Protocol on the free movement of goods and persons
across borders of member states while taking measures to curb transnational organised
crime.

**GULF OF GUINEA COMMISSION**
The growing insecurity in the Middle East has drawn increased global interests to the
abundant and largely untapped energy resources of the Gulf of Guinea (GoG) which

55


-----

provide both opportunities and threats. With 70 per cent of our country’s resources,
including oil, situated in the GoG, the protection of this critical maritime domain
becomes paramount. We will support the GoG Commission, which is an institutional
framework for cooperation among member countries. In order to promote peace and
socio-economic development, we will leverage the Commission to counter threats and
promote legal economic activities in the GoG. Specific approaches will include
strengthening collaboration with GoG member states and other international partners to
build capacity of the navies of the region and enhance the capacity of the Inter-Regional
Coordination Centre for Maritime Security in Yaounde, Cameroun. We will sustain the
Nigerian Navy’s operational readiness in order to improve security within our Exclusive
Economic Zone (EEZ) and the GoG. This will be achieved by the employment of our
maritime surveillance and enforcement capabilities to support efforts to combat piracy
and other high sea crimes, including attacks on shipping as well as oil and gas
infrastructure.

**COMMUNITY OF SAHEL-SAHARAN STATES**
The Community of Sahel-Saharan States (CEN-SAD) is important to our quest to counter
terrorism and violent extremism considering that it offers a broad platform for combatting
terrorism and transnational organised crime prevalent in CEN-SAD member states. We
will work to improve the vibrancy of CEN-SAD and support a speedy process of
ratification of the treaty binding members of the organisation. We will exploit the
opportunities offered by CEN-SAD to promote internal security through collaboration
with member states to fight terrorist groups in the region, counter the proliferation of
Small Arms and Light Weapons (SALWs) into Nigeria and address irregular migration
and trafficking in persons, especially of women and children.

**AFRICAN UNION**
Nigeria is committed to strengthening the capacity of the African Union (AU) to meet its
avowed objective and obligation of ensuring peace, stability, economic integration and
good governance in Africa. Our security and development to a large extent, depend on
the AU achieving these stated objectives. Nigeria will continue to support the AU in
ensuring peace and security by actively participating in activities of the AU Peace and
Security Council, including contributing troops to AU peacekeeping operations, and
collaboration in the fight against terrorism and transnational organised crime. We will
promote mutually beneficial free and fair trade relations in support of AU efforts to
ensure socio-economic integration.

56


-----

**UNITED NATIONS**
The UN is the foremost global multilateral institution and we take seriously our
responsibility towards ensuring its effectiveness. We support the quest for the reform of
the UN Security Council, including a push for a permanent African representative. The
effectiveness of the UN depends on the collaboration and support of its member states.
We will ensure that we meet our financial obligations to strengthen the UN’s efficiency
and capacity to work towards the goals that we all share. We will also implement the UN
Secretary General’s Action Plan on Preventing Violent Extremism as this is critical to our
national security. Strengthening UN conflict prevention and Peace Support Operations
(PSO) mechanisms is also a key priority. Overall, Nigeria will continue to contribute
troops to increase the efficiency and impact of UN PSO engagements.

**PROMOTE ENGAGEMENT OF NIGERIANS IN DIASPORA**
Nigerians in Diaspora constitute a viable resource for the mobilization of developmental
interventions for the country. The contributions of the diaspora to the advancement of
developing countries underscore the need to explore this category of Nigerians to attract
their positive intervention including FDI, remittances and expertise towards the
achievement of our national interests. We will support Nigerians in the Diaspora to be
more effective in achieving national objectives as well as strengthening the newly
established Nigeria Diaspora Commission. This will enhance collaboration with Nigerians
abroad to maximize their support for the country towards realising our national interests.

**CONTRIBUTION TO INTERNATIONAL SECURITY**
Active participation in UN peacekeeping missions remains a fundamental pillar of our
foreign policy. Nigeria has been a major contributor of troops and police to the UN since
1960. We have deployed military contingents, unarmed military observers, staff officers,
police formed units and advisers to more than 25 missions globally. Our troops
constituted the military backbone of peacekeeping efforts in Liberia and Sierra Leone;
initially as part of ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) and later under UN
peacekeeping operation – UN Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and UN Assistance Mission
in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). We will continue to promote global peace and international
security through our commitment and deployment to peacekeeping efforts. We will work
to improve the visibility of the Martin Luther Agwai International Leadership and
Peacekeeping Centre (MLAILPKC) as a regional hub of capacity building in peace
support operations. Peacekeeping is a key aspect of Nigeria’s foreign policy and
international diplomacy; therefore, the collaboration of the Ministry of Defence (MOD),

57


-----

Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) and other key players is central to coordinating our
overall peacekeeping efforts.

**SUSTAIN DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE**
Nigeria’s development assistance to our neighbours and other countries in sub Saharan
Africa is part of fostering mutual peace and security in the region. We will continue to
extend development assistance not only to our neighbours, but other countries. We will
also strengthen the Technical Aid Corps (TAC), a programme under which Nigeria
deploys experts in education, health and other human endeavours to render
developmental services and capacity building in the receiving countries. We will equally
sustain deployment of judicial officers to other countries to strengthen their judiciaries
and promote the rule of law. On good governance, we will continue to offer strategic
level training assistance through our strategic institutions to African countries and other
allies. This will foster collaboration and strengthen democracy in the region. We will also
support countries conducting elections by deploying election monitors to observe and
assess the conduct of the elections as part of democratic consolidation.

Nigeria’s engagement on the African continent towards international security is not only
restricted to peacekeeping operations, but also entails mediation in crisis situations. This
is cognizant of the fact that mediation is an increasingly popular dispute resolution
mechanism throughout the world as it provides a more cost-effective alternative. We will
continue to offer our resources and good offices towards mediation in crisis situations to
ensure regional and international security. Similarly, we are committed to supporting the
United Nations and other regional organisations to advance the course of international
peace and security.

**DEFENCE ENGAGEMENTS**
Defence diplomacy remains an important aspect of promoting our regional and
international interests. Our armed forces retain the capability to respond to conflict
situations, particularly within West Africa, in partnership with our regional partners. We
will continue to invest in defence capabilities particularly modular forces that allow us to
respond appropriately to regional security threats and to achieve interoperability with
regional partners. We will also seek to empower the armed forces to prioritize defence
engagements, which will include providing training opportunities to our allies in training
institutions and conducting bilateral and multilateral exercises with regional partners.

58


-----

###### CHAPTER 8

**CONCLUSION**

Nigeria’s National Security Strategy (NSS) 2019 is based on the experience gained over
five years since Nigeria’s maiden edition of NSS was launched in 2014. At that time, a
decision was taken to initiate a review every 5-10 years, as the case may be; this is to
update the document with the current security situation in the domestic and international
arena capable of impacting on Nigeria’s national security.

Since 2014, there have been several significant changes in Nigeria’s security
environment. The most prominent is the gradual but steady degrading of the capability of
Boko Haram Terrorists and other forms of insurgency. Nigeria is stronger in 2019,
having significantly incapacitated the terrorists. This was achieved through the valiant
efforts of our Armed Forces, security agencies and other Nigerians, in collaboration with
our international allies.

There have been other emerging security challenges, such as the pastoralists-farmers
conflicts which have spread to many states of the Federation and adversely affected many
citizens, especially women and children. Equally significant is the pervasive incidence of
armed banditry, kidnapping and other security challenges. In response to these
challenges, government has stood firm and deployed necessary ways and means to
combat, contain and neutralize current and emerging challenges between 2014 and 2019.

In addition to its domestic focus, Nigeria’s National Security Strategy is intrinsically
linked to the political, military, economic and social transformation in the West African
region and Africa, as well as the rest of the world. As many African countries begin to
stabilize and consolidate politically, we will continue to partner and benefit from these
positive developments. In the same vein, if and when challenges that threaten our
neighbours arise, Nigeria is committed to contributing to restore stability. The changing
international environment therefore looms large for Nigeria’s National Security Strategy.
This demands that we focus on our ability to influence emerging threats and leverage
opportunities in our region and on the African continent. This is against the fiscal
constraints that demands continuous assessment of our diplomatic priorities. The everchanging international dynamics will also require consistent and mutually beneficial
bilateral engagements to reinforce our efforts in the multilateral fora.

59


-----

In view of the above, the NSS 2019 envisions creative ways and means to address four
fundamental security concerns in Nigeria. First, is the existential need to protect Nigerian
people and territory. Second, is to promote Nigeria’s prosperity and sustainable
development. Third, is the need to promote national unity and peaceful coexistence.
Fourth, is that the document focuses on our regional and international interests. In sum, it
acknowledges the imperative for aggregation of internal resource endowments with
external opportunities. This envisages stronger partnerships between Nigeria and regional
organisations.

We have also taken steps to avoid a situation where the NSS is only aspirational and as
such, this strategy will be implemented in a robust manner. Performance measurement
and associated responsibilities will be carried out through statutory organs constituted for
that purpose. It is therefore the ultimate desire of the Government that the NSS 2019 goes
a long way towards identifying, combating and improving the national security
environment in the country. This is critical such that in the years to come, Nigeria will
become a secure, safe, stable and dependable nation, not only in terms of security, but in
the political, economic, social and cultural spheres.

60


-----

-----

-----

