## Security in uncertain times

 The Military Advice of the Chief of Defence 2023


-----

## Contents


**Foreword by the Chief of Defence** **6**

**1** **The Task** **8**

The mandate 8

Method 11

**2** **The Chief of Defence's assessment of the situation** **14**

An altered security situation 14

UN Sustainable Development Goals 23

The market situation 24

Technological developments 24

Economic framework 27

**3** **The role of the Norwegian Armed Forces today and in the future** **30**

**4** **The status and challenges of the Norwegian Armed Forces** **38**

**5** **More funding needed to realise the adopted structure** **46**

**6** **Adaption of the Armed Forces structure to the adopted financial framework** **52**

Adjusted priorities and level of ambition 52

Joint elements 54

The land domain 57

The maritime domain 58

The air domain 58

**7** **Recommendations given a reduction in the financial planning framework** **62**

**8** **Scalable strengthening of defence capabilities – the recommended approach** **64**

Focus Area: Eliminate weakness in the current structure 66

Focus Area: Maritime surface structure 71

Focus Area: Air defence 77

Focus Area: Long-range precision weapons 78

Focus Area: Increase the volume of the Armed Forces 78

**9** **The Chief of Defence's other recommendations** **98**

Personnel and expertise 98

Real estate and infrastructure 106

Equipment and logistics 114

Climate and environment 115

Innovation and technology 116

Allied cooperation 122

Sweden and Finland's membership of NATO 125

Training and exercises 126

Hybrid threats 129

Total defence framework 129

Further development of the Armed Forces' culture and the military profession 133

Modernisation and streamlining 133

Organisation and governance 134

**10** **Financial basis** **136**


**Part I**

**Part II**

**Part III**


**Context**

**The Norwegian Armed Forces**

**The Chief of Defence's Military Advice**


-----

We must continuously adapt to changing surroundings and technological developments.
Planning for the development of our Armed
Forces must have a long-term perspective. At
the same time the long-term plan for the Defence Sector must be sufficiently flexible to take
account of changes in our surroundings.
The Norwegian Armed Forces have been
changing over time. Our military structure holds
high standards, but has limited volume and
thereby limited endurance. We conduct operations at home and abroad continuously. Our
experiences from operations and ongoing reforms the last decade means that the Norwegian
Armed Forces are well place for further growth.
This Military Advice is holistic, but it does
not provide all the answers. I have deliberately
chosen to set a course by recommending five
focus areas for the future development of the
Armed Forces. Through the focus areas, I aim
to enhance the Armed Forces' combat endurance and ability to tackle challenging situations.
Initially, the measures will focus on eliminating
known weaknesses in the existing structure.
In addition, we need to strengthen the Armed
Forces’ ability to operate in the maritime domain and protect both military and civilian targets against air threats. The fourth focus area
aims to enhance the ability of the Armed Forces to engage targets at long range. In the final
focus area, I present proposals to additionally
improve the combat endurance of the Armed
Forces through further increases in the Armed
Forces' volume.
The last Military Advice was submitted in
2019. Significant changes have taken place since
then. We have been through a pandemic. We
have pulled out of Afghanistan after operating
there for almost 20 years. We have witnessed
a full-scale attack on Ukraine by Russia. Finland
has joined NATO and Sweden is also set to become a member. The effects of climate change
are accelerating, and an arms race is once again
under way between major powers such as the


USA, China and Russia. The challenges in the
Middle East and the Sahel region of Africa are
also considerable. In Norway, cross-sectoral security challenges have been attracting greater
attention, and it is apparent that the distinction
between societal security and state security is
becoming blurred.
As I am publishing the Military Advice, the
Norwegian Defence Commission and the Total
Preparedness Commission will also give their
recommendations. I will continue to provide
military advice in the work towards the next
long-term plan for the defence sector. Our politicians will have to make both short and longterm choices and priorities based on all the information that is now being presented to them.
I look forward to further discussions, but
would nevertheless like to state that it is absolutely essential to establish clear priorities at an
early stage. The Armed Forces must be further
strengthened and the strengthening needs to
happen fast. The Armed Forces are both well positioned and more than ready for further development and growth – for our common security.

Thank you to everyone who has contributed to
the preparation of this military advice. Comprehensive high-quality inputs have been received.
For my part, it has been important that the main
lines of the advice have the broadest possible
support among the Armed Forces leadership,
across branches and domains, among the employee organisations and among other government agencies within the sector.


## Foreword by the Chief of Defence

 The Norwegian Armed Forces must be further strengthened.


**Eirik Kristoffersen**
General
Chief of Defence


-----

## Chapter 1

 The task


**The mandate**
For use as a basis in the work on a new longterm plan for the defence sector, the Norwegian Government asked the Chief of Defence
to submit Military Advice by 31 May 2023. The
Government tasked the Chief of Defence with
assessing recommendations on scalable measures and priorities that address the following
development paths:

-  A development path with a level of funding
that is lower than assumed in the current
long-term plan.

-  A development path that is based on the
current long-term plan and associated financial planning framework, including the
Storting's resolution and associated financial consequences (cf. Prop 14S (20202021) and Inst. 87S (2020-2021).

-  A development path which, in light of a deteriorating security policy situation, recommends prioritised measures for the further
scalable strengthening of the defence sector in both the short and longer term. The
Chief of Defence is asked to present different levels of strengthening over and above
the current economic trajectory.

In addition, the Chief of Defence's recommendations should be based around the following
objectives as a basis for the further development
of the country’s defence capabilities:

-  Ability to maintain continuous situational awareness in Norwegian areas of interest, with a particular emphasis on the High
North.

-  Counter conflict by contributing to credible deterrence and reassurance based
around integrated cooperation with Norway’s allies.

-  Over time, be able to conduct joint operations in crises and wars in an allied framework to defend Norway and its allies.

-  Strengthen Norwegian and Nordic defence
capabilities.


-----

-  Ability to receive, support and transport
allied reinforcements.

-  Help to ensure that NATO remains a strong
and credible alliance.

-  Staff the defence sector with sufficient personnel with the right skills and expertise at
the right time.

-  Resist the influence of hybrid threats, partly
by helping to reduce Norwegian society's
vulnerability to such threats.

-  Further develop Norway’s total defence.

-  Continuous innovation in line with security policy and technological developments,
as well as enhancements and efficiency improvements.

-  Sustainable development of the defence
sector.

**Method**
The analysis used NATO's capability approach
as a method. Based on the Norwegian defence
concept and the nine tasks of the Norwegian
Armed Forces, a number of effects were derived
that the Armed Forces must achieve. These effects are created through specific actions which
the Armed Forces must be able to carry out.
Based on these actions, an analysis was then
carried out to determine the capabilities that
the Armed Forces should have. When deriving
the capabilities and the volume of the Armed
Forces, both allied commitments and allied operations in our region were taken into account,
as well as Sweden and Finland's membership of
NATO. Similarly, the Norwegian total defence
framework was a key factor in the analysis of
defence capabilities.
This Military Advice is based around a denial
ambition for the defence of Norway until allied
reinforcements are in position.

The analysis was carried out in four stages:

**1** Analysis of factors which impact on the development of the Armed Forces.
**2** Mapping the status of the Armed Forces.
**3** Deriving effects and analysis of the need
for development and strengthening of the
existing military structure.
**4** Analysis of resources, costs and feasibility.


The Military Advice was drawn up in accordance
with national regulations. During the work, a
number of supplementary studies were carried
out in selected areas in accordance with the
mandate given to the Chief of Defence by the
Government. The Norwegian Defence Research
Establishment, the Norwegian Defence Estates
Agency and the Norwegian Defence Materiel
Agency have provided input, and a dialogue has
taken place with the Norwegian Defence Commission and the Total Preparedness Commission.
Aspects of the Norwegian Defence Research
Establishment's Defence Analysis, published
in March 2023, were also taken into account in
the advice, and a dialogue has taken place with
the working group for the development of the
Norwegian National Security Authority’s security
advice. Employee organisations and a group of
cadets at the Armed Forces’ military academies
also provided input.

The Military Advice is divided into three main
parts:

**Part 1 Context describes the Chief of De-**
fence's assessment of factors relating to military
strategic developments, as well as overall trends
within society that are of significance to the
development of the Armed Forces.

**Part 2 The Norwegian Armed Forces describes**
the function of the Armed Forces, and presents
an account of the Armed Forces' status and
challenges.

**Part 3 The Chief of Defence's Military Advice**
constitutes the Chief of Defence's expert military
advice.

This document is a translation of the Norwegian
Military Advice. The Military Advice is underpinned by a set of classified supplementing
studies which, among other things, set out capabilities with regard to numbers and the need
for personnel, training and exercises, materiel,
real estate and infrastructure, ammunition and
fuel.


-----

### Part I Context

**2** **The Chief of Defence's assessment of the situation** **14**

An altered security situation 14

UN Sustainable Development Goals 23

The market situation 24

Technological developments 24

Economic framework 27


-----

**An altered security situation**
Russia represents the foremost threat to Norway
and Norwegian interests. The attack on Ukraine
is a watershed moment. Russia has launched
a full-scale war against one of its neighbours,
showing that it is willing to use extensive and
illegal military force in order to achieve its goals.
European security, the international legal system
and our democratic values are under threat, and
the likelihood of conflict involving Norway has
increased. Efforts to develop defence capabilities must take into account the fact that the
security situation has changed considerably.
Rapid response is needed in many areas.

The confrontation between the major powers
will be protracted
Rivalries between democracies and authoritarian regimes are increasingly characterised by
the use of force, ideological lines of conflict and
bloc formations. The war in Ukraine forms part
of this picture, and the consequences of the
war will linger long after hostilities have ended.
China's support for Russia is problematic. The
joint attempt of the two countries to change
the rules-based international order challenges
our values and interests.
Russia has demonstrated its disregard for
the international norms and legal principles on
which Norway as a small state depends. At the
same time, the USA's orientation towards Asia
means that it is increasingly expecting European
states to safeguard their own security. In addition to enhanced Norwegian defence capabilities, alliance affiliation and binding cooperation
with allies and other partners will be absolutely
crucial for Norway’s security policy.

Greater strategic importance
The geostrategic importance of the High North
and the Arctic has increased, and today our
allies have a more extensive and active presence
in the northern region than before. It is vital that
the Norwegian Armed Forces are able to shape,
coordinate and participate in allied operations.


## Chapter 2

 The Chief of Defence's  assessment of the situation


-----

Fig. 1 Context


As a maritime nation, Norway has global
interests across a broad spectrum of maritime
activities. Norway is also a significant player
in fields that are of strategic interest to other
states, for example as an energy supplier to Europe. The Nordstream incident has highlighted
not only the vulnerability of subsea infrastructure, but also the importance of having the capability to protect critical maritime infrastructure. Norway's freedom of action and security
depend on maintaining and respecting international conventions and customs with regard
to the ocean and marine resources, including
unrestricted access to the ocean as a transport
route. The importance of international frameworks and rules is reinforced by the fact that climate change is making the Arctic increasingly
accessible to civilian and military activity.
Developments in our close areas of interest
will require more of Norway in order to maintain
both influence and situational awareness. The
ability to maintain a presence and exercise authority simultaneously across extensive regions
is becoming increasingly important.

The importance of NATO
The membership in NATO forms the cornerstone
of Norway's defence and deterrence efforts.
Norway must continue to contribute to the
overall defence capabilities of the Alliance.
The Armed Forces must provide capacity and
contribute both at home and abroad. NATO's
further development of plans and the command
structure will enhance the collective capability
and require greater contributions in the form
of both forces and resources from member
states. The defence of Norway is strengthened
when both Norway and its allies demonstrate
willingness and ability to contribute to security
in our neighbouring regions through presence,
exercises and training. Strengthening NATO's
collective capability will raise expectations to
Norway regarding contributions to the Alliance,
both regionally and across NATO's entire area


of responsibility. The bilateral cooperation with
close allies will also become more important.

New Nordic dynamics
Finnish and Swedish NATO membership will have
a positive impact on the security of the Alliance
in the High North and the Baltic Sea region. The
enlargement will strengthen NATO's deterrence
and collective defence capability in our part of
Europe. While the membership paves the way
for a significant expansion of Nordic defence
and security co-operation, the Nordic countries
to a certain degree face different military strategic issues in certain regions. In the longer term,
Russia will strengthen its military footprint in
both the north and the west, but in the shorter
term, it is uncertain how Russia's activity will be
affected by the Nordic enlargement.
Norway's importance as a reception area
for allied reinforcements for the Nordic region
will increase. Allied reinforcements will no longer
only seek to reinforce Norway; they will also pass
through Norway on their way to Sweden and
Finland. Facilitating an allied presence and the
reception of reinforcements in Norway will offer
greater security and defence capabilities nationally, among the Nordic countries and for the Alliance as a whole.


**The security situation**

## The Norwegian Armed Forces


**Economic development**


Russia – worrying developments
Russia is facing an inevitable power and generational change. Developments may move in
several directions, including greater internal
unrest and instability. Norway is increasingly
being seen as part of a Western and aggressive
collective, and to a lesser extent as a neighbouring country whose interests align with those of
Russia.
The need for strategic dominance in the
Arctic is pivotal to Russian defence thinking, and
over the course of the next decade, Russia may
abandon its ambition of low tension within our
neighbouring regions. As a result of the war in
Ukraine, Russian vulnerability has increased. Rus

-----

#### The geostrategic position of Norway and the Nordic countries


Fig. 2


**50°** **40°** **30°** **20°** **10°** **0°** **10°** **20°** **30°** **40°** **50°** **60°** **70°** **80°** **90°** **100°E**


**80°**

**70°**

**60°**

**50°**


-----

## "In summary, Norway finds itself in a serious se- curity situation. Russia appears to be an unstable and unpredictable actor, and there are few signs of any change in political direction. Norway must contribute to stability and predictability in our neighbouring regions, and be prepared to take greater responsibility for our own security and contributions to the Alliance".


sia likely assesses that the situation in the Arctic
will also be affected by the increased tensions
with NATO. Russia's strategic dependence and
sensitivity relating to the bases on the Kola Peninsula is increasing, and the traditional strategic military aspects of Norway's geographical
location with regard to the "Bastion Defence"
remain. The development of advanced submarines and long-range precision weapons has
enhanced Russia's ability to strike strategically
important targets across Europe and allied reinforcements over the Atlantic Ocean. Svalbard
is becoming increasingly important for Russia
from a military strategic perspective. This development means that Norway's political and military room for manoeuvre is being challenged.
In summary, there is an increasing risk of misunderstandings and escalation in the High North.
Russia will learn important lessons from
Ukraine. Principles such as surprise, depth and
rapid movement will continue to form the basis for the further development of Russian military power. Any Russian attack on Norway would
probably seek to engage military and socially
critical targets throughout the country in an attempt to weaken both our will to resist and our
military capability. Long-range precision weapons will constitute the central component of
such a strategy. The war in Ukraine has shown
that nothing is off limits in the Russian way of
warfare. This places great demands on the ability of Norway and our allies to secure and defend
fundamental national functions, including critical
military and civilian infrastructure.
The experience gained from Ukraine will
lead to changes in the procurement plans, organisation, leadership, and planning of the Russian military. The implications are difficult to
predict in concrete terms. However, in some areas, today's economic circumstances may force
Russia towards less modern, yet still powerful
conventional military power. Parallel to this, the
threat from Russian reconnaissance and sabotage capabilities, both on land and under water,


electronic warfare and anti-satellite weapons is
increasing.
Russia is likely to remain strategically weakened in both the short and long term. Reduced
conventional capability has increased the importance of nuclear weapons in Russian military
power. The threshold for nuclear escalation may
be lower, including in our neighbouring regions.
We can expect Russia to continue to employ hybrid measures below the threshold of using open force against Western values, critical
infrastructure and resources. The purpose of this
is to spread unrest and fear among the population, to paralyse national decision-making, and
create divisions in Europe and the West. Activities linked to influence, cyber operations, information operations, sabotage and intelligence
from Russia may be stepped up.

China is challenging the West
Russia's intention to weaken the USA and
Western influence is shared by China. The
collaboration between China and Russia will
grow ever closer, which China considers advantageous for its interests and influence, including
in the Arctic. Russia is becoming increasingly
dependent on China as a result of the war and
Western sanctions. In the long term, Russia may
be forced to make concessions to China in the
High North as well. China is seeking to control
strategic infrastructure, resources and value
chains. China is also developing capabilities that
will impact on the ability of NATO countries to
exploit space and cyber capabilities for communications, navigation, surveillance and operation
of critical systems. In our neighbouring regions,
Chinese activity has so far primarily been linked
to research and commercial interests, as well as
activity in both space and cyberspace, but this
situation may change.

A serious situation
In summary, Norway finds itself in a serious security situation. Russia appears to be an unstable


-----

and unpredictable actor, and there are few signs
of any change in political direction. Norway must
contribute to stability and predictability in our
neighbouring regions, and be prepared to take
greater responsibility for our own security and
contributions to the Alliance. The likelihood of
direct conflict and war on Norwegian soil or that
of our allies has increased. The Chief of Defence
therefore believes that Norway must strengthen
its defence capabilities, both nationally and
within the framework of NATO.

**Sustainable Development Goals**
The UN Sustainable Development Goals, operationalised through the White Paper (Meld.
St. 40 (2020–2021)) Objectives with meaning
– Norway's action plan to reach the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, provides a
framework that the Armed Forces must take
account of. The Armed Forces must operate
in a sustainable manner and align themselves
with the UN Sustainable Development Goals.
Four main dimensions within the UN Sustainable
Development Goals are of particular importance
as regards our defence: Climate and environment, peace and security, economics and social
conditions.
Climate change poses a serious threat to
the international community, and the Armed
Forces must be prepared for the introduction of
stricter environmental requirements. A changed
climate will affect both the threat picture and,
as a result, the Armed Forces' operations. In addition, the development is placing demands
on the Armed Forces' own carbon footprint,
through both procurement and operations.
Climate change is a global problem that is
leading to scarcity of resources, more frequent
natural disasters, rising tensions and new migrant flows. The Armed Forces must be ready
to assist civil society with resources in order to
deal with more extreme weather events, such
as floods, forest fires and landslides. Climate
change will affect the regions within which the


Armed Forces operate. In the Arctic, for example, melting ice could lead to increased maritime
activity and make the region more accessible as
an arena for both cooperation and competition
between states.
In order to meet the requirement for emission reductions and environmental protection,
the defence sector has drawn up a climate and
environmental strategy, as well as an action plan
for climate and environment covering the period 2023-2030. Among other things, the action
plan for climate and environment sets out which
measures can be implemented and when, and
stipulates the cost of the measures as well as the
estimated impact.
The UN Sustainable Development Goals for
peace and security impact on the Armed Forces. The Armed Forces contribute to this work by
participating in international operations both
within and outside the framework of the UN.
More armed conflicts both internally and between states may increase the need to use the
Armed Forces outside Norway in order to promote global peace and security.
As both a contractor and a buyer, the
Armed Forces have a particular responsibility to
emphasise ethical and prudent processes, including development with a focus on economic sustainability. The circular economy and reuse of resources will be important if Norway is
to achieve its climate and environmental goals
and the UN Sustainable Development Goals. The
defence sector must be acutely aware of the sustainability requirements in connection with the
procurement, operation and disposal of materiel, real estate and infrastructure. Through future
investments, the Armed Forces must prepare
materiel, real estate and infrastructure to take
advantage of new climate-friendly technological
solutions over their lifetime. This will require flexible solutions emphasizing development potential over the course of their life cycle. The Armed
Forces must also make use of the technological
advances that may come about as a result of


-----

the efforts being made to counteract climate
change, both in order to create advantages in
operational effect and to facilitate the fulfilment
of future requirements and changes, such as new
energy sources.
The societal component of sustainable development means that the Armed Forces must
be inclusive, reflect diversity within society and
facilitate a safe working environment. The Armed
Forces must look after their employees. The societal aspect of sustainable development also
deals with combating social dumping and other
censurable actions on the part of external suppliers.

**The market situation**
The defence sector is affected by many of the
same trends as society as a whole. For a while,
the coronavirus pandemic contributed to longer
delivery times for raw materials and materiel.
The defence market is characterised by complex
supply chains that depend on predictability and
reliability in order to deliver.
Challenges relating to longer lead times
and higher costs as a result of the pandemic
have been magnified by the war in Ukraine. Both
Ukraine and Russia are major suppliers of many of
the raw materials and metals necessary to produce components of modern systems. Higher energy prices are also contributing to higher prices for goods the defence sector needs.
Price fluctuations and delivery challenges lead
to shorter deadlines from industry, which in turn
reduces the time available for in-house decision-making processes. In turn, this constitutes
a greater financial risk for the Armed Forces than
has previously been the case.
These developments have created challenges for our ability to rapidly procure materiel and ammunition. The challenging market situation is exacerbated by the fact that most NATO
countries are investing in more armaments at the
same time. The industry supply chain is unable


to respond sufficiently rapidly to the increase in
demand. Relatively low production levels over
time, particularly due to a limited focus on contingency stocks both nationally and among Norway’s allies, amplify these challenges. Production capacity will depend on the ability of the
industry to scale up fast enough, which depends
on a sufficient financial baseline. The Armed
Forces must plan for longer delivery times.

**Technological developments**
A modern and technologically up-to-date fighting force is crucial for operations, as well as the
day-to-day running of the force.
Technological advances happen at a rapid pace and may result in materiel and weapons systems losing their operational relevance if
they are not continuously updated. At the same
time, the development of emerging and disruptive technologies is increasingly being driven
by the civilian sector, such as machine learning,
artificial intelligence, autonomy and big data.
Increasing dependence on digital services and
infrastructure is also contributing to greater vulnerabilities and creating new threats.
Space-based sensors and communications
infrastructure, long-range precision weapons,
network-enabled weapons and unmanned systems will all give military forces greater precision and range. Network solutions that link sensors, weapons and decision-makers instantly will
make it easier to find and engage targets at long
range and help increase the pace of operations.
The technological prerequisites for this have
been there for a while already, but the Armed
Forces have so far been unable to make full use
of these opportunities.
Advances in machine learning and artificial
intelligence are facilitating automation of different processes, which in turn can contribute to
more efficient decision-making. Quantum technology will eventually be able to offer more secure communications and better sensors. Devel

-----

opments within the electromagnetic field also
point to more efficient systems for electronic
warfare and high-energy weapons.
We largely know what the Armed Forces’
principal materiel will be over the next 10-20
years. The Armed Forces must be able to integrate new technology in stages by adopting it
as it matures. When appropriate, new and disruptive technology must be introduced to replace traditional solutions. Technological development for purely military purposes will remain
important, but the Armed Forces must make use
of technology and innovations fostered by the
civilian sector. Cooperation with civilian industry is thus a key.
These technological advances will impact
how the Armed Forces operates in crisis or war,
as well as and manage its organization on a daily
basis. Additionally, they will shape how the defence sector interacts and is organised. Modern
military forces are entirely dependent on digital technology, and the effective application of
information and communications technology
(ICT) will be one of the paramount drivers of enhanced operational capability and management
the coming years.
Technology development will have consequences for the needs of the Armed Forces
with regards to skills and expertise in the future.
Armed Forces personnel must continually develop their skills and learn in new ways. This competence-building must be in step with technological developments and altered operational
concepts.


**Economy**
Striking a balance between tasks, structure
and funding is a fundamental premise for the
use, maintenance and development of defence
capabilities. Balance means that the existing
structure and associated operational requirements and tasks are funded in accordance with
the existing level of ambition. The development
of defence capabilities must be planned and
funded holistically within both investments and
operations, and must take into account future
needs regarding personnel, real estate and
infrastructure, materiel, etc.
Inadequate funding relative to the tasks of
the Armed Forces and the size of the existing
structure has long been a challenge. Insufficient
flexibility in the governance of the defence sector has meant that funding, tasks and structure
have not changed sufficiently rapidly in step with
changing assumptions. The consequence is an
imbalance which results in either a reduced ability to carry out tasks in a short-term perspective or fewer opportunities for development in
a longer-term perspective, or a combination of
these two scenarios. Correcting any imbalance
can also be disproportionately expensive because decisions about changes may be made
too late.


-----

### Part II The Norwegian Armed Forces

**3** **The role of the Norwegian Armed Forces today**

**and in the future** **30**
**4** **The status and challenges of the Norwegian Armed Forces 38**


-----

## Chapter 3

 The role of the Norwegian Armed Forces today and  in the future


Through the long-term plan, the Storting has
defined nine tasks for the Armed Forces along
with associated levels of ambition. Seven of
these tasks are dimensioning and, together with
developments in the security situation, act as
guidelines for the organisation and development of the Armed Forces.
The Armed Forces shall protect Norway's
population, territory, independence and sovereign rights against external threats. The threat
is constantly evolving, which means that the requirements imposed on the structure and organisation of the Armed Forces change over time.
The Armed Forces must have a long-term focus
that is adapted to a changing environment, with
the flexibility to adapt continuously in step with
developments.
The Norwegian defence concept constitutes a holistic approach to the defence of the
country. This defence concept describes how
the defence of Norway is based around three
parallel main lines: The national defence capability, the collective defence within NATO and
bilateral cooperation with close allies. The defence concept is underpinned by a modern and
prepared total defence system which contributes to resilience and combat endurance against
traditional and hybrid threats.
A strong national defence which complies
with NATO's Article III helps Norway to maintain
an influence over its own security and freedom
of action. The national capability is also a prerequisite for the ability of the Armed Forces to
face up to the challenges at hand. At the same
time, support from allied forces within the framework of NATO's Article V is a key part of Norway’s
deterrence and defence capabilities, which in
turn places demands on Norway's ability to receive and support allied reinforcements. Similarly, the Armed Forces must be able to make forces
available for an allied defensive response to an
armed attack under NATO's Article V, both within and outside Norway, in order to contribute
to NATO's collective defence. In addition to its


-----

#### The Norwegian Armed Forces’ operations

**Force**
**generation**

**Support during**

**National**

**incidents and**

**operations**

**accidents**

**The Norwegian**
**Armed Forces**

**Reception** **Multinational**
**of Allied** **operations outside**
**reinforcements** **Norway**

**Integrated**
**contributions to**
**NATO within**
**and outside of**
**Norway**

 Multi-domain operations

**Integration across domains**


Fig. 3

Fig. 4


contributions to the alliance, the Armed Forces
must be prepared to contribute to international
crisis management within multinational frameworks such as coalitions or under the auspices
of the UN.
It is the link between the three main aspects of the defence concept that constitutes
Norway's overall deterrence and defence capability. The structure of the Armed Forces must
have a volume and a composition that enable
them to carry out training, exercises and domestic operations, and to receive and integrate with
allied forces, while at the same time contributing to operations outside Norway. However, it
is also vital that the Armed Forces are available
to contribute to society's management of major
incidents and accidents as and when necessary.
The structure of the Armed Forces must possess
the necessary firepower, mobility and combat
endurance to facilitate sufficient flexibility and
an ability to face up to both current and future
security challenges.
Continuous situational awareness is a prerequisite if the Armed Forces are to be able to
respond to developing situations appropriately.
Rising tensions in our neighbouring regions are
increasing the importance of the Armed Forces having an independent intelligence capability in order to establish and maintain situational awareness, both on their own behalf and in
support of NATO. The Intelligence service has
a particularly important role to play and is responsible for providing situational awareness
and decision-making support to military and civilian Norwegian authorities and our allies.
The Armed Forces must operate jointly,
which means that the contributions of forces in
all domains must be coordinated in order to create challenges for the adversary. These operations are led by a Joint Headquarters which is capable of planning and leading operations across
the Armed Forces branches, domains and levels.
Joint operations are constantly evolving. A more
complex threat landscape is placing greater de

mands on holistic approaches and coordination
across domains and sectors. Modern technology, especially within the areas of weapons, sensors and information technology, is creating
great potential for close cooperation. These
developments form the basis for new conceptual directions, such as NATO's concept of multi-domain operations. Although multi-domain
operations still revolve around planning, managing and executing joint operations, the concept helps to exploit the potential of modern
technology and cooperation in a more efficient
way. The Armed Forces must therefore closely
monitor developments within new technology,
particularly within the areas of satellite technology, network technology and the processing of
large amounts of data, in order to ensure a high
tempo of operations and provide a sound basis
for decision-making by the political authorities
and the Armed Forces in the future.
Cyber defence and space activities are becoming increasingly important for the ability of
the Armed Forces to contribute to joint operations. The country’s cyber defences must maintain, operate and protect the Armed Forces' information and communication systems against
digital threats. In the space domain, space activities must maintain and strengthen capabilities as regards communication and navigation
throughout the Armed Forces' area of operation,
and contribute to the monitoring of Norwegian
areas of interest.
The Armed Forces must have a continuous
presence in prioritized areas to contribute to deterrence, situational awareness, the ability to assert Norwegian sovereignty and the ability to
exercise national authority. In the land domain,
the Armed Forces must have a presence with
a focus on the High North, surveillance of the
Norwegian-Russian border, and the King's Guard
(HMKG) in Oslo. Through the Home Guard, the
Armed Forces must have a presence throughout the country and ensure local knowledge and
interaction with the civilian sector. The Armed


**Integration**
**across nations**


**Integration**
**across total**
**defence actors**
**and society**


**Politiet**

**Avinor**

**Statens vegvesen**

**DSB** **Helsedirektoratet**

**Sivilforsvaret** **Bane Nor**

**Frivillige organisasjoner**

**Kystverket**

**Norsk industri**

**Tolletaten**


-----

Forces must also ensure preparedness for counterterrorism and crisis management. The ability
to operate in the maritime domain is particularly important to ensure presence and situational awareness in Norway's major maritime areas
of interest. The Armed Forces must have a presence and enforce jurisdiction and sovereignty in
territorial waters, economic zones and maritime
areas of interest. In addition, the Armed Forces
must monitor and patrol Norwegian and international airspace and maritime areas of interest,
as well as maintain combat aircraft readiness on
behalf of NATO.
The Armed Forces have many resources at
their disposal that can and should support civil
society in challenging situations such as major
incidents, accidents or disasters, both in Norway
and abroad. This support requires close cooperation between the Armed Forces and the civilian emergency preparedness sector within the
framework of the country’s total defence system. The increasing use of complex instruments
is also placing stricter demands on cooperation.
Ensuring that our Allies are able to operate
together with Norwegian forces in a challenging
Arctic climate and geography is a prerequisite
for the Norwegian defence concept. The Armed
Forces must therefore regularly host training and
exercises with allied forces in Norway. Military
activity together with our allies demonstrates
both a desire and an ability to stand together,
and helps to make Norwegian deterrence and
NATO's new defence concept credible.
In recent years, Norwegian Armed Forces
units have regularly taken part in allied operations in the High North. Participation puts us in a
position to influence allied operational patterns
in a direction that is consistent with Norwegian
security policy and interests. In addition, participation ensures that Norway is seen as a responsible actor that is serious about its security
interests in the region.
The Armed Forces must be able to execute
high-intensity combat operations both on their


own and together with Allies at short notice. The
Armed Forces must be able to draw allied forces into a Norwegian defensive response to an
armed attack without delay and have the capability to fight closely and jointly with these
forces from the outset. The Armed Forces must
make provision for allied reinforcements to reach
Norway rapidly and support the transportation
of these forces to the relevant area of operation, regardless of whether this is in Norway or
one of our neighbouring countries. In addition
to receiving and supporting allied forces, this
involves securing sea lines of communication,
reception areas, ports, air bases and transport
axes. In some areas, however, the Armed Forces must be prepared to fight without significant
allied involvement over a period of time, which
places demands on the responsiveness, volume
and combat endurance of the structure.
In a war against an adversary that is increasingly employing both offensive and defensive
weapons systems with long range and high precision, the Armed Forces, either alone or together with allies, must have the capability to attack
the adversary's military capabilities and critical
vulnerabilities with long-range fire from land, sea
and air. This development entails stricter requirements regarding the management of joint operations, the effect of which will depend on timely
and precise information gathering, the seamless
sharing of information and rapid decision-making at all levels, both nationally and in an allied
framework.
The Armed Forces must have the capability
to defend against attacks on both military and
civilian targets. In addition to long-range missiles, attacks can come in the form of sabotage,
unmanned systems or cyber-attacks. The Armed
Forces must also be able to handle the complex
use of instruments by the adversary, including attempts to exert influence. Society is particularly
vulnerable to attacks using long-range missiles.
The Armed Forces must therefore give priority to
ensuring sufficient capability to protect key mili

-----

tary and civilian infrastructure and societal functions against attacks in the form of cruise missiles, ballistic missiles and unmanned systems.
The Armed Forces must utilise society's collective resources in the defence of Norway, and
the key to this lies in the total defence concept.
Contributions from the total defence system are
crucial for performing many of the Armed Forces'
tasks, such as receiving allied forces and logistics. In order to strengthen Norway’s defence
capabilities, combat endurance and resilience,
instruments from different areas of society must
be coordinated seamlessly.
The Armed Forces must have the capability
to take part in multinational crisis management
operations within the framework of NATO or other multinational frameworks. Contributions to
NATO's standing forces, operations abroad and
international efforts help to promote Norway as
a relevant partner and strengthen the cohesion
of the Alliance.
In summary, the Armed Forces must be aligned with the Alliance and sufficiently flexible to
adapt to changes in the security situation and
society at large. In addition, the Armed Forces
must be modern, relevant and have the confi­
dence of the Norwegian population. Tasks, structure and finances must be balanced. The Armed
Forces must have a balanced ability to detect
threats and defend the country and Alliance
members in a joint operational framework against
threats in all domains.


-----

## Chapter 4

 The status and challenges of the Norwegian Armed Forces


The Armed Forces have significant operational
weaknesses, which challenges their ability to
face the security situation and handle the most
challenging situations that the Armed Forces
may encounter.
The early 1990s saw the start of the gradual
reduction of the Armed Forces. This downsizing
was a consequence of changes in the security
situation after the Cold War and the prevailing
budgets. The Armed Forces' inventories, operational structures and maintenance capacity were
downgraded or terminated. NATO operations in
the Balkans and later in Afghanistan influenced
the Armed Forces' focus and use of resources. Although the operations provided important operational experience, they led to the Armed Forces
being oriented towards a structure that afforded
less focus on national capability than had previously been the case. This focus has considerably reduced the ability of the Armed Forces to
defend Norway.
Following Russia's invasions of Georgia in
2008 and Ukraine in 2014, this trend reversed
and a gradual process of rebuilding began. Previous and current long-term plans are ambitious
and pull the Armed Forces in the right direction
in many areas. Overall, however, the plans have
accepted too much risk in implementation. As a
consequence, an imbalance has arisen between
funding, tasks and structure. Collectively, the
challenges mean that today's Armed Forces are
not sufficiently funded or dimensioned to perform the tasks incumbent on them.
Norway have donated large quantities of
materiel and ammunition to Ukraine. These donations are also important for Norwegian security, and the Armed Forces will contribute for
as long as needed. At the same time, the donations exacerbate the emerging imbalance, and
it is difficult to predict the extent of support that
will have to be provided to Ukraine in the future.
This Military Advice therefore does not consider the donations specifically, but assumes that
the materiel and ammunition donated by the


-----

Armed Forces will be reacquired and replaced.
However, reacquisition will pull resources from
the entire defence sector, simultaneously as the
Armed Forces must be strengthened and developed further.
The analysis process behind this Military
Advice indicates that the current long-term
plan represents a good starting point for further development of the Armed Forces. Despite
many challenges, there is a lot that works well
and our personnel carry out missions every single day. For example, the Armed Forces contribute presence, situational awareness and security through combat aircraft readiness for NATO,
participation in allied naval forces and border
security. The Norwegian Armed Forces have
demonstrated an excellent ability to plan, lead
and carry out major national and allied exercises with our allied partners. At the same time, the
Armed Forces have repeatedly demonstrated an
ability to rapidly turn their hand to the performance of unexpected and important tasks, e.g.
through donations to Ukraine, the withdrawal
from Kabul and the border security provided
by the Home Guard during the pandemic. The
Armed Forces are also investing in and phasing in
modern materiel, such as combat aircraft, maritime patrol aircraft and helicopters, ocean-going
coastguard vessels and submarines. In addition,
the special-forces are being strengthened. The
build-up of the Finnmark Land Command and
the mechanisation of Brigade North is continuing with the introduction of air defence capability, long-range precision fire and new combat vehicles.
Despite these initiatives, the Armed Forces
have a number of key shortcomings. The greatest challenges are linked to the protection of
military and civilian targets against air threats,
the ability to engage targets at long range, and
maintaining a presence and operations in Norway’s maritime areas of interest. In addition, the
Armed Forces do not have sufficient volume to


carry out operations over extended periods of
time. In a military context, quantity is often a
quality in itself.
The Armed Forces also face challenges and
shortcomings in terms of personnel, materiel,
ammunition, fuel, ICT and real estate and infrastructure. The personnel and competence situation represents the greatest risk factor for the
development of the Armed Forces. Unless measures are implemented by 2028, the sector risks
having a shortfall of around 1,000 commissioned
officers and 1,700 non-commissioned officers.
The Armed Forces are recruiting effectively, but
there is a trend that experienced personnel leave
the Armed Forces in order to pursue a civilian
career. Personnel leaving the armed forces are
increasing the need for education and training,
while at the same time reducing the level of experience available within the organisation. If
nothing is done to turn this trend urgently, the
Armed Forces will face considerable challenges
in realising the current structure. It will also be
difficult to succeed both with the planned development and strengthening of the structure.
The Armed Forces will need to upgrade,
modernise and replace a lot of materiel over the
coming years. Despite substantial investments
in, for example, aircraft, vessels and combat vehicles, insufficient funding has led to challenges in many areas to facilitate ongoing updates,
spare parts, ammunition and new equipment.
The same issue is also being faced by the Armed
Forces with regards to other materiel and equipment. Ammunition stocks are insufficient. The
greatest consequence for the combat endurance of the Armed Forces is a shortfall in stockpiles of combat-decisive ammunition. Given the
prevailing security situation, this trend must be
reversed.
Norway is currently producing large quantities of fuel, and the civilian sector has sufficient
capacity as regards storage and transport of the
most common types of fuel. However, the ability


-----

Artillery ammunition handling.


Th N


-----

of the Armed Forces to transport and store fuel
outside fixed infrastructure is limited, which reduces the combat endurance of land forces in
particular.
The Armed Forces' ICT is the foundation
that underpins the future digitalisation of all the
Armed Forces' processes and is crucial for daily operations, management of the Armed Forces and the sharing of situational awareness.
ICT is particularly important for multi-domain
operations and facilitates the effective utilisation of modern weapons platforms. The Office
of the Auditor General has identified a number
of challenges within Armed Forces information
systems, which over time have been characterised by a lack of modernisation and a significant
gap between actual condition and needs. The
ability to protect Armed Forces systems against
cyber security threats is also limited. Over time,
the defence sector has failed to realise effective
and secure information systems which meet the
necessary security approvals. Fragmented responsibility for the operation and management
of ICT within the sector has led to a lack of overview and disparate interpretations of roles and
responsibilities.
Maintenance, preservation and upgrades
of real estate infrastructure have not been funded sufficiently over time. The backlog is considerable and growing. Investments and changes
in the structure have not been followed up with
funding to establish and adapt the necessary
real estate and infrastructure. This lack of priority
means that personnel often have to live in barracks that do not meet expected standards and
that materiel and equipment is stored in unsuitable facilities or outdoors. The backlog of maintenance of NATO-funded infrastructure, including areas for air operations, ammunition storage

↖
Home Guard soldiers wearing out-dated uniforms.


and fuel stockpiles, reduces the capability of the
Armed Forces to support allied reinforcements
in Norway.
The defence sector comprises the following agencies: Norwegian Armed Forces, Norwegian Defence Materiel Agency, Norwegian Defence Estates Agency and Norwegian Defence
Research Establishment. In addition, the National Security Authority represents an important
contributor to the defence sector. The defence
sector is headed by the Ministry of Defence.
Through the interaction between the agencies,
as well as between the ministry and the agencies, there is considerable potential to streamline the processes. This Military Advice does not
consider this potential in any detail, because
many initiatives have already been implemented within what is known as the modernisation
and efficiency programme. In addition, the Government has signalled an organizational reform
which will clarify roles, responsibilities and authority within the defence sector.
The relationship between the tasks, structure and finances of the Armed Forces is not currently well-balanced. The challenges facing the
Armed Forces relating to personnel, materiel,
ammunition, ICT and real estate and infrastructure are having a negative impact on operational
capabilities. The Armed Forces also have weaknesses and shortcomings in the composition of
their capabilities, particularly as regards to maritime presence and warfare, protection from air
threats and long-range precision fire. The Armed
Forces' combat endurance and ability to operate over a prolonged period of time is marginal. These deficiencies and challenges essentially
mean that the Armed Forces will not be able to
carry out their most demanding tasks in a satisfactory manner.


-----

The basis for the current development of the
structure and operational profile of the Armed
Forces is set out in the current long-term plan
and associated financial planning framework.
In Report to the Storting (Meld. St. No. 10
(2021 – 2022)), the Government stresses that
the long-term plan assumed excessive risk in
its implementation. The Armed Forces maintain
daily operations and a presence in priority areas, but have too little combat endurance and
insufficient contingency stocks.
The analysis of the status of the Armed Forces and related calculations indicate that there
are many challenges associated with realising
the level of ambition within the planning framework. This is due to overly optimistic cost estimates, unexpected additional needs over and
above the planning assumptions and investment
and planning processes delaying and increasing
the cost of procurements.
Additional costs for materiel and real estate and infrastructure projects create a difference between the need for investment funding
and the funding that has been allocated to the
investment plan. This difference amounts to several billion Norwegian kroner as regards materiel
and real estate and infrastructure. When known
additional needs are added to the mix, the shortfall becomes even greater. Additional needs are
essential investments which are not included in
the investment plan, but which are considered
necessary to realise the objectives of the current
long-term plan.
Furthermore, the assumptions underlying
the level of ambition for supply preparedness
and ammunition have changed. The current
long-term plan takes account of risk in these areas by accepting a lower level of ambition. The
Armed Forces may be able to carry out day-today operations, but they have limited combat
endurance in the defence of Norway and its allies
against serious threats, strikes and attacks. Similarly, the long-term plan accepts risks associated with the maintenance of real estate and infra

## Chapter 5

 More funding needed to realise the adopted structure


-----

structure. The condition of much of the building
portfolio is currently at a level that requires considerable funding in order to preserve its value.
Barracks, logistics and support functions, training and exercise facilities, along with facilities
for receiving allied reinforcements, are of great
importance to national operational capability.
Better value preservation of real estate and infrastructure will reduce the need to build new,
and therefore have a positive effect from a sustainability perspective.
Since the publication of the current longterm plan, the assumptions used in the economic planning process have changed. For example, the cancellation of the NH-90 maritime
helicopter impacts the planning basis, and the
cost of replacing this capacity is contributing
to an increase in the additional funding that will
be needed. Furthermore, delays in the delivery
of new submarines will lead to a need for major investment to extend the life of the Ula class
submarines.
In addition to incorporated overheads, there
are many known needs that have not been included in the investment plan. These needs include ICT, personal clothing and equipment for
the entire force structure, as well as satisfactory real estate and infrastructure for personnel
and educational institutions within the Armed
Forces.
Overall, the current long-term plan and
its associated level of ambition have a financial
shortfall that will render it impossible to realise the structure that has been described. If the
current long-term plan, which does not include

↖
Armed Forces vehicle from the 1980s.


combat-decisive ammunition, for example, as
an objective, is to be realised, an estimated additional NOK 58 billion will be needed through
to 2028. Assuming that the level of ambition is
adjusted upwards to include combat-decisive
ammunition and value preservation, additional
funding of just under NOK 80 billion will be needed through to 2028.
The Norwegian Defence Research Establishment's defence analysis from 2023 points
to underfunding of the Armed Forces of at least
NOK 30 billion through to 2030. The analysis is
based on known investment figures from early
2022 and uses the level of ambition in the longterm plan as a basis for its estimates. This Military Advice differs from the defence analysis in
that it also takes account of other factors such
as the need to build up combat endurance with
regard to ammunition and the necessary value
preservation of real estate and infrastructure. In
addition, consideration is given to investments
that are deemed necessary in order to realise the
described ambition that do not currently form
part of the investment plan. This Military Advice
is based on what the Chief of Defence believes
are essential operational requirements for the
structure.


-----

### Part III


### The Chief of Defence's Military Advice

**6** **Adaption of the Armed Forces structure to the**

**adopted financial framework** **52**

Adjusted priorities and level of ambition 52

Joint elements 54

The land domain 57

Det maritime domenet 58

The air domain 58
**7** **Recommendations given a reduction in the**

**financial planning framework** **62**
**8** **Scalable strengthening of defence capabilities**

**– the recommended approach** **64**

Focus Area: Eliminate weakness in the

current structure 66

Focus Area: Maritime surface structure 71

Focus Area: Air defence 77

Focus Area: Long-range precision weapons 78

Focus Area: Increase the volume of

the Armed Forces 78
**9** **The Chief of Defence's other recommendations** **98**

Personnel and expertise 98

Real estate and infrastructure 106

Equipment and logistics 114

Climate and environment 115

Innovation and technology 116

Allied cooperation 122

Sweden and Finland's membership of NATO 125

Training and exercises 126

Hybrid threats 129

Total defence framework 129

Further development of the Armed Forces'

culture and the military profession 133

Modernisation and streamlining 133

Organisation and governance 134
**10** **Financial basis** **136**


-----

This chapter describes how the Armed Forces
must be adapted in order to align with an
economic direction that is based on the current long-term plan and associated economic
planning framework.
There is an imbalance between the Armed
Forces’ tasks, structure and finances. Through to
the end of 2028, the Armed Forces are expected
to realise a number of expensive investments.
In addition, as explained previously, it was decided that consideration should be given to risk
relating to ammunition stocks and value preservation as regards real estate and infrastructure.
The Armed Forces are currently underfunded.
Over time, this imbalance has resulted in a
defence structure that would not have the neces­sary stamina or robustness to provide sufficient
resistance in a conflict or war, particularly over
an extended period of time. If the decided financial framework is maintained, clear priorities
must be established within the Armed Forces.
An approach based unilaterally on terminating or adjusting investments is unsustainable over time. The Armed Forces must therefore
implement structural measures, which will entail
substantial cuts in the structure combined with
adjustments to planned investments.

**Adjusted priorities and level of ambition**
If the approved financial framework is retained,
the Chief of Defence believes that the priorities
and level of ambition established for the Armed
Forces must also be adjusted accordingly.
The Chief of Defence recommends that priority should continue to be given to capabilities that contribute to situational awareness in
our areas of interest, and to maintain the capability to enforce Norwegian jurisdiction, sovereign rights and security interests. Prioritising situational awareness will enable the Norwegian
Intelligence Service to continue to perform its
functions, but future growth must be deferred.
Timely intelligence, surveillance and target data
acquisition are emphasised and will continue
to be critical with regard to the Armed Forc

## Chapter 6

 Adaption of the  Armed Forces structure to the adopted financial framework


-----

#### The core of the Armed Forces with an adapted structure

**Maritime patrol aircraft** **Brigade** **Frigates**


Fig. 5

**Combat aircraft**


es’ overall defence capabilities. The Norwegian
Coast Guard and the border guard will continue
at their current level in order to enforce Norwegian jurisdiction, sovereign rights and our security interests on a daily basis.
The Armed Forces must maintain their ability to inflict losses on an adversary, both on their
own and alongside allies. If the structure is reduced, the Armed Forces must retain their capability to take part in joint operations in order
to exploit synergies across the domains. To ensure sufficient firepower and mobility, the Armed
Forces must retain a core set of capabilities consisting of a brigade structure, combat aircraft, air
defence systems, maritime patrol aircraft, frigates, submarines, the area structure of the Home
Guard and special forces. These core capabilities help the Armed Forces to maintain their joint
operations capability and provide the necessary
capacity to both find and inflict losses on an adversary in all domains. Parallel to this, it will be
necessary to prioritise certain rapid response
forces.
The sum of the proposed measures will
help to create some financial leeway in order to
gradually increase quantities of ammunition and


implement measures that extend the combat endurance of the remaining structure.
Any reduction in defence capabilities will
increase the importance of allied cooperation
and reinforcements. The ability to receive allied
reinforcements and transport them onwards
must therefore be given the greatest possible
priority. At the same time, allied forces must
be better prepared to protect their own transport, particularly at sea. A national defence system that is less compliant with NATO's Article III
could also weaken the Alliance's cohesion and
collective defence and deterrence capabilities.
In summary, defence capability will be
weakened. The ability of the Armed Forces to
perform their assigned nine tasks and achieve
the current level of ambition will also be challenged.

**Joint elements**
The Norwegian Special Forces is a strategic
capability with a high level of readiness. Special
forces have a high level of expertise which take
a long time to build up. The role of the special
forces in crisis management and counterterrorism must be maintained through a core consist

**Air defence** **Special forces** **Home Guard companies** **Submarines**


-----

## "An approach based unilaterally on terminating or adjusting investments is unsustainable over time. The Armed Forces must therefore imple- ment structural measures, which will entail sub- stantial cuts in the structure combined with  adjustments to planned investments".


ing of the Special Operations Commando and
the Naval Special Operations Commando. The
planned establishment of additional capacity at
Ramsund is being abandoned in order to reduce
operating and investment costs. Acquiring new
special forces helicopters will be stopped, and
the existing Bell 412 helicopters will remain in
use until they reach the end of their life cycle.
Support of maritime counter-terrorism operations must be provided by the search and rescue
helicopters and through the use of maritime helicopters once these are in place. In addition, staff
and leadership elements must be reduced to
protect core elements of the Norwegian Special
Forces. The Norwegian Special Forces Commando as separate branch will be disbanded
and the Special Operations Commando as and
the Naval Special Operations Commando will
placed under command of the Army and Navy.
The Norwegian Joint Headquarters (NJHQ ) will
be responsible for leading and coordinating
special forces operations in this alternative.
The ongoing establishment of a logistics
headquarters in support of a NATO joint operational headquarters will continue, and the possibilities as regards Nordic cooperation should
be explored. The Chief of Defence also recommends retaining plans to establish a cadre-based
heavy engineering battalion, a RSOM battalion,
an MP battalion and a CBRN company. It is also
recommended that the host nation support battalion that supports the U.S. Marine Corps be
continued. It is furthermore recommended that
a medical services command element continue
to be built up in order to coordinate medical services in rear areas.
Joint units such as the Norwegian Armed
Forces Joint Medical Services and the Norwegian
Cyber Defence Force must be adapted and reduced in step with changes throughout the rest
of the Armed Forces' structure.


**The land domain**
In the land domain, the Army and Home
Guard must reduce their structure, including
terminating new planned establishments and
investments. In addition, the leadership, administration and base operations of the Army
and Home Guard must be reduced in line with
a reduced structure.
Brigade North will remain the core of the
Army's structure. Brigade North will be remain
as today to ensure firepower and mobility on
the land domain. A brigade is an independent
capacity that can be integrated both with allied
forces and in joint operations. The establishment
of the 4th Mechanised Battalion will be terminated, which will result in Norway failing to meet
NATO's requirements in this area. The planned
acquisition on long-range precision fire will be
continued in order to enhance the capability to
inflict losses on an adversary and create joint
operational effects.
In order to reduce operational and investment costs at Terningmoen, the Armed Forces
must abandon the ambition of establishing a
joint basic training unit for the armed forces. As
a consequence, the training of recruits must be
integrated in the operational units, with the exception of His Majesty The King's Guard.
Finnmark Land Command in its current form
will disbanded. The border guard will continue
to monitor the Norwegian-Russian border. New
infrastructure being established at the Garrison
of Porsanger will be completed to facilitate both
Norwegian and increased allied training and
exercise activities, and maintain a minimum of
presence in the High North.
To ensure situational awareness, the Army's
Intelligence Battalion will remain in its current
form.
The Chief of Defence recommends that the
structure of the Home Guard must be reduced.
Cuts in the Armed Forces and the Army in par

-----

ticular, will lead to a reduction in the intake of
conscripts, which will also limit the pool for recruiting to the Home Guard. In addition, the financial framework will force a reduction in the
level of training, which in turn will lead to a gradual reduction in the operational capability of the
Home Guard. The core organisation of the Home
Guard is the territorial structure, and this must
be reduced to a level that will permit essential
training, while at the same time maintaining local presence to the greatest extent possible. The
capability to protect critical infrastructure worthy of protection will be reduced, and the level
of ambition for many of these installations and
infrastructure will be reduced from protection
to surveillance. The Chief of Defence also recommends that the Home Guard’s rapid reaction
forces be cut in favour of preserving the territorial structure. The current eleven Home Guard districts commands will be adjusted to four regions
in order to reduce operational and infrastructure
costs. A transition to four regions will render cooperation with actors within the total defence.
Overall, the reductions in the land domain
will reduce both responsiveness and combat endurance. In addition, the Armed Forces will not
meet NATO's requirements regarding land forces. The operational level of ambition must be
lowered and the presence of the Armed Forces within the land domain in the High North will
be reduced.

**The maritime domain**
Within the maritime domain, the Armed Forces
must accelerate the phasing out of existing
structures within the Navy, cut structural
elements and halt planned investments. Management, administration and base operations
must be adapted to be consistent with a smaller
structure. Tasks afforded a lower priority must
be terminated.
The Chief of Defence recommends that the
Armed Forces retain a core centred around frigates and submarines to ensure both a denial ca

pability and the capacity to inflict losses on an
adversary in the maritime domain. To enable the
core to maintain an adequate level of readiness
and availability, other parts of the structure will
have to be cut significantly. The following structures and associated projects must be either cut
or phased out earlier:

-  Norwegian Naval EOD Command

-  Mine Clearance Squadron (Alta/Oksøy
class)

-  Corvette Squadron (incl. Reine-class))

-  Royal Norwegian Navy Medical Services

-  Norwegian Coastal Ranger Commando.

-  Fleet Logistics Command (Marinens Logistikk kommando/MLK and the Reine class).

The Royal Norwegian Navy’s frigates should
undergo upgrades to secure operation in line
with the classification company’s regulations
and requirements. The role of the Norwegian
Coast Guard in enforcing Norwegian jurisdiction
and sovereignty will be maintained.
Within the maritime domain, the proposed
approach involves the Royal Norwegian Navy
continuing to use frigates (with reduced capability), submarines, KNM Maud and the Norwegian Coast Guard. Cuts in the structure of the
Navy will considerably reduce the Navy’s firepower and necessitate a reduction in the Armed
Forces’ operational level of ambition within the
maritime domain. The Armed Forces will not be
able to achieve the ambition of controlling the
sea and will be forced to focus on denial.

**The air domain**
Within the air domain, the Chief of Defence
recommends to prioritize the Royal Norwegian
Air Force's primary mission of fighting for air
supremacy and contributing to anti- submarine
warfare in the maritime domain. Combat aircraft,
air defence systems and maritime patrol aircraft,
combined with early-warning radar systems,
constitute the core of the Air Force, and must
therefore be shielded from cuts insofar as is


-----

possible. This will enable the Armed Forces to
retain their capability to contribute situational
awareness, inflict losses on an adversary and
contribute to joint operations in the air domain.
In the air domain, the Armed Forces must
cut structures that do not contribute to the core
mission in their entirety. In addition, management, administration and base operations must
be adapted to a smaller structure. The Chief of
Defence recommends that the Royal Norwegian
Air Force should not upgrade its Bell 412 helicopter capabilities and that the helicopters be
phased out at the end of their life cycle. In addition, ongoing procurement processes relating to
new tactical transport helicopters for the Army
and special forces will be terminated. This will
lead to a reduction in responsiveness, as well as
reduce tactical mobility and the ability to support special operations. The already approved
procurement of maritime helicopters will continue in order to support operations in the maritime domain. Helicopter support for the police
will cease when the Bell 412 is phased out.
The Armed Forces' C-130J Hercules tactical transport aircraft will also be withdrawn,
which will reduce the mobility, responsiveness
and medical evacuation capability of the Armed
Forces. Cuts in tactical transport capability will
also reduce the ability of the Armed Forces to
manage unexpected situations and crises both
in Norway and abroad.
In summary, cuts in the air domain will reduce the Armed Forces' mobility and responsiveness, as well as their ability to respond to
situations at home and abroad.


-----

This chapter covers a development path with
a level of funding that is lower than assumed in
the current long-term plan.
As outlined above, continuation of the financial framework will result in a considerably
reduced structure. The structure of the Armed
Forces will be altered significantly if the financial planning framework is reduced. The imbalance between task, structure and funding will
be amplified, and the ability of the Armed Forces
to manage both the current and future security
situation will be further weakened. As a result,
the Chief of Defence does not believe it is possible to provide military advice describing the
development path of the Armed Forces with an
appropriation level lower than that assumed in
the current long-term plan.
A development path that accommodates
a smaller economic planning framework must
build on the direction that is described under the
continuation of the current economic framework
and will entail further reductions in the volume
and capabilities of the Armed Forces. Given such
a development, the Chief of Defence recommends an approach whereby the task, structure
and economic framework are assessed holistically to ensure a mutual balance for the future operation and development of the Armed Forces.
If such a development path were to become reality, the Chief of Defence would ask to
be invited to participate in discussions concerning the level of ambition for the Armed Forces
and the tasks that the Armed Forces are to perform, and would then contribute military advice
concerning subsequent developments. The basis for such a discussion, given that the Government and the Storting wish such a development,
should be concrete alternative frameworks for
economic development, as different frameworks
would entail different orientations for the Armed
Forces and their tasks.


## Chapter 7

 Recommendations given a reduction in the financial planning framework


-----

This chapter describes a development path that
recommends prioritised measures for a scalable
strengthening of the Armed Forces in both the
short and the longer term.
The structure of the Armed Forces under
the current long-term plan forms a good starting point for further development. The analysis
for this Military Advice indicates that the current
capabilities and structural elements should be
continued. The Chief of Defence's recommendations to follow are therefore based on the existing structure.
At the same time, there are a number of
challenges that must be overcome. The Armed
Forces have weaknesses with regard to personnel, materiel, ammunition, ICT, real estate and infrastructure. These weaknesses affect the Armed
Forces negatively and must be resolved by ensuring that capabilities are resourced sufficiently
and in a balanced manner. The structure of the
Armed Forces must also be developed to possess an appropriate mix of capabilities with sufficient volume to meet both the current situation
and future developments. Although the current
long-term plan seeks to strengthen current defence capabilities, the Chief of Defence believes
that changes in underlying assumptions have led
to a situation where the structure and investment being made are insufficient. The challenges are particularly marked with regard to operations in the maritime domain, the capability to
defend civilian and military infrastructure against
air threats, the capability to engage targets at
long range, and the capability to face the most
challenging situations over time.
The Chief of Defence recommends to
strengthen the Norwegian defence through five
focus areas with basis in the defence concept,
the previously decided structure and the current status of the Armed Forces. The focus areas
establish a course for the development of the
Armed Forces. Within the focus areas, both new
capabilities as well as an increase in volume will
be introduced.


## Chapter 8

 Scalable strengthening of defence capabilities  – the recommended  approach


-----

#### Scalable strengthening of the Norwegian Armed Forces


Fig. 6


The ability to defend Norway does not require that all proposed new capabilities and increases in volume be realized. The Norwegian
defence concept means that Norway as a nation
will not face an adversary alone. Through our alliance affiliation, all attacks on Norway will be
met with resistance. However, any growth will
improve the capability of the Armed Forces to resist aggression and help reduce risks and vulnerabilities. The Military Advice therefore emphasizes scalability and offers priorities both within
and across the focus areas.
The Chief of Defence recommends a development path that is consistent with the following focus areas, listed in order of relative importance:

-  Eliminate weaknesses in the current
structure

-  Maritime surface structure

-  Air defence

-  Long-range precision weapons

-  Increase the volume of the Armed Forces

To ensure scalability, the Chief of Defence recommends a growth strategy that can be adapted to any increase in the economic trajectory.
Given sufficient economic room for manoeuvre, the strengthening across the focus areas should be carried out in parallel.
Given a limited increase in economic room
for manoeuvre, the following growth strategy is
recommended, where the size of the allocated
funding will determine how many and how much
of the focus areas can be realised:

-  Initially, it is recommended that weaknesses in the current structure be rectified, at
the same time as already approved structural elements are introduced.

-  Parallel to this, the focus should gradually
be shifted to strengthening the ability to
conduct maritime operations by replacing
the surface vessel structure.

-  Then the capability to protect Norway
against air threats must then be strengthened.



-  The Armed Forces must then enhance
their ability to inflict losses on an adversary through the use of long-range precision weapons.

-  Finally, the Chief of Defence will give priority to measures that increase the Armed
Forces' volume to ensure greater combat
endurance and the ability to operate in several areas simultaneously.

A priority has been stipulated within each focus area. Through these priorities, the Chief of
Defence highlights what is most important. At
the same time, not all measures within one area
need be addressed before measures in other
focus areas can be implemented.
Irrespective of the economic room for manoeuvre, appropriate synchronisation within the
defence sector is vital, and any growth must take
into account the sector's ability to deliver.

**Focus area: Eliminate weaknesses in the**
**current structure**
To enable existing and approved structural elements of the Armed Forces to achieve satisfactory operational capability, the Chief of Defence
recommends measures in this focus area which
help to remedy identified weaknesses in the
structure, with an emphasis on the following
areas:

-  Fill the structure with sufficient expertise
and personnel.

-  Ensure that real estate and infrastructure
meet the requirements for satisfactory living and working conditions for personnel.

-  Increase materiel and ammunition stocks.

-  Modernise and streamline the Armed
Forces' ICT.

These measures form part of a whole and are
interdependent in some areas. The strengthening must therefore take place in parallel with
measures in several areas. To ensure sufficient
firepower and mobility, the Armed Forces must
give priority to remedying deficiencies relating


**Increase the**
**volume of the**
**Armed Forces**


**Maritime surface**
**structure**

**Long-range**
**precision weapons**

**Air defence**

**Eliminated weaknesses**
**in the current structure**

**The Armed**
**Forces today**


-----

to the brigade structure, combat aircraft, air
defence systems, maritime patrol aircraft,
frigates, submarines and special forces. At an
overarching level, however, priority should be
given to factors that contribute to the strengthening of the Armed Forces' personnel status and
ammunition stocks.
The Armed Forces lack sufficient personnel and expertise, and this will become a considerable challenge if action is not taken soon.
The Chief of Defence considers that personnel
and expertise will require a particular focus over
the coming years, and supplementary advice on
this area is therefore provided in a later chapter.
The Armed Forces must step up their efforts to
recruit, retain and re-recruit competent personnel. Education quotas and the capacity to train
commissioned officers, non-commissioned officers and enlisted personnel must be increased,
in this order of priority. This priority is based on
the duration of the training and the time it takes
to acquire the necessary experience. Increasing
the training of officers will require measures relating to real estate and infrastructure and available personnel at the Armed Forces’ schools. The
increase must be given immediate priority in order to secure personnel with the right skills and
expertise, both to realise the current growth targets and in case additional growth is implemented in line with this military advice.
Real estate and infrastructure will require a
special focus going forward, and a supplementary recommendation on this will follow later in
this advice. Real estate and infrastructure creates operational capability and the Armed Forces are dependent on having infrastructure that
meets both their operational needs and applicable technical standards. The Chief of Defence
recommends establishing the necessary infrastructure and focusing on maintenance and the
execution of essential upgrades. Priority should
be given to relevant factors which secure satisfactory living and working conditions for personnel, followed by value preservation, which


is crucial for the Armed Forces' operational capabilities, including receiving allied reinforcements.
The Armed Forces must increase their
stocks of materiel and supplies to strengthen the
combat endurance of the structure. The opportunities that are inherent in direct procurement
should be explored in order to boost stocks
more rapidly. The following materiel should be
procured for the Armed Forces’ structure in the
following order of priority: Personal equipment
(including small arms), spare parts and then
medical supplies and other consumables (should
be procured and stored in cooperation with the
total defence system).
To ensure the necessary responsiveness
and combat endurance, the Chief of Defence
recommends procuring the estimated quantities of combat-decisive munitions that are considered to be needed as soon as possible. At the
same time, within the framework of the total defence system, the Armed Forces should establish
access to the estimated quantities of fuel needed to ensure readiness.
Repairs to combat-vital materiel, including
available spare equipment, should be accelerated. Certain categories of materiel should be retained in a war reserve, rather than disposed of.
The Chief of Defence recommends urgently
implementing critical modernisation measures
within the field of the Armed Forces' ICT, with an
emphasis on information systems. This modernisation will help to ensure the establishment of
robust and secure digital foundations with sufficient capacity. Capacity to implement cybersecurity measures and defensive cyber operations
should also be stepped up to safeguard freedom
of action in the cyber domain. To ensure the appropriate operation of existing ICT systems, both
expertise and capacity relating to ICT should be
strengthened.
The Chief of Defence also recommends the
comprehensive restructuring of ICT operations
within the sector. The defence sector should

↗
Soldier preparing personal equipment.


-----

consider consolidating and concentrating its
operations in an organisational unit with a joint
management team with responsibility and authority for managing the ICT organisation, e.g.
under the Chief of Defence. It is furthermore recommended that duplicate functions be consolidated and that the capacity and endurance of
the overall ICT organisation be strengthened.
This will reduce coordination needs and costs,
and enhance the ability of the Armed Forces to
make use of new technology more rapidly.
The defence sector must take account of
national and allied planning documents before
disposing of operational air basing infrastructure
earmarked for allied reinforcements. Norway
should gradually improve existing operational air infrastructure in cooperation with NATO.
The Chief of Defence also recommends procuring necessary stockpiles as regards materiel,
ammunition and fuel in relevant staging and response areas, including decentralised weapons
and ammunition stockpiles for the Home Guard's
area structure.

**Focus area: Maritime surface structure**
Norway's extensive marine areas, long coastline
and significant economic interests in the maritime sector make it necessary to enhance the
ability of the Armed Forces to deal with activities
that threaten and challenge national interests
underwater, on the surface and in the air. Russia
has its main naval base on the Kola Peninsula and
is developing modern, quiet and highly potent
submarines. Anti-submarine warfare capability,
in cooperation with allies, especially the United
States and the United Kingdom, will therefore
remain a priority capability into the future.
Our allies will have a more extensive and active presence in our neighbouring regions. The
ability to shape, coordinate and participate in
such activities is even more important today
than it was in the past.
Developing the ability to face up to current and future security challenges will require


investment in new capabilities relating to warfare in the maritime domain. The Navy consists
of a number different types of vessels with distinctive and to some extent outdated systems.
These vessels are resource-intensive to maintain
and operate, which when combined with outdated technical systems results in reduced operational capability and availability for mission execution. The Coast Guard also has vessels that will
need to be replaced over the coming decade.
The Chief of Defence therefore recommends strengthening and renewal of the maritime surface structure. In order to reduce the
breadth of variants, it is necessary to view the
entire structure in context and establish a programme area for maritime surface structure. It
is recommended to maintain close cooperation
with close allies in connection with both the acquisition and operation of the most advanced
combat vessels in the Navy. This form of standardisation with partners is taking place with regard to new submarines and should also form
the basis for the procurement of new frigates.
The current structure does not have sufficient capacity to meet the operational needs
that are required to be met across the entire
spectrum of conflicts in the maritime domain.
The capabilities and needs that must be addressed have been deduced through the fundamental analysis conducted in connection with
the preparation of this Military Advice. The number of vessels recommended for procurement
for the Armed Forces is based on an assessment
of operational and lifetime costs, and the assumption that the most challenging tasks in our
maritime areas will take place within an allied
and joint operational framework. In addition, the
assessment takes into account the need for the
ongoing execution of missions across the whole
conflict spectrum in order to safeguard Norwegian interests in the High North.


-----

Frigates
Maritime operations in Norway’s neighbouring
regions require vessels that are highly capable
and are able to operate in challenging weather
conditions. To enable Norway and its allies to
secure our defence capabilities and receive allied reinforcements along the coast, while at the
same time participating in maritime operations,
the Chief of Defence recommends that a minimum of four and preferably six new frigates be
procured. This type of vessel is in great demand
by NATO and is capable of making a relevant
contribution to the Alliance as regards operations beyond the shores of Norway. It would
be inadvisable to procure fewer than four, as
doing so would result in insufficient operational
availability for the execution of missions. Six
frigates would almost double the operational
availability, enabling the Armed Forces to carry
out several missions simultaneously. The number
of frigates must be viewed in the context of the
procurement of the ocean-going standard vessels described later in this report. The existing
frigates will be phased out and replaced by new
ones.
The frigates must be equipped with helicopters for the detection and engagement of
submarines, or alternatively unmanned systems
if the technology is sufficiently mature by the
time the frigates are introduced. The combination of frigates, helicopters and/or unmanned
systems makes it possible to engage submarines before the frigate comes within range of
the submarine's torpedoes. The frigates must
also be able to engage threats both in the air
and on the surface. The capability to conduct
anti-submarine operations will require further investment in complementary capabilities such as
satellite surveillance, stationary sensor systems,
maritime patrol aircraft and submarines, in addition to sensors and weapon systems based on
surface vessels.


Standard vessels
In addition to the frigates, the Chief of Defence
recommends that the surface structure of the
Navy be built around large and small standard
vessels. These vessels should be based on
tailored civilian standards, as this approach
would streamline both operation and support
throughout their lifetime and enable the phasing
in of more environmentally friendly propulsion
methods. The Chief of Defence recommends
the procurement of up to four large standard
vessels and up to 16 smaller standard vessels
with modular weapons and sensor systems.
The standard vessels will complement the
frigates, but will not be able to replace them.
They will also contribute to the cost-effective
supply of quantity for the execution of maritime warfare. The number of frigates and large
standard vessels must be seen as a whole to ensure sufficient capability in order to maintain
a presence in the maritime domain, both nationally and in an allied context. The standard
vessels must have the capability to interact in
modern joint operations and must be capable
of being equipped with anti-surface capabilities and self-protection against air threats. The
large standard vessels must have blue water capabilities and the capacity to carry large modular solutions. Depending on their size, the vessels should have a limited ability to participate
in anti-submarine operations and be capable of
being used as a platform for minelaying, mine
clearance and maritime security operations, including force protection in Norwegian territorial waters.
The Chief of Defence recommends to eventually replace the Coast Guard the vessels that
do not carry helicopters with a combination of
large and smaller standard vessels. The Coast
Guard's standard vessels are equipped for Coast
Guard operations on a daily basis, but must be
able to be equipped with modular systems as
and when necessary. It is recommended that the
Coast Guard's helicopter-carrying vessels and
KNM Maud be continued without alteration.


# Luftvern (NASAMS)


-----

## From seven classes to two standard vessels


Fig. 7


**Current vessels** **Future vessels**


###### Standard vessels

The Chief of Defence recommends replacing the Navy's
ageing surface structure and reducing the breadth of
variants in use over the next few decades. In addition to
new frigates, the rest of the maritime surface structure
will be built up based on two sizes of standard vessel.
The vessels have an area of use and an operating profile
that makes it possible to make extensive use of civilian
standards and solutions. Cost reductions, a lower risk of
obsolescence and commercially available maintenance
expertise are identified as positive consequences.
Modernisation of the maritime maintenance concept
in line with the idea that vessels should be as civilian
as possible and as military as necessary will help to
keep costs down and ensure operational availability. A
standard vessel class is also well-suited to the adoption
of innovations within the Norwegian maritime industry,
including more environmentally friendly propulsion
systems that both reduce greenhouse gas emissions
and are potentially quieter.

Standard vessels must be capable of being equipped
with modular sensors and weapon solutions as required.
The ability to carry out missions is thus not limited to
the design of the vessel itself. The standard vessels
complement and support warfare capabilities in the
maritime domain with distributed sensors and effectors.
All standard vessels must have the capability to interact
in modern joint operations and must be capable of being
equipped with anti-surface capabilities and self-protection against air threats. The difference between the
large and small standard vessels is that the large vessels
have ocean-going characteristics and the capacity to
carry large modular solutions. Depending on their size,
the vessels must have a limited ability to participate
in anti-submarine operations and could be used as a
platform for minelaying, mine clearance and maritime
security operations/force protection.


**Skjold-class**

**Reine-class**

**Boa-class**

**CGV Harstad**


**Modular weapons- and sensor technology**


**Anti-submarine**
**Mine counter-**
**measures**


**NSM** **UAS/** **Coastal Rangers /**
**Counter-UAS** **Force protection**


**Oksøy/Alta-class**

**Nornen-class**

**Barentshav-class**


**Large standard vessel**

**Small standard vessel**


-----

**Layered air defeces protecting civillian**
## Air defence
**and military targets**


Fig. 8


Maritime surface vessel procurement programme
To ensure the holistic development of the
surface structure, the Chief of Defence recommends that a separate programme area be
established for the new maritime surface vessel
structure.
As the current structure is phased out, the
programme area will phase in standardised vessels that enhance operational capabilities and
availability in the maritime domain. The ongoing
project concerning the development of standard vessels for the Navy is expected to be redefined and incorporated into the programme area
together with the acquisition of new frigates.
Phasing-in of the described surface structure could take place during the period 20272037, enabling the new vessels to replace vessels that are phased out during the planned
period as far as possible. A flexible and phased
replacement of the current surface structure
is recommended, where the economic framework for the programme area governs both
the rate of phasing-in and the total number
of vessels. It is recommended that the programme area receive supplementary funding, given the financial scope of the measure.

The Chief of Defence recommends that the programme area be realised in the following order:
**1** Start the gradual phasing-in of new standard vessels as existing vessels of various
classes need to be phased out
**2** Parallel to the phasing-in of standard vessels, only implement measures so that frigates of the Fridtjof Nansen class satisfy the
alternative "safe sailing" (“sikker seilas”)
according to supplementary alternative
analysis P6096 until they can be replaced
by new frigates. The measures largely
comprise those that are strictly necessary
to maintain class certificates and HSE requirements, as well as maintain ship technical availability through to 2035.


**3** Start the gradual phasing-in of new frigates to replace the Fridtjof Nansen class

**Focus area: Air defence**
Weapons development is making it possible
to hit targets across the whole of Norway with
cruise missiles, ballistic missiles and unmanned
aerial systems, as has been clearly demonstrated in several conflicts in recent years. Resilience
and the ability to protect critical military and
civilian infrastructure from aerial threats require
a layered approach with a combination of air
defence systems with different ranges and
capabilities. Air defence also helps to improve
the survivability of the Armed Forces' forces,
especially large and static structures such as
air bases.
The Armed Forces lack sufficient air defence to protect military targets and functions
within civil society at the same time. In addition,
the Armed Forces lack any capability to provide
protection against ballistic missiles. The ability
to protect against smaller unmanned systems
and drones is marginal.
Firstly, the Chief of Defence recommends
increasing the volume of the Armed Forces' existing short- and medium-range air defence
systems, so that they can protect both civilian
and military areas at the same time, and then investing in new long-range air defence systems
that can also provide protection against ballistic missiles. Wherever possible, this strengthening should take place within the framework of
the existing NASAMS system and existing plans.
Parts of the air defence system should be based
on reserve forces.
The Chief of Defence then recommends the
establishment of a multi layered air defence system for the land forces. Both Brigade North and
Finnmark Land Command should be equipped
with short-range air defence systems that are
also effective against drones. In addition, it is
recommended to establish an Army air defence
battalion, within the framework of the NASAMS


-----

## Long-range precision weapons


Fig. 9


system with short-, medium- and long-range air
defence capabilities. A portion of the air defence
system should be based on mobilization.
In the maritime domain, protection against
air threats is important, in order to protect both
vessels and maritime installations. The need
for air defence systems beyond self-protection
must be assessed holistically in relation to the
intended primary role of the vessels within anti-submarine warfare.
Existing air defence systems have limited
effect against hypersonic missiles. However, it
is expected that such systems will be developed
over the coming years and the Chief of Defence
recommends that Norway monitor these developments closely.
In addition to the missile threat, it is important that the Armed Forces are able to protect units, installations and objects against unmanned aerial systems. Defending against small,
portable systems is particularly difficult and imposes new demands. The Chief of Defence recommends the development of defence systems
against unmanned systems as part of the integrated air defence system.
It is difficult to fully guard against a modern air threat. Air defence systems must therefore be supplemented with measures and operational concepts that help to boost resilience
and survivability. Dispersal concepts and other
measures that enhance the ability of the structure to maintain operations in the face of attack
are important.

**Focus area: Long-range precision weapons**
The Armed Forces must have the ability to influence an opponent through a wide range of
means. The ability to fight back becomes especially important in an armed conflict against an
adversary that operates a number of different
types of long-range weapon systems. In order
to enhance the Armed Forces’ ability to inflict
casualties on an adversary, the Chief of Defence
recommends increasing the Armed Forces' ca

pabilities as regards long-range precision fire
in all domains.
In order of priority, the Armed Forces
should bolster firepower in the northernmost
part of the country by strengthening already
approved investments in long-range precision
weapons in the current long-term plan to establish a fully-fledged rocket artillery battalion. The
Armed Forces should then establish a long-range
artillery battalion as part of Finnmark Land Command. In the maritime domain, a future surface
structure must be geared towards the delivery
of long-range firepower. In addition to the approved acquisition of Joint Strike Missiles, Norwegian combat aircraft must then be armed with
relevant weapons such as radar homing missiles
to enhance the Armed Forces’ ability to break
through the adversary's air defences.
Long-range precision weapons require appropriate processes and systems for targeting
at all levels. The Armed Forces must have access to sensors that can find targets in an opponent's rear areas, and weapons platforms and
decision-makers must be able to make use of the
information quickly. Special forces can contribute in the form of target acquisition against targets at depth, and these forces have an excellent
ability to adopt new technology, which can help
to exploit the benefits of precision weapons, regardless of the platform being used. Sensors and
communication carriers in the space domain are
particularly important in this context. In addition,
operations and the use of long-range firepower
against an adversary's rear areas can be supported and amplified through operations in the cyber domain and the electromagnetic spectrum.

**Focus area: Increase the volume of the**
**Armed Forces**
The volume of the Armed Forces should be
increased in all domains in order to strengthen
combat firepower and facilitate effective joint
operations, over and above the strengthening
described for other focus areas. An increase


Long-range precision weapons launched
from air-, land-, and sea based platforms


-----

in volume will make it possible to concentrate
forces on key tasks and the ability to operate
in several regions at the same time, both in
Norway and abroad. A greater volume will also
give the Armed Forces the necessary combat
endurance to sustain both low- and high-intensity operations over a prolonged period of time.
Within the focus area, measures that enhance the capabilities of the Armed Forces as regards for situational awareness, command-and-control, firepower and mobility
should be given emphasis. The Chief of Defence
therefore recommends that the following measures be afforded priority depending on the allocated financial framework: Strengthening of elements of comprehensive intelligence, elements
within the cyber and space domains, the acquisition new helicopters, increasing the number
of submarines, establishing a brigade based on
mobilization and strengthening the air surveillance radar chain. In addition, the focus area outlines further proposals that should be realised assuming sufficient financial room for manoeuvre.

Joint elements
The Armed Forces must continue to exploit
new technology and develop new operational
concepts in order to facilitate effective joint
operations. The Armed Forces' joint operations
must be able to seamlessly link together sensors,
effectors and decision-makers to ensure operations can be carried out at a high tempo and
with great flexibility. The Armed Forces should
therefore align with NATO's concept of multi-domain operations, which places demands on the
Armed Forces' capabilities, ICT, operational
processes and command-and-control concept.
The Armed Forces must be able to share
large quantities of information rapidly, both nationally and with allies. Alongside communication technology, digitalisation and decision
support technology are pivotal. The Chief of Defence recommends exploiting the opportunities
inherent in artificial intelligence, including machine learning in order to exploit big data, by es

###### Electromagnetic operations

The electromagnetic spectrum can be used to re­
inforce or create new operational effects. In addition
to the fact that the Armed Forces must be capable of
carrying out electromagnetic operations to support
their own operations, the structure must be prepared
for an adversary attempting to use the electromagnetic spectrum against us or interfere with and deny
our use.

Both NATO and our closest Allies have a strong focus
on creating structures that can effectively facilitate
defensive and offensive electromagnetic operations.
The Armed Forces must monitor the developments
closely.

Greater use of the electromagnetic spectrum impo­ses increased demands on the coordination of available frequency ranges, and civilian use may impose
restrictions on military use in peacetime.

tablishing a common strategic objective for this
in the sector. The Armed Forces must emphasise the holistic and continuous development of
processes, technology and organisation in order
to exploit the potential inherent in multidomain
operations. Such a development will also entail
changed requirements as regards skills and expertise. Norway should have the ambition of being able to lead allied forces up to what NATO
calls ‘Small Joint Operations’, either on or adjacent to Norwegian territory and at both joint operational and tactical levels.
The Chief of Defence recommends strengthening the capabilities of the Armed Forces as
regards holistic intelligence. A continuing focus
on intelligence will be essential for national situational awareness, which in turn forms the premise for the Armed Forces' decision-making processes and operations. The Armed Forces must
further develop their ability to acquire data and
information concerning the military capabilities,
operational patterns and intentions of threat


-----

actors, analyse the information and communicate intelligence to relevant recipients in a timely manner. This will require investment in expertise, digitalisation and sensors.
The Chief of Defence recommends that the
special forces to be further developed with a
focus on quality and competence. The special
forces should be concentrated around the four
bases Rena leir, Haakonsvern, Karljohansvern and
Ramsund. The Norwegian Armed Forces must
strengthen their ability to lead special operations both nationally and within the framework
of NATO, as well as enhance their ability to integrate with allied special forces. The Norwegian
Special Forces Command must be developed
further and consolidated into a fully-fledged
leadership element which can meet national
and allied needs. The special forces are characterised by an ability to rapidly develop, test and
introduce new technology. This special characteristic must be continued and strengthened.
The Chief of Defence recommends that the
ability of the Armed Forces to conduct special
forces operations is strengthened by replacing
the existing and ageing Bell-412 with new helicopters.
The Chief of Defence recommends enhancing the ability of the Armed Forces to carry out
electromagnetic operations in all domains. First
and foremost, the professional leadership must
be strengthened, and competence in key areas
of the structure increased. In addition, the ability to lead electromagnetic operations and maintain situational awareness must be enhanced at
the operations headquarters, in particular by
completing the establishment of the electronic
warfare centre at the Norwegian Joint Headquarters. Finally, Armed Forces units must have the
ability to exploit the electromagnetic spectrum
and protect themselves against electromagnetic threats. This should be considered separately in certain materiel procurements. The Armed
Forces must improve their access to training systems that can support training and exercises in


offensive and defensive electromagnetic operations.
The Chief of Defence recommends strengthening the ability to support Allied operations
in Norway and in our neighbouring areas. The
Armed Forces’ ability to lead the reception,
alignment and further transport of Allied forces
should be strengthened. This includes the ability to lead Allied receiving and transport units, in
different parts of the country, at the same time.
Reception and support of Allied forces is the subject of more detailed advice in a later chapter.
The Chief of Defence recommends increasing the capacity for medical air evacuation by
hiring civilian capacity equivalent to the “SAS
agreement”. The capacity for manning and
equipping air evacuation must be strengthened
accordingly. Furthermore, the Armed Forces
should strengthen the ability to treat and move
a large number of patients via advance requisitioning of infrastructure and equipment in selected areas. To support the entire treatment
and evacuation chain, it is recommended to establish a dedicated company to ensure supplementary supply of medicines, medical consumables and blood products, starting from central
storage sites.
Attacks with chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear weapons (CBRN) are challenging to manage. The war in Ukraine has once
again brought the use of nuclear weapons to the
fore, with reduced respect for conventions, arms
control and non-proliferation. Warfare at nuclear
power plants shows that the risk of unintended
incidents has increased. The Chief of Defence
therefore recommends further strengthening of
CBRN defence beyond what was decided in the
current long-term plan. Sweden and Finland’s
NATO membership will pave the way for closer
Nordic cooperation on CBRN defence, for example cooperation on courses, exercises and procurement of equipment.


-----

Fig. 10
### Space activity


Continuous coverage of the High North requires two Satellites used for surveillance, navigation
satellites in high elliptical orbit over the North Pole and global secure communications

**Launch facilities for satellites**

**Ground segment**


-----

The cyber domain
Due to rapid technological development and
digitalisation, ICT is now a precondition for,
rather than mainly facilitating for joint operations. The Armed Forces need to augment the
organisation’s expertise in the ICT area in order
to match the development within multi-domain
operations and facilitate effective modernisation
and digitalisation of the management of the
Armed Forces. The Chief of Defence recommends that the digital foundation be supplemented with modern platforms that, among
other things, can use artificial intelligence and
machine learning to exploit big data in order
to support the Armed Forces’ operational processes and operations, such as targeting. This
modernisation will also facilitate effective exploitation and protection of the cyber domain
and digital value chains.
The redundancy and capacity of communication systems are being increased in order
to make the best possible use of new technology. In particular, the Armed Forces must increase their satellite communications capacity,
and 5G should be introduced as a supplementary communication carrier. To increase the rapid response capacity and mobility of the Armed
Forces units, the Chief of Defence recommends
increasing the capacity within mobile and deployable ICT.
The Chief of Defence recommends establishing more connection points to NATO’s network structure, in order to ensure sufficient redundancy in the link with NATO and to increase
the capacity to support operations outside Norway.

The space domain
The space domain will become increasingly
important for the Armed Forces. The Armed
Forces’ capability for operations in the space
domain must be strengthened, and the Chief of
Defence recommends further developing and
strengthening the ability to plan, execute and
coordinate operations in space.


The Chief of Defence recommends investing
further in space-based surveillance capabilities.
This initiative would increase situational awareness throughout Norway’s area of interest, in
all situations, and facilitate effective methodical
target engagement, among other things. The
Armed Forces must have the ability to understand the situation in space, also in cooperation with civilian authorities and international
partners. The defence sector must focus on the
development, procurement and maintenance
of satellite constellations with different sensor
configurations. Secure and resilient ground
infrastructure that is interoperable with our
Allies and partners is critical and must be further
developed.
The Armed Forces depend on a spacebased ICT infrastructure for secure and efficient
communication. The Armed Forces must continue to invest in efforts to establish secure broadband coverage in the High North, in cooperation
with commercial operators and international military partners. There is also a growing need for
access to satellite constellations that enable secure global communication. The ground infrastructure in this area should be further developed, and the Chief of Defence recommends
establishing alternative anchoring capacity for
satellite communications.
International space activities are characterised by technology that weighs less and less and
is becoming less expensive. There is thus a lot
of pressure for satellite launching infrastructure,
and the Armed Forces must maintain access to
secure launch infrastructure, primarily in cooperation with close Allies.

The land domain
To strengthen the Armed Forces’ ability to conduct land operations, the Chief of Defence recommends that the Army be organised with an
Army Headquarters capable of leading national
and Allied land operations, two brigades, Finnmark Land Command, three regiments (today's
Armed Forces’ Military Police Department, the


-----

Intelligence Battalion and the Logistics Regiment, respectively) and a the Land Warfare
School.. The future strengthening of the Army
have units which is partially based on mobilization.
The Chief of Defence further recommends
to establish an additional brigade. The brigade
will give the Armed Forces increased resilience
and firepower, as well as tactical and operational
freedom. The brigade will be based on armoured
wheeled vehicles, to ensure mobility over longer
distances. The brigade must be based on the potential we have in the reserve structure and be
based on mobilization. The unit should be set
up in south east Norway, to ensure a presence
in both the north and south of Norway.
The defence of our northernmost region
should be further strengthened within the framework of the Finnmark land command. The Chief
of Defence recommends establishing an ISTAR
capacity, engineering resources and one light
infantry battalion with coastal mobility (amphibious). The light infantry battalion will be based
partly on mobilization. The Finnmark land command will thereby constitute a tactical system
on brigade level, which contributes to increased
presence and operational capability in the High
North, and with new capability for operations in
coastal areas.
The mission and tasks of the Home Guard
have increased. The Home Guard's ability to plan
and lead territorial operations at district level
is recommended to be strengthened, together with the ability to adopt new technologies
such as unmanned systems and countermeasures against drones. The Home Guard should
also gain an increased ability to secure infrastructure with a sea front, as well as more vehicles in order to increase the territorial structure’s
mobility. In addition, there will be the establishment of a Home Guard task force in Tromsø. In
Troms and Finnmark, the forces should have an
increased anti-armour capability. The Chief of
Defence recommends strengthening the terri

torial structure with at least one position with
a fixed monthly remuneration, in support of the
local Home guard commanders.
The Home Guard's territorial areas of responsibility should be consistent with other total defence actors, primarily the police and the
county governor, as is the case in for example
Trøndelag.
The development in the land domain must
include simulators and training facilities. The initiative will contribute to streamlining and increasing the quality of education, training and
instruction of personnel and units. Simulators
will provide environmental benefits through reduced use of ammunition, fuel, and by reducing
impacts on nature and the environment.
The land forces’ logistics units are under-dimensioned. The Chief of Defence recommends
increasing the fuel transport capacity and the
procurement of mobile tank facilities to support
own and Allied operations. To increase the capacity to transfer heavy equipment, the Armed
Forces should renew and increase the Army’s
heavy transport capacity. Moreover, new capacity should be procured for the rail transport of
own and Allied forces. In view of NATO’s expansion in the north, this resource should be viewed
in a Nordic framework.
Finally, the Chief of Defence recommends
acquiring mobile land-based anti-ship missiles,
to increase the capability of sea denial across
all domains.

The maritime domain
The Chief of Defence recommends the scalable renewal of both the Navy’s and the Coast
Guard’s vessel structure, which also entails a
volume increase in the maritime domain, as
described under the maritime surface structure focus area. The increase will contribute an
enhanced presence, the ability to solve parallel
assignments, and operational availability.
Given the economic scope for manoeuvre,
the Chief of Defence recommends increasing the

Alli d h li


-----

number of submarines from four to six. An increase from four to six submarines takes higher
priority than an increase from four to six frigates.
An increased number of submarines will double
the operational availability. Submarines are difficult to detect in submerged state, and in the
short and medium term, no technology has been
identified that will challenge this. This strengthening will increase the Armed Forces’ ability to
deny an adversary freedom of operation and increase the ability to combat an adversary’s maritime forces.
The Chief of Defence accordingly recommends restoring the ability to lay sea mines from
surface vessels, aircraft and submarines. Sea
mines are a cost-effective tool that contributes
to protection in the maritime domain. In addition
to the acquisition of the mines and the establishment of a centre of expertise, these are capabilities that do not require significant investments,
because existing aircraft and vessels can be used
to lay the actual mines.
It has been decided to introduce a new
mine countermeasure system, but there is a
need to strengthen the approved investment
framework. Further development and the potential for a rapid volume increase must be realised within the framework of civil/military cooperation. Standard vessels are intended to be able
to support and guide the system, but it must also
be able to operate with the support of civilian
vessels and from land.
The Armed Forces should strengthen the
Kystjegerkommandoen (Norwegian Coastal
Ranger Commando) as a maritime ISTAR unit
with unmanned sensors and effectors. This
strengthening will increase the Armed Forces’
ability to build situational awareness and deliver target data for long-range weapon systems.
The development of the maritime domain
must include simulators and training facilities.
This measure will reduce the need for training
while sailing and thereby provide environmental benefits and a more personnel-friendly training situation.


The Armed Forces must exploit the potential of unmanned systems in the maritime domain. Over time, the Navy has gained experience in the use of unmanned systems for mine
countermeasures, and is in the process of further
developing the concept, with greater use of unmanned platforms to take over tasks currently performed by manned platforms. The Chief
of Defence recommends following and contributing to developments within unmanned systems in the maritime domain and assessing the
introduction of new systems as the technology
matures and becomes available. Future vessels,
such as the proposed standard vessels, will be
equipped to carry unmanned systems that can
add new capabilities and increased capacity.
Unmanned vessels are well suited for acquisition and mapping both on the surface and
below the sea. The Chief of Defence therefore
recommends that further development of unmanned systems for use by the vessels and for
the Kystjegerkommandoen (Norwegian Coastal Ranger Commando) be facilitated. In order to
benefit from the increased data volume, when
unmanned systems are procured the Armed
Forces must also assess the need for analytical
capacity.
Over time, the maritime industry has developed and operated unmanned systems for
commercial use, particularly in the offshore industry. At the same time, relevant Allied nations
are also contributing to this development. The
Armed Forces should cooperate with civilian industry and Allies wherever possible, to benefit
from existing knowledge and experience.

The air domain
To ensure effective command and control in
all phases, the Chief of Defence recommends
that the National Air Operations Centre be developed so as to be able to lead both national
and Allied air operations in a joint operational
framework, in crisis and in war. After 2025, the
Chief of Defence recommends consolidating
the leadership of national air operations at one


F-35 maintenance.


-----

## "The Chief of Defence recommends a develop- ment path that is consistent with the following focus areas:

 ▪ Eliminate weaknesses in the current structure

 ▪ Maritime surface structure

 ▪ Air defence

 ▪ Long-range precision weapons

 ▪ Increase the volume of the Armed Forces"


location. The Armed Forces should also work towards the National Air Operations Centre being
interoperable with NATO and dimensioned to be
able to assume regional leadership responsibility for Allied air operations. This must be seen in
the context of the possibility of establishing a
joint Nordic or Arctic air command.
The Chief of Defence recommends facilitating more efficient operation of the Air Force’s air
wings and air bases. Air bases must be strengthened as a combat structure, and units and functions central to the operation of the air bases
should be subordinated to the Air Force. As one
of the Air Force’s most central air bases, responsi­bility for base operations at Evenes Air Base
should be transferred from AVINOR to the Air
Force, to ensure military control in crisis and in war.
To exploit the joint operational potential
of the F-35, the Chief of Defence recommends
strengthening technical and ICT support of the
combat aircraft system. Solutions and arrangement of technical support and maintenance
should look towards civil-military cooperation in
both national and international contexts, which
also applies to the P-8 and new helicopter capabilities.
The Chief of Defence recommends that
the further development of the Armed Forces’
helicopter fleet be assessed holistically and be
based on one helicopter family.  This means that
future procurement of anti-submarine helicopters, special forces helicopters and transport helicopters must emphasise cost-effective training,
procurement and operation. The acquisition of
anti-submarine helicopters for the Armed Forces’ frigates should be viewed in the context of
the Navy’s future maritime surface structure. As
an alternative to helicopters, an unmanned system may be considered if the technology is mature at the time that the frigates are introduced.
As a main alternative, the Armed Forces should
procure helicopters adapted to special forces
operations in addition to medium sized transport helicopters. If the financial situation does


not allow for two helicopter variants, the Armed
Forces should procure one helicopter type that
can meet the needs of both the special forces
and other parties. Within helicopters in general,
the following order of priority is recommended:
Anti-submarine helicopters, helicopters adapted
for special forces operations and medium-duty
transport helicopters.
Situational awareness and the ability to respond rapidly in Norwegian areas of interest depend on an effective chain of air surveillance radars. To ensure sufficient coverage, the Chief of
Defence recommends replacing another three
Sindre II radars with a new type, in addition to
the eight that have already been approved, primarily by triggering the existing option. The
Armed Forces should also invest in a passive air
surveillance system that can increase the Armed
Forces’ ability to detect and identify airborne
targets.
The stationary air surveillance radar chain
is vulnerable to attack. To compensate for loss
of coverage, the Chief of Defence recommends
that, within the framework of NATO cooperation, and preferably together with our Nordic
neighbours, Norway contributes to ensuring
that there is sufficient capacity for early airborne
warning, and command and control.
The Chief of Defence recommends acquiring a full system simulator for the P-8 at Evenes.
This will provide significant gains through increased operational capability and availability,
as well as major sustainability gains in the form of
reduced personnel requirements, financial savings and reduced emissions.
The Armed Forces should facilitate the increased availability of aerial tanker aircraft. This
will make the Armed Forces’ combat aircraft
more effective because they will then be able
to stay in the air longer without having to land
to refuel. If a platform that can also be used for
transport is chosen, this can help increase the
Armed Forces’ capacity for support, mobility and medical evacuation. The Armed Forces


-----

should explore the possibility of either increasing the framework within existing multinational
cooperation arenas, or procuring a dedicated
aerial tanker capacity in cooperation with, for
example, our Nordic neighbours.
To increase the Armed Forces’ rapid response capacity and mobility, the Chief of Defence recommends acquiring two additional
Hercules transport aircraft. Increasing the fleet
from four to six would double the average operational availability from two to four.

Unmanned aerial systems
The Norwegian territory and exclusive economic
zone extends over very large areas. This requires
the Armed Forces to be able to collect, operate
and ensure a presence over great distances, often with short reaction times and for prolonged
periods. In addition, developments within
modern air defence systems make it more demanding and risky to conduct air operations in
the vicinity of an adversary’s forces. Unmanned
aerial systems with and without weapons can
help address some of these challenges. In addition, experience from recent wars shows that
such systems are cost-effective and flexible tools
that can contribute with a number of effects. By
using a large number of simple and inexpensive
systems, one can, for example, accept a higher
loss rate and thereby take greater operational
risks.
The Chief of Defence recommends a comprehensive approach to the procurement of unmanned aerial systems across branches and services. The defence sector must also strengthen
its knowledge of this area. Procurement of unmanned aerial systems must take account of
the rapid technological development whereby
systems quickly become outdated. The Armed
Forces must also monitor the development of
new concepts and applications closely, such as
the interaction between unmanned and manned
systems, swarm technology and the use of unmanned systems in support functions such as air

to-air refuelling and transport. Based on experience from Ukraine, it is natural to strengthen the
Armed Forces’ capacity within unit level systems
that may also be armed, to include the defence
against such systems. The Armed Forces should
exploit the potential of unmanned aerial systems
throughout the structure.
The Chief of Defence recommends strengthening the capacity within both tactical and
unit level unmanned aerial systems, in order to
have sufficient sensor coverage at the tactical
level. Some of these systems are consumables
in armed conflict and should therefore be inexpensive and easy to replace.
The Chief of Defence recommends acquiring a larger unmanned aerial system that can
be used for a wide range of tasks throughout
Norway’s area of interest, including as a weapons platform. The system must be able to operate in civilian airspace and in an Arctic climate.
The procurement should be conducted as part
of a multinational framework, based on leasing
rather than purchasing the equipment, and contracting civil technical services and maintenance
wherever possible. As a first step, the Armed
Forces should lease a smaller number, for example two platforms, with an option to expand to
more platforms over time. The responsibility for
operational planning and management of the
system must be assigned to the National Air Operations Centre, but must be staffed with personnel from relevant branches of the Norwegian
Armed Forces, to ensure that joint perspectives
and priorities are ensured. Flight operations and
technical support are recommended to be located at Andøya.
To strengthen the defence capability
against unmanned aerial systems, the Chief of
Defence recommends working systematically
to develop a robust defence against unmanned
systems, as part of the integrated air defence
system.


Launch of Puma II system.


-----

#### Unmanned systems

**Manned-unmanned**
**teaming**

**Support systems**


Fig. 11


###### Unmanned systems

Unmanned systems can support and supplement manned platforms and soldiers in all
domains, and in more and more new ways.
The systems are particularly useful to handle
tasks that are repetitive or dangerous, or
that might expose personnel to inappropriate risk.

Until now, it has been most common to
equip systems with sensors, but other equipment and new areas of use are becoming
more and more prevalent Examples are
systems used as weapons platforms, for
logistics support, as communication nodes
or for air-to-air refuelling.

Unmanned systems come in many sizes, with
different prices, performance capabilities
and features. They range in size from the
smallest weighing a few dozen grammes, to
the largest that are equivalent to manned
platforms. The distinction between unmanned systems and modern weapons
can sometimes be fluid, which can lead to
grey zones in terms of classification and
regulations.

Planning and operations with unmanned systems are to a great extent based on human
involvement. However, new technology
such as artificial intelligence will provide for
greater autonomy and new opportunities
that can increase the system’ effect.

We can expect significant developments
within unmanned systems in the coming decades in such areas as autonomy, weapons
use, communications, propulsion systems
and on board energy solutions.

This development opens up new opportunities, operational concepts and types of
cooperation, such as:

-  Autonomous interaction between
unmanned systems (e.g. drone swarms)

-  Integrated interaction between
manned and unmanned systems
(manned-unmanned teaming).


**Larger systems**
**Tactical**

**Drone swarms**

**Man-portable**

**Land based**
**Sub-surface**


**On the surface**


-----

In addition to advising on scalable measures that
provide various development directions, the
Chief of Defence was asked to provide advice
related to several specific matters. The following
section covers advice that is either independent
of the various development directions, is not
directly related to the structure, or is of such
central importance that it must be given special
weight.

**Personnel and expertise**
Today, the Armed Forces face shortcomings
in terms of personnel and competence. The
shortcomings will result in significant challenges
by 2028, if no measures are taken. Among other
things, the Armed Forces may face challenges
with regard to realising the potential of costly
investments, while the ability to further develop
the Armed Forces and phase in important new
capabilities may be reduced.
High labour market mobility and competition with the civilian sector affect the Armed
Forces’ ability to retain and recruit personnel.
Unemployment is at a historically low level and
more opportunities are open to individual employees. At the same time, younger generations
move on to new jobs more frequently, and fewer
and fewer settle in rural areas, which has an impact on a sector with a high proportion of jobs
outside major population centres and which
is dependent on a relatively young workforce,
compared to other activities.
Today, many of the Armed Forces’ employees leave well before they reach retirement age.
Advertised positions at all levels currently lack
applicants. The vacancies lead to greater use of
temporary arrangements and temporarily higher
ranks. The challenge is exacerbated by the fact
that that the Armed Forces’ educational capacity
does not meet current and future needs.
The Armed Forces’ age structure for military employees is out of balance, with a preponderance of personnel over the age of 45 and a
shortfall of personnel aged below 45. Some of


## Chapter 9

 The Chief of Defence's other recommendations


-----

## Imbalaced age structure


Fig. 12

**Age**

**60**
**59**
**58**
**57**
**56**
**55**
**54**
**53**
**52**
**51**
**50**
**49**
**48**
**47**
**46**
**45**
**44**
**43**
**42**
**41**
**40**
**39**
**38**
**37**
**36**
**35**
**34**
**33**
**32**
**31**
**30**
**29**
**28**
**27**
**26**
**25**
**24**
**23**
**22**
**21**
**20**
**19**
**18**


Officers **1** Increase quotas at school houses
Specialists **2** Re-hire

**3** Adjust age limit for military personnel

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|Col11|Col12|Col13|Col14|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||A|djust age limit for|military personnel|||||||||||
|||3||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||
|||||||||2||Re-|hire|||
|||Re|-hire|2||||||||||
|||||||||||||||
|||||||||||||||
|||Increase quot|as at|1||||||||1|Increase quotas at school houses|
|||school hou|ses|||||||||||
|||||||||||||||


-----

the imbalance is due to the fact that the education reform and the Armed Forces’ reorganisation of the personnel structure have not had their
full effect. Irrespective of the reforms, a large
group of employees will soon reach retirement
age. If no action is taken, the Armed Forces will
not be able to adequately replace those who resign, neither in volume nor competence terms.
The gap may lead to a lower level of experience
in the higher echelons of the Armed Forces in
the future.
The Chief of Defence recommends that the
defence sector makes long-term investments in
personnel and competence, and takes swift action to rectify the situation. Demographic trends
and technological developments must be emphasised in this work.
The Armed Forces must be an attractive
workplace that recruits, develops and retains
expertise on a sound basis over time. The Chief
of Defence recommends establishing a life phase
policy whereby incentives can be adapted to
the individual’s life phase. In addition, the Armed
Forces must offer officers, non-commissioned officers, specialists and civilian employees good
and clear development and career opportunities. Armed Forces personnel are interested in
pension terms and retirement age, and a clear
and predictable framework for these should be
established. Adjustment of the special age limit might also contribute to curbing the effect of
the pension wave.
The Armed Forces must assess how a wide
range of incentives can help retain personnel for
longer. In addition to salary, incentives might
consist of commuter schemes, investment in
housing and neighbourhoods, flexible working
hours, or flexible solutions for remote and home
offices. A differentiated, competitive salary system should be developed, while rectifying the
system’s imbalances between different positions, to avoid internal competition in the sector. In this context, the Chief of Defence refers to
the ongoing salary and incentive project headed
by the Norwegian Ministry of Defence.


Civilian experience must be valued more
highly, to facilitate the re-appointment of former
military employees. In this context, the Armed
Forces must develop and communicate a clear
model for assessment of prior competence. Similarly, the Armed Forces should be permitted to
employ personnel with relevant civilian expertise in certain military positions at different rank
levels, provided that the necessary basic military
training has been completed. Appointment processes must be rapid, so that candidates do not
select other job offers before the appointment
process has been completed.
The Armed Forces are a diverse organisation that needs high-level and, in many cases,
specialised expertise. The need for development
and innovation requires the readiness for change
as a competence. The Armed Forces’ core competence consists of basic military skills, as well
as the competence to plan, lead and conduct
military operations. At the same time, the Armed
Forces manage substantial assets. Corporate
governance and corporate development competence must also be emphasised, to ensure
that the organisation manages its responsibilities in a good and efficient way. Furthermore,
the technological and mercantile development
also sets competence requirements. The Armed
Forces rely on good, data-driven analyses to facilitate the long-term mapping and planning of
their own competence production and recruitment of acquired civilian expertise.
Military personnel hold positions throughout the defence sector, both in Norway and
abroad. The Chief of Defence recommends assessing where core military competence should
be allocated and prioritised between agencies
in the defence sector, in order to have the greatest effect. This assessment must ensure that personnel’s duties and rights in peace, crisis and
war are maintained.
The Armed Forces have many functional vacancies whereby a permanently filled position is
temporarily vacant as a consequence of leave,
secondment or illness. Functional vacancies put


-----

#### A scalable approach to increase the number of personnel

**2024** **2028** **2032** **2036**


Fig. 13

**91 000**

**88 000**

**85 000**

**82 000**

**79 000**

**76 000**

**73 000**


pressure on the organisation and personnel. The
Armed Forces also see a connection between
functional vacancies and the Armed Forces’ reputation as an employer, both internally and externally. A structure with adequate staffing levels
will help reduce workloads, increase predictability, improve well-being and contribute to a lower
risk of adverse incidents.
The Chief of Defence will give priority to
targeted work on the Armed Forces’ employer profile, whereby citizen, relationship and employee surveys are used actively.
The recommended strengthening of the
structure will require significantly more employees than today. Even if measures are taken, a
high rate of attrition due to age is likely to cause
the Armed Forces' personnel stock to decline
by 2028. The measures can nevertheless help
reduce the gap and improve the situation. There
is still time and opportunity to make adjustments
to competence production and to further develop the good and effective necessary measures
in the period after 2028. The Chief of Defence
therefore considers it possible to achieve the
strengthening outlined in the advice, but this
requires immediate action.

Education and training
The Armed Forces’ training and education
system has undergone several major changes.
To ensure predictability, the Chief of Defence
recommends developing existing models,
rather than new restructuring. FHS (the Norwegian National Defence College) should be
further developed as an accredited university
college. Relevance surveys under the auspices
of the university college should form the basis
for the further development of programmes and
courses at our educational institutions.
The Armed Forces are unique in the respect
that to a great extent the organisation itself provides qualifying-level education and vocational
education. The Armed Forces are therefore vulnerable to personnel turnover. The Chief of Defence assesses that there is a need for an imme

diate increase in the current education quotas.
The increase must take place in line with real estate and teaching capacity.
Increased education quotas in the Armed
Forces will not resolve the challenges alone, and
the opportunities inherent in the civilian education system must be better utilised. The Chief of
Defence wishes to continue its targeted recruitment of personnel with acquired civilian expertise, with the opportunity to add military qualifications as required.
Opportunities for lifelong learning and development can help retain personnel longer. The
Chief of Defence recommends giving priority to
incentives that facilitate competence enhancement. For example, provision should be made for
military or civilian graduate studies at an earlier
career stage.
Training and education institutions must be
strengthened to meet the needs of vocational and functional education programmes. The
Armed Forces are conducting an ongoing study
to consider the organisation of vocational and
functional education programmes, including the
organisation of the various weapon schools. The
study will not be completed before this advice
is submitted. The purpose of the study is to ensure a quality-based and cost-effective vocational and functional education programme.

Conscription
The Chief of Defence will continue the joint
recruitment and education programme for the
Armed Forces. In this way, the Armed Forces will
ensure that basic training in military skills and
values is uniform and independent of service.
The Armed Forces should facilitate differentiated lengths of conscription and flexibility in the
number of admissions per year, in order to meet
the needs of the Armed Forces and contribute
to reduced costs, greater flexibility, reduced
reaction time and increased endurance.
The transition to basic training of recruits
outside the operational units has a higher cost
than initially estimated. The Chief of Defence still


Proposed scalable structure
Current decided personell strength trajectory


The graph shows a scalable increase in the number
of personell required to meet the proposed plan to
strengthen the Armed Forces. The upper line shows a
trajectory where all proposed forcus areas are realized,
while the lower line shows the trajectory of the current
plan The actual growth will depend on the decided


-----

Fig. 14
## The bases of the Armed Forces


considers joint training of recruits at Madla and
Terningmoen to be the best solution. Training of
recruits and soldiers outside operational units
increases operational capability and provides
better defence capability opportunities at time
of crisis and war. Adjustment of contingents and
differentiated lengths of service might reduce
the volume during any transitional period until
sufficient capacity at the basic training schools
are in place.
The Armed Forces must exploit the potential inherent in reservists. In addition to the benefits of increasing the personnel intake, former
service members should be recruited back into
the Armed Forces to a greater extent. In addition, non-permanent personnel should be able
to register an interest in serving in the Armed
Forces for shorter periods. The Chief of Defence
recommends that a system be facilitated to enable this in an effective manner.
The recommended strengthening is based
to a great extent on exploiting the opportunities
inherent in the conscription system. The manning within some structures is therefore based
on reserve personnel.
Work on digital solutions for more effective
contact between the Armed Forces and conscripts must be continued and strengthened.
The solutions can be used to offer courses, education and follow-up throughout all stages of
conscription. To increase society's resilience and
willingness to defend the population, e-learning
courses in relevant topics can, for example, be
offered to all conscripts in connection with conscription, regardless of further service.

**Real estate and infrastructure**
The status of the Armed Forces’ real estate and
infrastructure has shown negative development
for some years, as a consequence of continuous
underfunding. The status rating is marginal in
several places, and some elements of the real
estate portfolio have fallen to a very low status
level. In the short term, the situation may lead
to an unintended decrease in operations tempo,


restrictions on use and closure of buildings.
The poor condition also increases the need
for proactive maintenance, rather than a more
cost-effective and long-term approach, with
status-based and planned maintenance.
The Chief of Defence recommends giving
priority to measures that contribute to achieving the necessary real estate and infrastructure
related to the approved structure. As an element
of this, maintenance and upgrading of existing
real estate and infrastructure should be emphasised. Priority should be given to ensuring satisfactory living and working conditions for personnel, followed by preservation of assets, which
is crucial for the Armed Forces’ operational capabilities, including receiving Allied reinforcements. At the same time, firing and training areas
must be further developed to meet new needs.
Today, the residual potential for available
real estate and infrastructure has generally been
utilised. Some vacant real estate and infrastructure is available in the overall real estate portfolio, but not in the parts of the country where
there is the greatest need. The remaining potential that can be realised through, for example,
more efficient use of areas, cannot be realised
until investment limits for renewal of the building stock are available.
Several of the Armed Forces’ bases have no
room for any increase in real estate without investment in subterranean infrastructure. In order
for the Armed Forces to grow, streamlining of
the real estate and infrastructure portfolio must
be geared towards streamlining existing bases,
with increased functionality and efficient use of
areas. New workplace concepts and the use of
technology can also contribute to improvement
and greater efficiency.
The Armed Forces’ operational capability
depends on the operational infrastructure that
is ready and rapidly available in a crisis or war
situation. The Chief of Defence therefore recommends that renewal and maintenance of critical
operational infrastructure be emphasised. Receiving Allied reinforcements, training and exer


Jan Mayen

Banak

Porsangmoen

Bardufoss

Sørreisa

Andøya

- 

Trondenes Høybuktmoen

Sortland
Evenes Skjold
Ramsund

Setermoen

Reitan
Bodø, Bodin Bjerkvik, Elvegårdsmoen

Drevjamoen

Værnes

Ørland

Kuhaugen

Setnesmoen

Dombås

Florø

Jørstadmoen

Rena

Hamar

Wallemsviken Terningmoen

Sessvollmoen

Bergenhus Huseby

Gardermoen, Nordkisa

Haakonsvern Eggemoen Kolsås

Akershus festning, Lutvann, Linderud

Heistadmoen

Rygge

Madla

Vatneleiren
Sola

Karljohansvern, Vealøs


-----

Fig. 15 What does a soldier need? Fig. 16


## What does an aircraft need?


**Runways and taxiways** **Aprons**

**Hangars and shelters** **Maintenance**


**Følgekonsekvenser for annen EBA og viktige grensesnitt**


**Offices**

**Mess halls**

**Education facilities**

**Barracks**


**Følgekonsekvenser for annen EBA og viktige grensesnitt**

**Infirmary** **Storage**

**Storage**


**Firing- and training ranges** **Religious practice**


**Ammunition**


**Communications**



**Tactical command and control**


**Sports facilities**


**Fuelling facilities**


**Utilities (power, water)**



**Religious practice**


**Welfare**


**Personnel related**
**infrastructure**


**Runway support**


-----

cises make special infrastructure demands, and
this must be seen in the context of Allied and national operational plans. The Armed Forces must
also exploit the opportunities offered by NATO’s
infrastructure programme and the Supplementary Defence Cooperation Agreement. Allied air
forces make special demands of operational infrastructure. National and Allied planning must
therefore be thoroughly assessed before operational air infrastructure is disposed of. In some
areas, Norway should improve the existing operational air infrastructure in cooperation with
NATO, or bilaterally.
To increase resilience and rapid response
capacity, the Chief of Defence recommends
establishing necessary stockpiles as regards
equipment, ammunition and fuel in relevant
staging and response areas, including decentralised weapons and ammunition stockpiles for
the Home Guard's area structure.
The Chief of Defence recommends
strengthening the focus on integrated planning when introducing new equipment or in the
event of personnel changes. Over time, investments in real estate and infrastructure have often been under-dimensioned and given low priority. The introduction of new capabilities must
be planned holistically, whereby the overall real
estate and infrastructure needs of the capability are mapped and resourced from the start. Examples might be the need for infirmaries, classrooms, warehouses and garages, as well as firing
ranges and training areas..
The renewal of the real estate portfolio
must be given priority in the investment budget.
The current rental model does not function well
and should be revised, including assessment of
whether funds for asset preservation should be
routed directly to the manager of the real estate
and infrastructure. Renewal measures should be
included as part of the manager's financial scope
for manoeuvre, rather than being fully linked to
the investment process. The Norwegian Defence Estates Agency should be responsible
for projects that primarily involve renewal and


provision of standardised real estate and infrastructure, without the need for significant clarifications from the Armed Forces. The defence
sector should exploit the opportunities inherent
in NATO’s infrastructure programme for facilities
available for Allied use.
Renewal of existing capacities and introduction of new capacities must also be planned
and implemented holistically. Real estate and infrastructure is traditionally the input factor with
the longest lifespan. At the same time, real estate and infrastructure must be in place at an early stage on the introduction of new equipment
or personnel increases. The long service life often entails a need for adjustments when new
equipment or more personnel are to be added.
The Armed Forces’ real estate and infrastructure must meet existing and future sustainability requirements. The Armed Forces must
make use of new technology that contributes
to more environmentally friendly construction
processes. In addition, sustainable procurement
of real estate and infrastructure and equipment
is central to the transition to a circular economy. Sustainability must therefore be assessed
on an equal footing with time, costs and performance in competitions, and specific and ambitious climate and environmental requirements
must be set. The solutions must be assessed in a
future-oriented life cycle perspective, while balancing the need for simpler solutions and greater standardisation.

Specific real estate and infrastructure advice
In Report to the Storting No. 10 (2021-2022),
the Norwegian Government decided to continue with Andøya as a base for Allied activities.
Andøya is partly financed through NATO funds
and is important for NATO’s operations in the
High North, both in peace, crisis and war. The
Chief of Defence therefore recommends caution
related to the disposal of operational infrastructure. The scope for financing the renewal
of infrastructure on Andøya via NATO must be
exploited.


-----

In Proposition 151 S (2016-2020), it was decided to move the Air Force Training Centre from
Kjevik to Værnes, in order to gather all Air Force
training activities in the Trøndelag region. The
Chief of Defence supports this decision.
Proposition 14 S (2020-2021) assumes an
increase in the number of conscripts entering
initial service and a joint basic training school.
The approved financial framework for the establishment of a joint basic training school is not
sufficient. If the economic trajectory is continued as today or reduced, the Chief of Defence
recommends cancelling the plan to establish a
joint basic training school at Terningmoen. If the
financial framework is increased, the Chief of Defence recommends proceeding with this establishment according to the intentions of the current plan.
Proposition 14 S (2021-2021) outlines a
strengthening of the Army and associated support functions in Inner Troms. Studies have
shown that the budget framework allocated
is too optimistic. The Chief of Defence recommends increasing the financial framework for the
strengthening and that the necessary real estate
and infrastructure be established according to a
comprehensive plan.
The termination of the Armed Forces’ activities beyond the rescue helicopter service
and critical emergency infrastructure at Bodø
Air Base creates a need for a new real estate and
infrastructure for the functions that move out of
the base. The Bodin base is central to solving this
challenge. Even though the base is characterised
by old and partly dilapidated buildings, there
is good potential for further development of
the base area. Decisions and measures must be
closely synchronised with AVINOR’s “new city –
new airport” process. The Chief of Defence recommends that a financial framework be allocated to handle the relocation of the Bodø Air Base.
The current long-term plan assumes an increase
and strengthening of several functions associated with the headquarters at Reitan. To handle


this increase, office facilities and other relevant
real estate and infrastructure should be established at Reitan. The Chief of Defence does not
require all office facilities to be located in the
mountain bunker facility.
According to the plan, the National Logistics Operations Centre (NLOGS) will be moved to
Sessvollmoen when Kjeller closes down. NLOGS
will be further developed as a management element to ensure national operational management of logistics functions at the tactical level.
The centre could also provide the framework for
a NATO Joint Logistics Support Group headquarters. The Chief of Defence recommends moving
the Norwegian Defence Logistics Organisation
staff to the same location, in order to combine
specialist communities and strengthen the ability to manage logistics in the Armed Forces.
When NLOGS has to leave Kjeller, arrangements
should be made for temporary establishment in
Eastern Norway, until Sessvollmoen is ready.
HV-02 must be moved as a consequence
of the progress plan for the development of the
Lutvann base. In line with previous recommendations, the Chief of Defence recommends facilitating the establishment of HV-02 at Linderud
base. This measure must be seen in the context
of the need for an increase at the Norwegian Military Academy.
The defence sector currently has a number
of locations in the Oslo area, with a mix of leased
and owned areas and with varying development
potential. The Norwegian Defence Estates Agency has conducted an initial survey of development needs and opportunities in the area, indicating that there may be scope for efficiency
improvements and savings. The Chief of Defence
recommends that a comprehensive plan be implemented for the development of real estate
and infrastructure in the Oslo area. The plan must
emphasise efficient use of the area, with flexible
and future-oriented solutions that help strengthen the Armed Forces as an attractive workplace.
The Chief of Defence recommends a com

-----

prehensive review of opportunities to strengthen the defence sector's presence, particularly
in the High North. Many jobs in the sector that
are currently located in central Eastern Norway
and in Oslo can be moved to locations in the
High North, close to military bases. The benefits
of more civilian jobs in connection with military
bases are also obvious to our defence personnel.
One example of such a decision is the establishment of a finance centre in Inner Troms, which
will facilitate more civilian jobs in close proximity to activities in the Armed Forces.

**Equipment and logistics**
Today’s stocks of important equipment and
supplies in the Armed Forces are both imbalanced and inadequate. The Armed Forces must
improve the equipment situation, strengthen
the security of supply, and increase standardisation, to ensure a rapid response capacity and
endurance.
Emergency response organisations such as
the Armed Forces cannot rely on small stockpiles
to which supplies must be added as the need
arises. Stocks of important equipment and supplies must be large enough to handle demanding situations over time, and when the possibility of new supplies may be uncertain. The Armed
Forces must establish a better balance in stocks
of equipment through a combination of their
own inventories, strategic agreements, contingency partners and overall defence operators.
In addition, the Armed Forces must be ensured
sufficient areas for storing supplies.
The Chief of Defence will give priority to replenishing the Armed Forces’ stocks of ammunition, spare parts for critical systems and personal
equipment. The Chief of Defence recommends
targeted efforts to replenish stocks of battle decisive munitions (BDM), in line with NATO capability targets. The Armed Forces must also be
ensured access to fuel within the total defence
framework.
In cases where procurement is time-critical
and necessary, the Armed Forces should make


greater use of direct procurement and exemption provisions in EEA legislation. Maintenance
and repair of vital combat equipment should be
accelerated. The Chief of Defence also recommends assessing the establishment of a war reserve, rather than selling certain categories of
equipment when it is taken out of service.
The Armed Forces do not have the capacity to support their own forces alone in wartime.
The Chief of Defence recommends exploiting
the potential of civil-military cooperation, so
that the Armed Forces can be more oriented towards their core activities. Within the total defence framework, the Armed Forces’ operations
must be supported by an efficient, flexible and
scalable system in which both military and civilian resources mutually reinforce each other and
ensure the Armed Forces access to goods and
services in the most challenging situations.
In vital areas, security of supply and emergency preparedness must be under the control
of the defence sector. Where the needs of the
Armed Forces and society in general are aligned,
it may be appropriate and cost-effective to rely
on logistics and maintenance solutions together with civilian suppliers, contingency partners and total defence actors. The Armed Forces must continuously exploit the opportunities
offered by multinational logistics cooperation,
both within NATO and via bilateral agreements
with Finland and Sweden, for example.
The Armed Forces face challenges in maintaining certain types of equipment. It is necessary to streamline roles, responsibilities and
authority, so that the necessary framework conditions are in place to make maintenance more
efficient. Furthermore, the pace of technological development requires frequent upgrading
of equipment in order for it to be operationally
relevant and maintainable. This requires financial
predictability and long-term agreements with
suppliers. The Chief of Defence recommends
facilitating more incremental development of
equipment throughout its lifetime.


The Armed Forces must work to reduce the
range of variants and emphasise standardisation
and variant limitations in future procurement of
equipment. Greater cooperation with Allies concerning standardised procurement will provide
financial benefits and may contribute to more
efficient operations. Standardisation between
nations will facilitate possible interchangeability across operations and thereby greater resilience. Standardisation, a reduced range of variants and cooperation with the civilian sector
will also contribute to streamlining the Armed
Forces’ maintenance of equipment.
The defence sector should have the opportunity to make greater use of the Armed Forces’
requisition system. The system will strengthen
the Armed Forces’ emergency preparedness by
making it possible to requisition civilian equipment and buildings.
A process has been initiated to clarify roles,
responsibilities and authority regarding the organisation of logistics in the defence sector. The
work will facilitate modernisation and digitalisation of the logistics value chain, and has, among
other things, entailed a proposed change in
the warehouse structure, to improve the management of equipment flows to and within the
Armed Forces. The Chief of Defence acknowledges that the sector’s logistics apparatus is
technologically immature, with too little digitalisation, outdated warehouse technology
and a lack of system integration with suppliers.
The Chief of Defence recommends investing in
a future-oriented and more cost-effective supply service through adapted and newly established real estate, infrastructure, and technology
for improved equipment management.

**Climate and environment**
Climate change probably poses the greatest
challenge of our generation. The Armed Forces
must therefore take their share of the responsibility and help Norway achieve its climate and
environmental goals. The defence sector has


drawn up a climate and environmental strategy
that supports the UN Sustainable Development
Goals and describes the sector’s priority action
areas and ambitions, as well as an action plan.
The climate and environmental strategy
describes how the sector will cooperate and organise the climate and environmental work, and
how the Armed Forces will report on progress
and achievement of the goals. According to the
strategy, the Armed Forces’ overall objectives
for climate and environment are that:

-  The defence sector reduces its total climate footprint and negative environmental impact, and contributes to a sustainable
society, both nationally and internationally.

-  The defence sector is prepared and adapted to climate change.

The action plan is an extension of the climate
and environmental strategy, and specifies how
the sector will achieve the overall goals set in
the strategy.
Climate change is happening at a rapid
pace and requires rapid action. The defence sector will therefore take several measures over the
next five years and work systematically to reduce its climate footprint. Reducing the total
climate footprint must be seen in the context of
the size of the structure, as a larger structure will
naturally have a bigger footprint.
The Armed Forces must also be prepared
to operate in a more demanding climatic environment, which may have an impact on technology development, equipment procurement,
education, training and exercises, as well as operational patterns. Efforts to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions also lead to the development of
new technology, providing opportunities that
the Armed Forces must be able to exploit in a
military context. A focus on climate and the environment will also help to support other sustainability dimensions, such as economic and social
conditions.


-----

Climate change may affect the security situation and the threat picture, and create new
problems. The Armed Forces must therefore also
be prepared to adapt to the changes arising in
the wake of climate change.
The advice below outlines measures to take
in the short, medium and long term. The advice
is based on the defence sector’s climate and
environmental strategy and is intended to help
Norway achieve its emission reduction target,
while maintaining or strengthening the Armed
Forces’ operational capability.

Required status in 4 years’ time (short term):

-  Soldiers and employees in the defence
sector have an augmented awareness of
what climate change means for our activities and which measures need to be taken
to strengthen operational capability, while
contributing to emission reductions. This is
achieved through awareness-raising work,
communication, courses, education, reports, analyses and research.

-  The defence sector makes strategic decisions based on data of good quality from
the sector’s greenhouse gas accounts and
the annual climate budget.

-  The defence sector sets relevant environmental requirements in procurement processes, and sustainability is assessed on an
equal footing with time, cost and performance in all procurement processes.

-  Climate change considerations are implemented in camp plans and taken into account in the planning of exercises and training.

Required status in 5-10 years’ time (medium
term):

-  The defence sector has begun the implementation of measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and a negative environmental footprint, based on knowledge
acquired during the preceding four years.


Required status in 10-20 years’ time (long term):

-  The defence sector has implemented sustainable new technology that ensures a
high level of emergency preparedness and
operational capability.

-  The defence sector has established a robust energy supply system.

-  The defence sector has developed zero-emission camps.

-  The Armed Forces have integrated simulators between the operational environments.

**Innovation and technology**
The development of new technology has a
major impact on the Armed Forces’ operations,
activities and development. The Armed Forces
must facilitate a higher rate of innovation in
order to continuously develop and update
materiel and equipment.
The technological development within digitalisation, artificial intelligence, machine learning and big data provide new opportunities that
can provide operational benefits, and should
therefore be given great weight as technological focus areas. Developments within network
architecture are a key challenge and Norway
must follow NATO’s commitment to digitalisation of the network infrastructure, to ensure interoperability with the alliance.
The Armed Forces plan to establish an overall leadership-function with responsibility for coordination and prioritisation of digitalization efforts in the Armed Forces, thus helping to  better
take advantage of new technology faster. The
Chief of Defence believes that a clear leadership-focus pertaining to technology and innovation will improve the ability to draw up specific
action plans in various technology areas. Strategic development plans linked to the Armed
Forces’ most important capabilities must take
into account the organisational and incentive
structure that will produce them, the capability to operate and further develop the systems,


###### Artificial intelligence and machine learning

Artificial intelligence offers new opportunities
for the defence sector. Technology is developing rapidly, and the Armed Forces must monitor
this closely in order to exploit the technology’s
potential.

Artificial intelligence denotes technology
that can perform physical or digital tasks that
normally require human intelligence. Artificial
intelligence systems are based on the interpretation and processing of structured or unstructured data, in order to learn, adapt and make
decisions. Artificial intelligence can process
large amounts of data and perform tasks such
as image recognition, interpretation of speech
and text, and proposal of solutions and courses
of action to solve specific problems, as well as
controlling vehicles, vessels and aircraft.


The Armed Forces can benefit from artificial intelligence for, among other things,
surveillance and intelligence, planning and
decision-making processes, streamlining
operations, and autonomous management
of systems and platforms in all domains.

Machine learning is a sub technology of artificial intelligence. The technology consists
of data systems that automatically detect
patterns in large amounts of data and make
choices based on this, as well as learns to
adjust its behaviour over time. Machine
learning can for instance be used to manage
logistics, personnel and financial systems.
The use of artificial intelligence raises
several new ethical and legal questions.
The Armed Forces’ development and use
of this type of technology must therefore
be transparent, verifiable, characterised by
caution, and adhere to ethical principles and
legal frameworks.


-----

↓ Allied forces on winter training in Norway.


i h


-----

and the ability to develop relevant concepts for
joint operational use.
The Chief of Defence believes that the
three-party cooperation between the Armed
Forces, the Norwegian Defence Research Establishment and defence industry can be strengthened by establishing an innovation fund for the
defence sector. The fund can help close the gap
between development, experimentation and
procurement, and strengthen the ties between
industry and government actors. In addition,
the fund will facilitate that innovative technology from small and medium-sized Norwegian enterprises can help meet the needs of the Armed
Forces, and speed up the qualification and rollout of promising technological solutions.
The defence sector must give targeted
priority to the sector's research and development (R&D) funds, in cooperation with the Norwegian defence industry, in order to strengthen the three party cooperation. This effort must
define what technology we should develop on
our own, what we should do in cooperation with
close Allies, and what we will exclusively procure
based on existing solutions in the market. Concept development and experimentation (CD&E)
in the Norwegian Armed Forces must emphasise the development of concepts that can utilise technology in smarter ways. To facilitate this,
the Chief of Defence recommends that CD&E
and R&D resources in the sector are coordinated more holistically than is the case today. This
implies that the Armed Forces’ Joint Headquarters takes on a network leader role for the Armed
Forces' CD&E activities through NOBLE vis-à-vis
the Norwegian Defence Research Establishment
(FFI) and strengthens the relationship with their
innovation efforts such as the centre for innovation, ICEworx. The Armed Forces must take
a long-term approach to exploiting technology
in new ways and contributing to future-oriented
concept development.
To exploit emerging and disruptive technologies, the Armed Forces must find new ways


of working. The pace of innovation in civilian industry is high, and traditional procurement processes do not sufficiently take this rapid pace
into account. The defence sector must reduce
the time from the concept and experimentation
stage to procurement and operational use. This
development must be in harmony with differentiated procurement regulations that provide for
a faster pace. The ecosystem associated with
emerging technologies differs from traditional
development and procurement. A holistic approach that avoids “locking in” procurement
efforts to specific systems or capabilities prematurely will enhance opportunities for course
corrections when needed or as opportunities
arise. Civilian-military cooperation is in this respect vital.
The Armed Forces must exploit the opportunities within autonomous and unmanned
solutions to increase operational capability and
create cost-effective solutions. The rapid development of unmanned systems is to a great
extent driven by civilian technology development. The Chief of Defence recommends procuring fully developed systems for military use, or
adapting civilian-developed systems for military
use where possible. The Norwegian Defence Research Establishment’s ICEWorx, in close cooperation with the Armed Forces, can contribute
to this development.
Norway relies on being able to operate together with its Allies. The Armed Forces’ materiel
and equipment must therefore be standardised
with NATO and our close Allies to the greatest
possible extent.
The Chief of Defence recommends that
procurement to a greater extent should be managed in portfolios or programmes that make it
possible to coordinate projects and to prioritise
across and within them. New technology often
cuts across traditional domains such as land, sea
or air, and this requires a more holistic approach.
At the same time, the current distinction between procurement and operation is less adap

Allied air forces on winter training
in Norway.


-----

tive to new technology. By placing responsibility
for a technology in a programme arrangement
that allows for more coherent management with
associated room for prioritization of the allocated finances, a more continuous and incremental
development of the technology over time can
be facilitated.

**Allied cooperation**
NATO is a key element of the Norwegian defence
concept. The Alliance is based on the principle
of a fair sharing of the burden, which means
that NATO sets requirements for the nations
concerned. The Norwegian Armed Forces’ orientation has a direct impact on NATO’s ability to
defend Norway and NATO’s northern flank. The
Chief of Defence recommends that the Armed
Forces meet NATO’s capability requirements
for Norway, including requirements for volume,
response time and endurance.
To strengthen Norway’s influence and cooperation with NATO, Norway will contribute
with personnel to NATO’s command structure.
Norway should prioritise being represented at
the NATO Headquarters and Allied Command
Operations in Belgium, Allied Command Transformation and the Regional Command for the
Atlantic and the High North in the USA. It is also
necessary to exert influence on NATO’s other regional commands, tactical commands and NATO’s Support Command in Germany. Norway
must also be prepared for the fact that the ongoing expansion of NATO’s command structure
will entail increased expectations of Norwegian
participation.
The Chief of Defence recommends that
Norway stand by the ambition that the Armed
Forces Operational Headquarters and the tactical headquarters must be able to operate in
close cooperation with NATO's and close Allies'
command structure, and be prepared to lead Allied forces and operations in our region.
Allied reinforcement forces rely on Norwegian infrastructure. Via the NATO Security Investment Program (NSIP), NATO has invested large


amounts in military infrastructure such as air bases, ports, naval bases, ammunition and fuel depots, and command and control infrastructure
in Norway. Norway owns the infrastructure, but
must maintain and make it available to the alliance as required, until its possible removal from
the alliance’s inventory register. The Chief of
Defence recommends that the defence sector
maintain a close dialogue with NATO on both financing and implementation of improvements
and upgrades.
Aviation forces require fixed infrastructure
and large areas. The infrastructure at some Norwegian air bases is in need of upgrades to meet
NATO’s requirements. The Chief of Defence recommends that the defence sector be dimensioned to receive and support up to three reinforced air wings or helicopter brigades at air
bases in Northern and Central Norway. In addition, there are Allied requirements at Sola,
Gardermoen and Rygge.
Land forces are less dependent on specially adapted infrastructure, and can use existing airports, ports, railways and road networks
during strategic deployments. Land forces can
use available civilian accommodation and other infrastructure, and where this is not sufficient,
they can in many cases meet their own needs.
NATO therefore makes few demands on Norway
to make such infrastructure available. The Chief
of Defence recommends that Norway be prepared to receive and support at least one Allied
division in Norway.
Maritime forces can usually make use of existing ports, shipyards and fuel depots. NATO has
nevertheless invested in Norwegian ports, ammunition and fuel stocks, to be able to support
operations in the North Sea, the Norwegian Sea
and the Barents Sea. However, the capacity to
support Allied maritime operations from bases
in the High North is marginal.
NATO has invested in command-and-control infrastructure in Norway. The Chief of Defence recommends that all future investments in
K2-infrastructure, both at the joint, operational


-----

and tactical levels, be viewed from an alliance
perspective, to ensure that the Armed Forces
can operate on a joint operational basis with Allied forces. The Armed Forces must also facilitate
the combined use or combined location of Norwegian and Allied K2 elements and be prepared
for NATO to deploy parts of a regional headquarters, with support functions, to Norway.
Norway has a long tradition for arranging
major exercises in an allied framework. The Chief
of Defence recommends that, within the total
defence framework, the Armed Forces be dimensioned to host major exercises. The exercises are normally planned over several years,
which makes it possible to acquire the necessary
infrastructure and other resources as part of the
planning process. In the future, Allied exercises
in the High North will to a greater extent be carried out across national borders in the Nordic
region. The Chief of Defence recommends facilitating a simplification of the regulations for
border crossings.
The costs of exercises are defrayed by the
troop contributing nation. The cost level in Norway is high, and this may make it less attractive
to participate in exercises in Norway. To reduce
the cost level, the defence sector should establish additional permanent or semi-permanent infrastructure for Allies conducting exercises from
Norwegian air bases or in connection with Norwegian firing and exercise areas. The infrastructure should be financed in cooperation with key
Allies with interests in the region, and opportunities for combined civil and military use should
be assessed.
The Armed Forces must be able to contribute to operations outside Norway within
the framework of NATO, the UN and coalitions.
This will signal strength and unity in the alliance
and strengthen Norway's position as a credible
ally. The Chief of Defence recommends that the
Armed Forces be dimensioned so that national
missions can be solved while up to 20 per cent of
the force structure is engaged outside Norway.

↖
A Home Guard unit conducting live firing.

←
Si l d f i i f j i i l


**Sweden and Finland’s membership of NATO**
Swedish and Finnish membership of NATO will
pave the way for closer Nordic cooperation.
Liaison with Finnish and Swedish headquarters
has been established and should be continued.
Cooperation on courses and expertise should
be continued and further developed. In addition
to military cooperation, there will be a need for
close coordination between the civilian parts of
the Nordic countries’ total defence.
The Armed Forces should give weight to
closer cooperation between the Nordic countries within the framework of NATO’s Centre of
Excellence for Cold Weather Operations located at Elverum. Closer cooperation should entail
an increased presence at the centre from all the
Nordic countries.
Norway’s importance as a reception area
for Allied forces is likely to increase as a consequence of Finland and Sweden's accession to
NATO. The extent will not be clarified until both
NATO’s and the USA’s operational plans for this
region have been revised. Norway’s capacity
for reception of Allied forces must be strengthened and adapted, so that Norway can also act
as a transit area for Allied forces that are to proceed to Sweden and Finland. New opportunities must be exploited, such as cooperation on
reception and manoeuvres on road axes, and
the use of air bases and ports. The capacity for
strategic rail transport should be increased in order to be able to move heavy equipment from
reception points in Norway and on to Sweden
and Finland. This will require involvement and
coordination beyond the defence sector in all
the Nordic countries.
The allocation of real estate and infrastructure to advance storage capacity for different
contingency stocks should be assessed in an
overall Nordic framework. The Chief of Defence
recommends facilitating easier flows of military
goods and services between the countries. A
more transparent approach includes access to
and utilisation of other countries’ infrastructure,


-----

simplified border crossings and advance agreements on biological border control.
Cooperation on equipment between the
Nordic countries can make the investment and
procurement process more efficient. The Nordic
countries should agree on standardised equipment types, and the Armed Forces should assess
the procurement of equipment within a common
Nordic framework, when appropriate, to utilise
scale economies. The Chief of Defence recommends that the Armed Forces establish dialogue
with the Nordic countries on combined enrolments to NATO’s force structure and in order
to view assigned capability targets in a Nordic
framework.
Norway should assess cooperation with the
Nordic countries on a joint Nordic Total Defence
Concept that can flexibly support national and
reinforcement forces in the Nordic region. Priority should be given to establishing a Nordic
Total Defence Forum to ensure effective coordination of emergency preparedness between
the countries. Norway's role and work related to
climate change and climate adjustment within
NORDEFCO should be strengthened. The work
on research, development and innovation related to robust solutions adapted to a changed climate in the High North should be strengthened.
The development of a logistics headquarters to support a NATO Joint Operational Command should continue, and in the long term be
considered for implementation within a Nordic
framework. The Armed Forces are also considering Nordic cooperation on a joint regional air
tactical command within the NATO framework.
This cooperation could result in more effective
management and coordination of air operations and thereby greater capacity for combining forces.

**Training and exercises**
The Armed Forces’ operational capability depends
on personnel at all levels being well-trained in
everything from basic soldier skills to advanced


interaction between units, branches and services within the Norwegian Armed forces, and
Allies. The Armed Forces’ training and exercise
activity must take place with as small a climate
footprint as possible.
Norway is a sought-after-country to train
and exercise in. Several nations conduct regular
exercises in Norway and thus have a presence
for large parts of the year, particularly during
the winter season. In addition to military training areas in several parts of the country, Norway
is unique in an Allied context in that, under the
Requisition Act, it is possible to conduct exercises on civilian land outside the Armed Forces’
exercise areas. Civilian land is used particularly for major exercises and makes it possible for
larger units on land, at sea and in the air to conduct combined joint exercises in regions where
it is important to demonstrate a Norwegian and
an Allied presence. The Chief of Defence recommends that the scheme be managed and preserved on a sound basis.
Swedish and Finnish NATO membership
paves the way for closer cooperation between
the Nordic countries within training and exercises. It is possible, for example, to establish cooperation on firing ranges, logistics, training infrastructure and planning of exercises. The Chief
of Defence recommends working systematically to establish arrangements that facilitate more
seamless training and exercises across the Nordic national borders in all domains.
Developments in operational patterns,
equipment and weapons indicate that there
will be a continued high requirement for firing
ranges and exercise areas in the future, but that
a lot of new requirements will be imposed on
these facilities. Due to the increasing focus on
joint operations and training together with Allies, the platform for future exercises must be
dimensioned for training on a larger scale in the
air, at sea and on land simultaneously. Advanced
new weapon systems have special features, very
long ranges and is often be interconnected in

↗
Exercising the total defence concept.

→
Military and civilian actors work together


-----

networks, which imposes new demands on firing ranges and support infrastructure. At the
same time, modern platforms have advanced
sensors and equipment for electronic warfare.
The Chief of Defence recommends further developing the training infrastructure with training
systems that provide more realistic training in all
domains. This type of training system is highly
sought after by our Allies and can help increase
Norway’s relevance as an Allied training and exercise arena.
New technology makes it possible to conduct more realistic training and exercises in
simulators and this potential will increase in the
years to come. The use of a simulator contributes to increased skills and competence, while
the training will be more cost-effective. It will
also be possible to integrate simulators into intensive training programmes, to make the training more realistic. While simulators cannot replace all the intensive training and firing, they
can reduce the need. Simulator technology can
also help reduce emissions, noise or damage to
nature.

**Hybrid threats**
Hybrid threats is a term used to describe strategies and instruments below the threshold of
armed conflict. The strategies can combine a
wide range of open and covert methods aimed
at creating dilemmas across sectors and levels.
Hybrid threats can contribute to blurring the
distinction between peace and armed conflict,
and between state security and society’s security. An adversary can use hybrid instruments
to target both the Armed Forces and important
functions in society, including private commerce
and industry. Protection against hybrid threats
must therefore be viewed within the total defence framework.
Mutual situational awareness and the ability to cooperate across sectors are vital and will
increase the ability to detect, attribute and han

dle incidents. Norway must have a national capability to establish comprehensive situational
awareness across sectors. All sectors with interest in the area should be included, including
non-military commerce and important industries. In particular, the Armed Forces can contribute with comprehensive situational awareness and expertise within analysis, intelligence
and information sharing. The cooperation between the petroleum sector, the Norwegian
Navy and the Intelligence Service on investigations of gas pipelines illustrates the potential inherent in such forms of cooperation. The Home
Guard's presence throughout the country makes
it well suited to detect deviations from the norm
in crisis and war, which can help identify and deal
with various threats.
The Armed Forces must have the ability to
assist civil society in handling incidents and situations. The Armed Forces must also contribute
to securing critical national infrastructure and
important functions in society. The Chief of Defence recommends a comprehensive approach
to securing critical infrastructure, such as reception areas for Allied forces and ICT infrastructure,
within the total defence framework.
The Chief of Defence recommends further
developing and strengthening the ability to prevent, detect and counteract security-threatening activities. Systematic and comprehensive efforts in this area are important to maintain the
ability and function of the Armed Forces in a situation where we are facing complex threats, with
vulnerable value chains across and from the sector.

**Total defence framework**
The defence of Norway consists not only of
military forces, but also society’s willingness
and ability to support a military response. Total
defence is based on mutual support and cooperation between the Armed Forces and civil
society across the entire spectrum from peace


-----

to crisis and war. The Armed Forces’ ability to
assist civilian authorities and the emergency
preparedness for peacetime events have been
strengthened significantly over the past ten
years. At the same time, the war in Ukraine
confirms that in wartime, military forces rely on
support from civil society, and that in wartime
civil society will have to endure great strains.
The Armed Forces are mainly geared to the
upper end of the conflict spectrum. The Armed
Forces' assistance to civil society will, with a few
exceptions, be based on military capabilities dimensioned for military purposes. In peacetime,
this means that the Armed Forces can offer a
wide range of resources for civilian crisis management.
At times of war, there is an enormous need
for military resources, and to a great extent support will be given from the total defence framework to the Armed Forces. The Armed Forces
will draw on civilian resources such as personnel, equipment, supplies and infrastructure on
a scale that far exceeds what the Armed Forces themselves can sustain. The Armed Forces
must clearly quantify and communicate military
needs, so that decision-makers in the public and
private sectors can make choices that increase
society’s resilience. For example, the health service must be prepared to reinforce hospitals or
reprioritise resources, and AVINOR will play a
crucial role in situations where the Armed Forces take control of the airspace. There is also a
great need for support within logistics, transport
and distribution of fuel, food and other necessary supplies.
Today, the national building and construction preparedness as part of the total defence
framework does not have mechanisms to coordinate and support the needs of the defence
sector. The national building and construction
preparedness as part of the total defence framework must be re-established so that the Norwegian Defence Estates Agency can establish,
maintain and restore critical real estate and infrastructure in support of operational capability.
In connection with training and exercises,


Allied forces will need support from the total
defence framework actors, including transport,
supplies and other services. Similar needs may
apply in a crisis or war situation, within or outside Norway. For example, there may be a need
for medical treatment by Allied personnel in Norway.
An understanding of roles, responsibilities and authority in emergency preparedness
work is important. Society and the Armed Forces have limited resources. The priority given to
increasing emergency preparedness in the community must start at the top and be holistically
assessed and prepared down to the executing
level. War must set the dimensions for assessments and measures. Emergency preparedness
requires continuous long-term efforts. The longterm planning capability must therefore be further developed in all sectors, as a responsibility
shared by everyone.
Society must maintain its basic functions,
despite impacts across the crisis spectrum.
There are numerous interdependencies. In particular, modern ICT solutions help to link the
Armed Forces with the rest of the total defence
framework in effective, but also less transparent,
ways. In the wake of this development, new vulnerabilities arise. The ability to withstand cyber
threats is a precondition for defence capability.
Major military exercises such as Trident Juncture
in 2018 have been important for the revitalisation
and further development of the total defence
framework. This is not to say that the large-scale
military exercises necessarily address the most
demanding scenarios for the basic functions of
society. Exercises that challenge the breadth of
the total defence framework help to strengthen
confidence in our defence capability. Such exercises should therefore be prioritised and will
help strengthen mental readiness and resilience.
A will to defend generates the ability to defend. An ability to defend also generates a will to
defend. Experience from Ukraine indicates that
in a situation where a nation’s security is threatened, there is great support from civil society.


-----

This support will come from public and private
actors, but also from individuals and organisations. The Armed Forces must therefore have
the ability to receive and utilise civilian support,
ranging from simple supply support to technological innovation during a conflict. Civilian and
voluntary efforts can help maintain the ability
and willingness to resist. Volunteers can come
from organised groups or arise on an ad-hoc basis. To ensure a comprehensive approach, the
Chief of Defence recommends that the Home
Guard be given a role in leading and coordinating voluntary efforts in crisis and war. The Home
Guard's role in emergency preparedness councils locally and at county level makes them well
suited for this.
Norway has leading technological environments that can be of decisive importance in the
event of a protracted conflict. The Armed Forces must therefore plan for how such support will
be managed and utilised within the framework
of international law.

**Further development of the Armed Forces’**
**culture and the military profession**
Surveys from 2018, 2020 and 2022 show that
several of the Armed Forces’ employees and
conscripts have been exposed to bullying and
sexual harassment. At the same time, the Armed
Forces’ handling of whistleblowing cases has
received strong criticism in the media over the
past year. The criticism has been directed at the
system, management and culture.
The Armed Forces have established a team
in the Defence Staff dedicated to ensure increased focus and empowered leadership. The
core values of the military and the distinctive
nature of the Armed Forces will be at the core of
this future development. The goal is a defence
force in which missions are performed in a working environment characterised by trust, safety
and a sense of affiliation, where all actions are
rooted in our values. The focus of the development will be on three priority areas: System,


management and culture. To ensure progress,
focus and the right priorities in the work, the
Armed Forces will prepare a strategy for the development of the military profession.

**Modernisation and streamlining**
Modernisation and streamlining are and will
continue to be an ongoing process in the Armed
Forces. The Armed Forces have established a
centralised modernisation and streamlining programme to facilitate a comprehensive approach
in this area. Nevertheless, initiative and action
must also take place locally, and local leaders
must have the authority to achieve efficiency
gains at their level. The main objective of the
modernisation and streamlining of the Armed
Forces is to establish well-functioning and
resource-efficient processes. Financial savings
must not be an end in itself, but the result of
more efficient processes.
The Chief of Defence recommends building on the same principles that have been fundamental during the current period:

-  Standardisation and simplification that
contribute to limiting variations and reducing costs

-  Centralisation of control that contributes to
increased process and task efficiency

-  Combining forces in professional environments so that tasks are solved in one place,
at one time, and with the right expertise.
The Armed Forces will continue to use the
process, technology and organisation (PTO)
perspective in their streamlining and modernisation efforts. A PTO approach facilitates a
focus on effect and delivery, and can help to
break development loose from old patterns of
thinking.
Analyses under the modernisation and
streamlining programme indicate that delayed
or inadequate achievement of results can mainly be explained on the basis of three main areas: Fragmentation, decision-making capacity
and conflicts of interest. Fragmentation occurs


-----

as a consequence of many actors and organisational units being involved in different processes. In addition, broken value chains contribute
to fragmentation. Furthermore, ambiguity concerning responsibility and authority can lead to
decisions being made by the wrong body, or
not being taken at all. Unclear responsibilities in
combination with a large number of actors and
overlapping or conflicting regulations can ultimately lead to conflicts of interest, resulting in
increased time consumption and reduced quality.
Organisations that are constantly evolving must continuously optimise processes and
procedures, in order to streamline operations.
This also applies to the Armed Forces. Some processes can be changed in the short term, while
others will require wider measures to create improvement. The Armed Forces have identified
significant potential gains within procurement,
maintenance and investment. However, realising
this potential does not seem realistic in the short
term, due to governance challenges in the defence sector. New processes must be designed
and clear requirements must be set for financial
benefits, in order to realise this potential.
The Armed Forces also have great potential to improve the efficiency of area use. The real
estate and infrastructure area is only affected
by the ongoing modernisation and streamlining work to a limited extent. The Armed Forces
have recommended measures regarding personnel-related real estate and infrastructure,
but there are probably also potential benefits
from streamlining the sector’s equipment-related real estate and infrastructure. Models for the
management and financing of real estate and infrastructure that include incentives for efficient
land use and reduction of land needs should be
studied.
The Chief of Defence recommends streamlining management and resource utilisation of
supplies (simplification of the value chain), logistics support (restructuring and renewal), edu

cation (training technology, simulator use, further development of military academies), force
production (joint recruit training, simulator use)
and HR. Within all of these areas, there are great
opportunities for better resource utilisation with
regard to the cooperation with civil institutions
and private industry. Developing the total defence framework in this way will provide emergency preparedness benefits, in addition to ensuring modern and effective solutions.
Swedish and Finnish NATO membership will
open up new opportunities for modernisation
and streamlining, including increased cooperation concerning equipment, education, maintenance and supply.
The Armed Forces must exploit new technology to create advantages. A modernised ICT
infrastructure is a prerequisite for achieving efficiency gains related to digitalisation and automation. The progress of the modernisation of the
ICT portfolio is less certain, but the Armed Forces expect to realise some of the modernisation
and streamlining potential associated with digitalisation and automation during the next longterm planning period.
In overall terms, modernisation and streamlining measures can play a crucial role in promoting the sustainable development of the
Armed Forces and laying the foundation for a
resource-efficient sector that is able to achieve
cost-effective solutions and create increased
operational capability.

**Organisation and governance**
The Armed Forces should be organised and be
capable of functioning both in peacetime, and
at times of crisis and war. The Chief of Defence
leads the Armed Forces via 13 operating units,
each of which has its own performance targets
and budget. The Armed Forces' operations are
headed by the Norwegian Joint Headquarters
with subordinate tactical force commanders.
The intelligence picture is produced and disseminated by the Intelligence Service.


The day-to-day management and coordination of the Armed Forces’ activities is vested
in the Defence Staff on behalf of the Chief of Defence.
The Armed Forces Operational Headquarters has overall responsibility for the Armed Forces’ operations in Norway and abroad. The operations must be led in accordance with strategic
guidelines from the Chief of Defence. The Joint
Operational Headquarters serve as the Chief of
Defence’s adviser on military operations and
contribute to the preparation of strategic advice to be used by the Armed Forces. Relations
with NATO headquarters are maintained via the
Military Mission in Brussels.
The Army, Navy, Air Force, Special Forces
and Home Guard should have more comprehensive responsibility than they have today. For example, Armed Forces bases and camps are operated by several different actors whose roles,
responsibilities and authority are fragmented. To
facilitate more efficient running and operations,
the main user should have more comprehensive
responsibility for the activities associated with
the base. For example, the Air Force should have
overall responsibility for the air bases from which
it operates.
The support structure must be organised
in a way that is better adapted to the needs of
the operational forces. At the same time, the organisation, supported by modern technological solutions and rational processes, must ensure that the resources granted and allocated to
the defence sector are utilised effectively. The
Armed Forces must facilitate effective management without compromising the structure’s rapid response capacity and robustness. The Armed
Forces have an ongoing programme to consider
modernisation and streamlining measures. Under the programme’s framework, it is assessed
how the support structure should be organised
and managed. The assessment had not been finalised when this advice was submitted, so the
Chief of Defence will revert to this in the work on


the forthcoming long-term plan. The modernisation will help to clarify roles, responsibilities and
authority, simplify the Armed Forces’ processes, and reduce fragmentation by adjusting the
number of actors involved in joint and support
functions. Deliveries will be standardised so as
to reduce the overall consumption of resources. Simplification and standardisation will give
scope to adjust the Armed Forces’ organisation,
including the staff and support structures.
Parallel to this, within the framework of the
Government's confidence reform, the Norwegian Ministry of Defence has decided to implement changes in the governance and arrangement of the sector, so that Norway can achieve
greater defence capability from the resources
available. The ongoing processes will affect the
organisation and governance of the Armed Forces. The Chief of Defence has identified possible
potential for reorganising and reducing the number of operational units, while also safeguarding
the principle of equality in peace, crisis and war.
At the time that this advice is given, it is too early to anticipate the number of operational units
and the future arrangement of staff and support
structures. The Chief of Defence will therefore
revert to this in the work on the forthcoming
long-term plan.
The Chief of Defence can see that the naming of the Armed Forces’ departments and management centres communicates the units’ functions and tasks to varying degrees. The Chief of
Defence should have the scope to determine the
naming of the units and departments. One solution might be for the deciding authorities to describe capabilities rather than structural names
in long-term plans, as is the case today.


-----

To realise the Military Advice’s highest ambition, there is an estimated need to increase
budgetary allocations to the defence sector
by approximately NOK 8 billion per year in the
period from 2025 to 2031.
Given the financial magnitude, renewal of
the maritime surface structure must receive supplementary funding, in full or in part, beyond the
increase described.
The total increases are in addition to the
commitment already planned, with the exception of the Government’s recent decision to
achieve NATO’s 2-per-cent target by 2026. The
unallocated funds towards the end of the period are necessary to maintain and develop the
structure and associated capabilities.
As from 2031, an annual increase of around
1 per cent is needed to compensate for the defence specific inflation. This applies regardless
of future structure and ambition. The defence
sector's support to Ukraine, including the re-procurement of donated equipment, is assumed by
the Military Advice to be financed outside the
sector’s financial framework.
As previously described, the investment
plan is significantly over budget for the 20252028 period. Even with increased budgetary allocations, there is a need to revisit the ambition.
A revision of the investment plan in a shorter perspective must also reflect the need to rectify
shortfalls in the structure, in order to achieve a
better balance between maintaining and developing defence capabilities. Alternatively, a more
rapid increase of budgetary allocations may be
considered.
The strengthening of the defence capabilities as described will entail a high level of investment over time. In the longer term, a sustainable balance between operations and investment
must be established, as a persistently high level
of investment puts pressure on operating costs.
In the current long-term period, funds are proposed to be reallocated from investment to operation. The purpose is to rectify an imbalance


## Chapter 10

 Financial basis


-----

#### Economy The figure shows the estimated cost of realizing
the advice's highest ambition


Fig. 17

**MNOK**

**180 000**

**170 000**

**160 000**

**150 000**

**140 000**

**130 000**

**120 000**

**110 000**

**100 000**

**90 000**

**80 000**

**70 000**

**60 000**

**50 000**

**40 000**

**30 000**

**20 000**

**10 000**


Economic starting point
Eliminate weaknesses in the
current structure
Strengthening the Armed Forces
Maritime surface structure
Recommended economic trajectory


-----

between investment and operations as a consequence of excessive investment activity within
the given budgetary allocation. There is no absolute ratio between operations and investments,
as investment requirements will vary with the
age and condition of equipment and infrastructure. A starting point might be to approach an
investment ratio of 20 per cent, in line with the
minimum level in NATO’s Defence Investment
Pledge. To balance operating and investment
costs within a given budgetary allocation over
time, it is recommended that the defence sector puts greater emphasis on the operational
consequences of investments. This applies to
all phases of a project procurement. The operational consequences must be given higher significance in the decision as to whether a project procurement should be implemented, and
the balance between investment and operation
must to a greater extent become an integrated
element of the sector’s annual budgeting.
The Armed Forces depend on economic
predictability. An increasing proportion of expenditure is exposed to exchange rate fluctuations through cooperation concerning equipment with other nations. The Armed Forces are a
major energy consumer, in regards to using fuel
for military equipment, but also to operate an
extensive infrastructure. The defence sector has
a high ratio of fixed costs, and thereby limited
possibilities to handle externally driven changes in the cost level. Overall, this means that the
sector’s economy is under constant pressure, as
there is no established scheme to compensate
for external factors. One consequence is that


the Armed Forces are unable to employ, maintain and develop the defence capability as required. This has become clearer in recent years,
with strong simultaneous growth within all of the
factors mentioned. It is recommended that the
Norwegian Ministry of Defence initiate a special
compensation scheme for the defence sector,
to ensure that defence capability can be employed, maintained and developed in line with
the ambitions.
It is recommended that modernisation and
streamlining continues along the same principles as for the current period, with allocated financial goals. The financial goals should not be
set as a condition for financing the future structure and associated ambitions. It is recommended that the financial headroom that is created
is used to accelerate the strengthening of defence capability, or to adjust the budgetary allocations.


-----

Several factors influence the defence sector’s
ability to upgrade and strengthen the defence
capability.
Even with the proposed personnel-related measures, a sufficient supply of personnel
will entail a risk for the Armed Forces’ ability to
achieve the plan. The introduction of each capability must take place on a holistic basis, taking due account of any personnel-related challenges.
The Armed Forces are affected by price
fluctuations and supply challenges in the market. The market situation may require the Armed
Forces to accept greater uncertainty and risk
related to costs. To reduce the risk associated
with longer lead times, the sector must facilitate
shorter decision-making processes and take into
account that the market increasingly expects access to capital early in the procurement phase.
The Armed Forces assess that increased
budgets can be managed, provided that there
is effective cooperation between the Norwegian
Ministry of Defence and the defence sector’s
agencies. The increase will require changes in
how agencies and operating units are managed,
and simplification of planning and procurement
procedures, as well as the provision of the necessary personnel and expertise.
Timely decisions will be a condition for the
proposed strengthening. The necessary paths
must be chosen early in the coming period, to
reduce uncertainty in the planning, implementation and execution of new capabilities.
To succeed in strengthening the Armed
Forces, procurement of existing and new capabilities must be well-planned and synchronised.
The defence sector must expect to encounter
challenges, while new opportunities may also
emerge. The Armed Forces must have the scope
to deviate from plans and reprioritise resources
as required. Moreover, a greater willingness to
accept the risk that not all plans can be implemented, even when resources have been allocated, is required.


## Chapter 11

 Risk and uncertainty


-----

**Responsible publisher**
The Norwegian Armed Forces

**Design**
Bold Scandinavia

**Photo**
The Norwegian Armed Forces´ photographers

**English translation**
Semantix

**Website**
forsvaret.no


-----

