# Norwegian Defence 2008


-----

### Norwegian Defence 2008


-----

2


-----

#### Content

Norwegi a n Secur it y a nd Defence Policy 4

1. Security Policy Objectives 5
_Defence Policy Objectives_ 5
2. Defence Tasks 6
3. Areas of Government Focus 7
4. International Cooperation 8
_UN_ 8
_NATO_ 9
_EU_ 10
_Nordic cooperation_ 11
5. National Cooperation 12

Defence Struc tur e a nd Acti vities 14

1. Constitutional Division of Responsibility in Norway 15
2. The Strategic Leadership of the Armed Forces 15
_The Ministry Of Defence_ 16
3. The Defence Agencies 17
_The Norwegian Armed Forces_ 17
4. The Norwegian Armed Forces 18
5. The Service Branches 19
_The Norwegian Army_ 19
_The Royal Norwegian Navy_ 20
_Royal Norwegian Air Force_ 21
_Home Guard_ 22
6. Personnel Policy 23
7. National Service 23
8. Materiel and Investments 24
Overview of Forces Engaged in International Operations 25

Supplement – The Fac t S 26

1. The Defence Budget 27
2. International Operations 27
3. Ranks and Insignia 28
4. Non-Governmental Organisations 29
5. Addresses 32


-----

## Norwegian Security  and Defence Policy

4


-----

#### 1. SECUR IT Y POLICY OBJEC TI V ES


The principal objective of Norwegian security
policy is to safeguard and promote national
security policy interests. This is best achieved
by contributing to peace, security and stability
both in areas adjacent to Norway and in the
wider world. Nationally Norway must be in a
position to uphold its sovereignty and sovereign rights and to exercise authority in order
to safeguard our interests. At the same time,
the progress of globalisation means that geographical distance is no longer a determining
factor for potential threats to our security.
Norway’s most important contribution to the
strengthening of international, and therefore
Norwegian security, is active and constructive
participation in the UN and NATO.


Map source: Norwegian Military Geographic Service


_The principal national security policy objectives are:_

-  to prevent war and the emergence of various kind of threat to Norwegian and

collective security

-  to contribute to peace, stability and the further development of the

international rule of law

-  to uphold Norwegian sovereignty, Norwegian rights and interests and to

protect Norwegian freedom of action in the face of political, military and other
kinds of pressure

-  to defend, together with our Allies, Norway and NATO against assault and

attack

-  to protect society against assault and attack by state and non-state actors

**Defence policy objectives**
Norway’s defence organisation is structured to be as relevant and effective as possible as an instrument for the achievement of the national security policy objectives.
This is reflected in the overall objectives laid down for Norwegian defence activities.
The defence policy objectives are intended to form a link between defence policy


-----

and security policy by stating the contribution to be made by the Norwegian Armed
Forces in ensuring as far as is possible that the overall security policy objectives are
achieved. The relevant defence policy objectives are as follows.

The Norwegian Armed Forces, within their area of responsibility and in concert with
other national authorities where this is natural, must be able to:

-  alone and together with Allies, secure Norwegian sovereignty, safeguard

Norwegian rights and interests as well as ensuring Norwegian freedom of
action in the face of military or other pressure

-  together with Allies, through participation in multinational peace operations

and international defence cooperation, contribute to peace, stability, the
enforcement of international law and respect for human rights and to prevent
the use of force by state and non-state actors against Norway and NATO

-  together with Allies, contribute to the collective defence of Norway and

other Allies in accordance with our Alliance commitments and to meet
different kinds of assaults or attacks with force in order to safeguard
Norwegian and collective security

-  contribute to safeguarding the security of Norwegian society, save lives and

limit the consequences of accidents, disasters, assaults and attacks by state
and non-state actors.

#### 2. DEFENCE TASKS

In carrying out their tasks, the Norwegian Armed Forces will contribute to the achievement of Norway’s security and defence policy objectives. The tasks of the Armed
Forces are divided into national tasks, tasks carried out in cooperation with Allies and
possibly others, and other tasks.

_National tasks_

-  to ensure a national basis for decision-making through timely surveillance

and intelligence gathering

-  to uphold Norwegian sovereignty

-  to exercise Norwegian authority in defined areas

-  to ensure a national basis for decision-making through timely surveillance

and intelligence gathering

-  to prevent and manage security-related incidents and crises in Norway and

in areas under Norwegian jurisdiction.


-----

_Tasks to be carried out in cooperation with Allies, and possibly others_

-  to contribute to the collective defence of Norway and other parts of NATO

against threats, assault and attacks, including the use of weapons of mass
destruction

-  to contribute to multinational crisis management, including multilateral

peace operations.

_Other tasks_

-  to provide military support to diplomacy and to prevent the proliferation of

weapons of mass destruction

-  to contribute towards safeguarding the security of society and other vital

tasks.

#### 3. A R EAS OF GOV ER NMENT FOCUS

Norway’s fundamental security policy interests have as their guiding principle the
defence of our political and territorial integrity while at the same time contributing to
the security of Norwegian society against external threats and ensuring the functioning of public services and important infrastructure. It is of central importance that
there should be a unified security policy with the emphasis on strengthened public
safety and a good balance between military and civil preparedness.

The Armed Forces constitute one of the most important instruments available to the
Norwegian authorities for the promotion of national security policy interests, both
in areas adjacent to our borders and internationally. Whether at home or abroad, the
use of the Armed Forces as an instrument of security policy means that military force
forms part of an overall strategy.

The northern regions are Norway’s prime area for strategic investment. Norway’s
position as a significant energy exporter and as a country responsible for the administration of important natural resources extending over large sea areas, has an important bearing on security policy. We must be able to uphold our sovereignty and our
sovereign rights, and to exercise authority in a proper way in areas under Norwegian
jurisdiction. Even though the day-to-day challenges we face in the north are linked
with economic factors, the administration of natural resources and regard for the


-----

environment, the Armed Forces play an important role by virtue of their operational
capabilities with the emphasis on maintaining a presence and upholding national
sovereignty in the North. A robust Norwegian military presence represents a security
policy threshold and ensures a capacity for good crisis management, so contributing
importantly to the creation of stability and predictability in the region.

National challenges, together with our international tasks, are central factors in determining the future size and structure of the Armed Forces. One of the defining features
of our time is globalisation. This has inevitable consequences for security and defence
policy. Norway contributes actively to the promotion of the international rule of law,
based primarily on the United nations and international law. It is a clear national aim
that Norway’s military involvement within the UN framework should be increased.
Together with the UN, NATO provides the cornerstone of Norwegian security and
defence policy. It is in Norway’s interest that NATO should develop its potential as a
forum for political consultation. NATO is important not least in providing a means of
developing the transatlantic dialogue, partnership and the promotion of peacekeeping, disarmament, arms control and conflict prevention.

The Norwegian Armed Forces are undergoing a process of comprehensive modernisation and restructuring, one of the most far-reaching ever undertaken in the
Norwegian public sector. The principal objective is to develop our armed services still
further in the direction of greater availability and usability in carrying out tasks both
nationally and internationally. This restructuring will continue to focus on enhancing
the Armed Forces’ operational capability through the further adaptation of the base
and support structure, prioritisation of the use of resources for operational purposes
and materiel investment, together with the implementation of wide-ranging personnel reforms.

#### 4. INTER NATIONA L COOPER ATION

**UN**
The United Nations Organisation plays a key role as an anchor point for Norwegian
security policy. A world order built on UN principles, and with the UN as the leading
actor in matters of security policy, can ensure a peaceful and more stable path for
global development. This is a world order built on the foundations of international
law and one in which the use of force is regulated. Our security is closely linked to the
existence of well-ordered arrangements for multilateral cooperation on matters of
security within a global framework. A changed threat picture, in which geographical


-----

distance is of less significance and in which the threats are global, serves to underline
this point still further. It is in Norway’s interest that challenges to international security
should be met and resolved through broad consensus based on the principles of the
UN Charter and the provisions of international law.

Following a substantial increase in recent years, the UN is once again the largest single contributor to international peace operations measured in terms of the number
of operations and the personnel involved. The UN is also now in much better shape
to carry out unified, integrated operations and in this it draws on the many and various resources at its disposal. The UN is the only global organisation able to call on
the entire spectrum of means available in the field of conflict resolution ranging from
humanitarian, through diplomatic and economic, to military means. Peace operations with a mandate from the UN may also be led by member states or they may
be regional operations as, for example in Afghanistan and the Balkans. The fact that
these operations have a UN mandate gives them legitimacy. At the same time, this
role allocation helps to ensure that the UN is able to employ its resources on other
challenges.

**NATO**
The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) is an alliance between 26 countries
from North America and Europe committed to fulfilling the goals of the North Atlantic
Treaty signed on 4 April 1949.

Within the overall framework of the UN, NATO remains the cornerstone of Norwegian
security and defence policy. NATO´s geographical focus is the Euro-Atlantic area and
the Alliance actively works to promote security and stability throughout this entire
area. The new security challenges, however, have a global reach, a factor which has
meant that NATO has also become increasingly involved beyond the Euro-Atlantic
area. The main focus is prevention, containment and resolution of regional crises and
conflicts that may escalate and threaten the security of one or more member countries.

NATO’s collective security guarantee, where an attack against one is considered to be
an attack against all, is based on the ability to counter threats and security challenges
where they arise. An overall Norwegian goal is to make a contribution to NATO’s
ability to carry out its collective security tasks in a credible and effective manner.
Norway places strong emphasis on ensuring that NATO remains a central consultation
body, both in a transatlantic context and in maintaining European and international
security. Norway therefore works actively to promote the work of rationalising and
streamlining the organisation of NATO and strengthening the operational capability
of the Alliance.


-----

From acting primarily as a planning organisation during the Cold War, when the
prime function was military deterrence, NATO has now become an organisation
that actively leads and implements a variety of types of military operations. In 2008
NATO has operations in Afghanistan (International Security Assistance Force – ISAF),
Kosovo (Kosovo Force – KFOR), and NATO Training Mission – Iraq (NTIM-I). All these
operations are based either on UN Security Council mandates or on an invitation from
the authorities of the country concerned. In addition, NATO is running a surveillance
operation in the Mediterranean (Operation Active Endeavour – OAE) based on Article
5 of the North Atlantic Treaty (NATO’s mutual security strategy). The Alliance is also
supporting the African Union (AU) in its operation in Darfur in Sudan.

Norway is also contributing elements to the NATO Response Force (NRF).

**EU**
The EU’s European Security and Defence Policy has undergone significant development in recent years. The EU is showing its increased will and ability to develop a
defence capability and to carry out civil and military crisis management operations.
The European Defence Agency and a number of EU Battlegroups form the core of the
EU’s investment in operational capability.

Norway is actively seeking to play a part in the EU’s security and defence cooperation.
At an overall level, Norway engages in dialogue with the EU both formally and informally on matters relating to defence and security policy, and we are working closely
with the EU within the framework of the UN. Norway has declared both civil and military personnel to the EU force register and we are participating in the EU’s civil operations in the Western Balkans and in Afghanistan. With broad parliamentary support,
the Government has decided that Norway will take part in the Nordic Battlegroup
together with Sweden, Finland, Estonia and Ireland. Norway will contribute about 150
personnel, mostly for transport control and medical duties. The Nordic Battlegroup
will be on standby for the first half of 2008.

It is of fundamental importance to Norway that cooperation between the EU and
NATO should be constructive and based on openness, cooperation and mutual coordination. The Berlin Plus agreement is important in this context. This agreement gives
the EU assured access to NATO’s collective resources for the planning of complex
EU-led military operations. The agreement also gives participation rights to allied
non-EU countries.

The European Defence Agency (EDA) was established on 1 January 2005 in order to
support the development of the EU’s military and civil crisis management capability.
The agency is responsible for the EU’s activities in areas such as capability develop
10


-----

ment, materiel cooperation and procurement, defence-related R&D and collaboration
with the defence industry.

In 2006 Norway concluded an agreement on cooperation with the EDA. The agreement gives Norway access to participation in the EDA’s programmes and projects
in all areas covered by the agency. Norway’s participation in the various areas has
increased in line with the growth in the EDA’s activities.

**Nordic cooperation**
Nordic defence collaboration is extensive and works very well despite the countries’
differing relationships with the EU and NATO. There is a high degree of commonality
between the security policy assessments and security interests of the Nordic countries. At the same time, the Nordic neighbours share a range of defence requirements
that in many cases make cooperation both appropriate and mutually advantageous.
Nordic defence cooperation therefore provides a suitable arena in which a range of
common security and defence-related matters can be coordinated.

Good international cooperation is one of the cornerstones of Nordic defence collaboration. Acting together the Nordic countries can make a greater contribution to peace
support and stabilising operations than each country could make individually. All the
Nordic countries participate in international operations under the auspices of the
EU, NATO and the UN. Norway provides part of the Nordic Battlegroup and Sweden
and Finland both take part in NATO operations. In addition, the Nordic countries act
jointly in contributing to the reform and democratisation of the security structures in
the Balkans and Ukraine. Ensuring stability, orderly control and predictability in the
framework for democratic development in states where this is necessary, is a priority
aim of Nordic defence cooperation. For Norway such cooperation in defence matters
is seen as an important arena which can make an important contribution towards the
realisation of a range of defence policy ambitions.

Nordic cooperation is also important in other areas. Based on a study of future possibilities carried out by the Chief of Defence and the Swedish Supreme Commander,
work is in hand with a view to extending and strengthening the cooperation between
the Nordic countries in the areas of force production and logistics. Such collaboration
would yield substantial advantages and savings while still allowing the countries to
retain the necessary sovereignty over their national operational capabilities.

11


-----

#### 5. NATIONA L COOPER ATION

In the traditional view of security policy and its objectives, the tasks of the Armed
Forces have been associated with defence of the state and its vital interests – essentially the security of the state itself or national security. National security is an absolutely fundamental security requirement which, if the state is faced with a serious
threat, can legitimise action involving many or all of the nation’s resources. National
security has traditionally been associated especially with the defence of territory
(invasion-oriented defence). National security can also be challenged through political and military pressure brought to bear on Norwegian authorities or through more
limited assaults and attacks against Norwegian authorities or interests.

New security challenges and new forms of armed conflict that have emerged following the end of the Cold War have brought the security of society into sharper focus.
In addition, a range of risk factors such as the danger from infectious diseases, natural
disasters and major accidents have attained heightened significance in the context of
national emergency planning. The security of society is about ensuring the safety of
the civilian population and protecting important infrastructure and the main public
sector functions against attack or other forms of subversion in situations where the
existence of the state as such is not threatened. The guiding principle in working to
ensure the security of society is that the authority which has day-to-day responsibility
for a particular sector also has responsibility for emergency planning and the implementation where necessary of emergency measures in a crisis situation.

Responsibility for ensuring the security of society rests with the police and the other
civil authorities in situations in which the security of the state itself is not threatened.
The Armed Forces have the task, enshrined in the relevant laws and regulations and
within the limits of their competence and available resources, of providing support
to society and the civil authorities in the event of major accidents, rescue operations,
natural disasters and other situations posing a threat to life or health, or involving the
risk of material damage. The Armed Forces must be capable of helping to prevent and
counter possible assaults and attacks on the country’s inhabitants, infrastructure and
management functions.

Civil-Military Cooperation (CIMIC) refers in principle to civil-military cooperation at all
levels. In some cases units of the Armed Forces will be supporting the civil authorities while in other cases it may be a civil agency that provides support for the armed
services. Examples of civil-military cooperation are the border guard activities along
the Norwegian-Russian border in Finnmark, service units taking part in Search and
Rescue Service (SAR) operations and the part played by the Armed Forces in coastal

12


-----

defence and preparedness. The Total Defence concept builds on the principle of
civil-military cooperation. The fundamental idea of total defence is that the whole of
society’s resources should, if necessary, be capable of being used in defence of the
country, to deal with immediate or imminent threats to public safety in peacetime,
security crises and war situations.

The concept of total defence embraces both civil support for the military and military
support for the civil community. Greater emphasis is now being placed on the Armed
Forces’ support for the civil community than in the past. In crisis situations in peacetime, this support will normally take the form of supplementary assistance to the civil
authorities when the crisis is of such a nature that the particular authority responsible
for that sector is unable to manage the crisis on its own. The assistance provided by
the Home Guard in connection with crises and disasters is a typical example of such
support.

The tasks of the Armed Forces in peacetime and in times of crisis or war illustrate the
integral and important role that our service personnel play in society, a role that helps
to make Norway a safe and secure country to live in.

13


-----

## Defence Structure  and Activities

14


-----

#### 1. CONS TITUTIONA L DI V ISION OF
 R ESPONSIBILIT Y IN NORWAY

According to the Norwegian Constitution, the King is the Commander-in-Chief of
the Armed Forces. This authority is exercised by the King in Council of State, i.e. by
the Government. Political control of the Armed Forces is exercised through cooperation and the division of power between the Parliament and the Government. It is the
Government which has the highest executive authority responsible for military and
civil preparedness in peacetime, and for the command of all aspects of total defence
in time of crisis and war. In important cases involving foreign and security policy,
the Parliament’s agencies are consulted prior to decisions being taken. Moreover,
Clause 25 in the Norwegian Constitution states that the armed forces (“the land and
naval forces of the Realm”) “may not be increased or reduced without the consent of
Parliament.” The Minister of Defence heads the Royal Norwegian Ministry of Defence
and carries the constitutional and political responsibility for the activities of the
Armed Forces. All matters not decided in Council are decided by the Minister, or by
departmental officials on the Minister’s behalf. So-called “military command matters”, i.e. matters concerning mobilisation and defence plans, are dealt with outside
the Council. The Minister of Defence presents such matters to the King in the presence of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Foreign Affairs alone. This procedure is
adopted only very occasionally.

In peacetime it is the Ministry of Justice and the Police that has responsibility for the
coordination of civil emergency planning. All other ministries are responsible for
emergency planning in their own sectors.

#### 2. THE S TR ATEGIC LEA DERSHIP OF THE
 A R MED FORCES

The strategic leadership of the of the Armed Forces includes the Royal Norwegian
Ministry of Defence, the Chief of Defence and his/her strategic functions within the
Ministry of Defence, collocated with the Defence Staff. The Ministry of Defence is a
political/administrative institution. In other words, the Ministry of Defence is both a
part of the apparatus of political control and a part of the administrative system.

The Minister of Defence is a member of the Government and overall head of the
Ministry. The State Secretary is directly responsible to the Minister. The Secretary

15


-----

General is the Ministry’s most senior civil servant. The Chief of Defence exercises his or
her role as the Defence Minister’s top military adviser and the Chief of Defence’s strategic functions are integrated with the Ministry.

The military command authority is delegated to military commanders. The Chief of
Defence is the country’s highest ranking military official and is the principal adviser to
the Government and the Defence Minister on military questions as well as exercising
full command of Norwegian Defence. The Chief of Defence is head of the Norwegian
Armed Forces and at the same time is the Ministry of Defence’s most senior military
adviser. The Chief of Defence’s support staffs occupy posts both in the Ministry of
Defence and in the Defence Staff. The Defence Staff, which is collocated with the
Ministry of Defence, has been established to assist the Chief of Defence in the running
of the Armed Forces.

In peacetime the Chief of Defence exercises full command of Norwegian Defence. In
time of war the Chief of Defence continues to be the Government’s closest military
adviser while the operational command authority over the military forces, with the
exception of the Home Guard, is assumed to be transferred to NATO’s Integrated
Command Structure. The military operational headquarters, the National Joint
Headquarters, has been established as a national headquarters to exercise command
of joint operations and to coordinate territorial forces remaining under national command in time of crisis and war.

**The Ministry of Defence**
The Ministry of Defence is organised in five departments with a total staff of just over
300. There are both civilian and military posts at all levels within the Ministry.

The Department of Personnel and General Services deals with administrative tasks.
Some of these tasks are purely internal while others, for example personnel policy
and common legal services, entail responsibilities across the sector as a whole. The
department’s responsibilities include internal personnel policy, overall employer’s
responsibility for the defence sector, responsibility for internal restructuring projects
including new forms of working, management and control systems and legal questions – both in the Ministry of Defence and on behalf of the sector as a whole. Security
and administrative routines within the Ministry, pay, postal services, IT, minutes and
records, archiving and library services also form part of the department’s portfolio.

The Department of Security Policy is responsible for the handling of questions of
security policy as well as for the Ministry’s internal activities and external relations in
the field of security policy. This entails responsibility for security policy studies, secu
16


-----

rity and defence related cooperation with allied and partner countries, defence policy
relations with NATO, the European Union, the United Nations and OSCE, security
related crisis management and questions of military or international law.

The Department of Operations and Emergency Planning has overall responsibility for
operational and emergency planning, crisis management planning and the planning
of exercises – including civil defence liaison. This entails monitoring relevant aspects
of the strategic situation, ensuring effective utilisation of military aid to the civil
power in the event of disasters or accidents, participation in international cooperation
concerning the planning of operations, and for planning the composition and deployment of Norwegian forces taking part in operations both in Norway and abroad.

The Department of Defence Policy and Long-Term Planning is responsible for strategic analysis, the development of long-term defence policy and overall planning for
the defence sector. This entails responsibility for the follow-up and analysis of fundamental development trends of relevance to the defence sector, the development
of a unified overall policy in areas bearing on developments in defence, providing
superior guidelines for ICT development as well as the development of defence policy
aims and tasks.

The Department of Finance and Management has overall responsibility for followup of the defence restructuring and for ensuring that approved long-term plans are
implemented. This entails translating the long-term plans into more concrete fouryear plans regarding, for example, finance, structural changes, investment, operating
costs and disposals. This also includes the work of preparing and following up the
annual defence budget. The department is also responsible for the day-to-day running of the Norwegian Armed Forces and the Norwegian Defence Estates Agency.

#### 3. THE DEFENCE AGENCIES

**The Norwegian Armed Forces**
The Armed Forces collectively represent the largest agency subordinate to the
Ministry of Defence and are responsible for force production and the various service
branches.

_The Norwegian National Security Authority (NoNSA)_
The Norwegian National Security Authority (NoNSA), also referred to by the
Norwegian acronym NSM, is an administrative directorate subordinate to the Ministry
of Defence. On behalf of the Ministry of Justice and the Police the Authority acts as

17


-----

the executive agency concerned with protective security across both military and civil
sectors. NoNSA’s mission is to assist in countering threats to the security of vital assets
and information primarily against espionage, sabotage and acts of terrorism.

_The Norwegian Defence Research Establishment (FFI)_
The Norwegian Defence Research Establishment (NDRE), usually referred to by the
Norwegian acronym FFI, is a civilian research agency organised as an administrative
agency charged with special responsibilities and answerable directly to the Ministry
of Defence. FFI is the prime agency for research and development directed towards
meeting the needs of the Norwegian Armed Forces and the agency also provides specialist advice to the strategic leadership. In particular, FFI closely monitors developing
trends in science and military technology that may have a bearing on security policy
or defence planning.

_The Norwegian Defence Estates Agency (NDEA)_
The Norwegian Defence Estates Agency is an administrative agency subordinate to
the Ministry of Defence. The agency’s primary tasks relate to the planning, construction, administration, leasing and disposal of defence estates and properties. The
buildings administered by the agency cover several million square metres. Other
property include a land area amounting to approximately 1.3 billion square metres.
The Defence Estates Agency has the Norwegian Armed Forces as its largest and most
important customer but is not itself part of the Armed Forces’ military organisation.

#### 4. THE NORW EGI A N A R MED FORCES

_The Defence Staff_
The Defence Staff, usually referred to by the Norwegian acronym FST, is responsible, on behalf of the Chief of Defence, for the execution of the Armed Forces’ tasks,
for ensuring that decisions are followed up and for exercising day-to-day employer
responsibility for Armed Forces personnel. This entails responsibility for ensuring
that the plans and budgets adopted and communicated by the Ministry of Defence
are duly implemented. The individual Service Chiefs of Staff form part of the Defence
Staff and have executive responsibility for force production in their respective Service
branches.

_The National Joint Headquarters_
The National Joint Headquarters (NJHQ) in Stavanger is the national crisis management command centre and continuously monitors the situation picture relating to

18


-----

Norwegian areas of interest both on land and in the airspace and sea areas under
Norwegian jurisdiction.

The National Joint Headquarters has operational control of Norway’s territorial
defence and is responsible for planning and leading the operations of the Norwegian
Armed Forces both in peacetime and in time of crisis and war. This means that NJHQ
is also responsible for Norwegian forces abroad. NJHQ plans and leads the major military exercises conducted in Norway, prepares for Allied training in Norway and manages projects concerned with military development. Regional Headquarters North in
Bodø forms an integral part of NJHQ with special responsibility for the northern areas.

_The Norwegian Defence Logistics Organisation (NDLO)_
The NDLO’s areas of responsibility include engineering services, procurement, investment, supply, information and communications technology services as well as the
maintenance, repair and storage of materiel. NDLO is also responsible for the operation of communications and computer systems within the Defence Establishment.
NDLO also supports the Army, Navy, Air Force and Home Guard force production
functions as well as the operational units of the Armed Forces .

_The Intelligence Service_
The Intelligence Service is responsible for the acquisition of information concerning
matters outside Norway’s borders. The Service also gathers, processes and analyses
information relating to Norwegian interests seen in relation to foreign states, organisations and individuals. The purpose of intelligence activity is to contribute towards
providing the Norwegian authorities with a sound basis for decision-making where
security, defence and foreign policy matters are concerned.

#### 5. THE SERV ICE BR A NCHES

**The Norwegian Army**
_Operational capabilities_
A mobile tactical land command (MTLC)
One independent mechanised brigade (Brig N)
ISTAR unit
CIMIC company
H M The King’s Guard
Border Guard
Norwegian Army Special Forces Command
(In addition there are a small number of support units)

19


-----

_Materiel_
52 Leopard 2 A42N (120 mm) and up to 15 Leopard 1 A5NO (105 mm)
104 Armoured Infantry Fighting Vehicles, type CV 9030
440 Armoured Personnel Carriers, type M-113 (various versions) and 75 type SISU/PASI
36 artillery pieces, type M 109 A3GN and 12 type MLRS
48 TOW anti-tank weapons, 228 ERYX anti-armour missile launchers and a large
number
of M72 mortars
36 mortars, type 81 mm BK
31 Combat Engineer Vehicles of various types, based on the Leopard chassis
25 armoured IVECO plus various multi-role vehicles

_Education and training centres_
The Norwegian Army Transformation and Doctrine Command, including the Military
Academy located at Camp Linderud in Oslo
The Norwegian Army Officer Candidate School, Camp Rena
The Norwegian Army Tactical Training Centre, (Simulator Training Centre, Camp Rena

**The Royal Norwegian Navy**
_Operational Capabilities_
The Norwegian Fleet
Commander Norwegian Fleet, with staff, based in Bergen
Command element, Norwegian Task Group (NorTG), lead multinational maritime
operations in and outside Norway
Frigate Flotilla (Fridtjof Nansen Class frigates)
Submarine Flotilla (Ula Class submarines)
Missile Torpedo Boat Flotilla (Hauk and Skjold Class)
Mine Warfare Flotilla (Oksøy and Alta Class mine clearance vessels)
Norwegian Naval Special Warfare Group (Coastal Rangers, Naval Rangers,
Mine Clearance Divers and Tactical Boat Squadron)
Norwegian Fleet Support Group (logistics afloat)

_Materiel_
2 Fridtjof Nansen Class frigates during the course of 2007*[)]

6 Ula Class submarines
2 Hauk Class MTBs**[)]

3 Skjold Class vessels (6 by 2010)
3 Oksøy Class minehunters
3 Alta Class minesweepers
3 logistics and support vessels and the Royal Yacht KS Norge

*)  During the course of the next few years to 2010-11, the Navy will be phasing in 5 new Fridtjof Nansen Class

20frigates and 6 new Skjold Class vessels


-----

A small number of other support vessels and small high-speed craft in the Tactical
Boat Squadron (Combat Boat 90N).

_The Coast Guard (CG)_
Commander, Norwegian Coast Guard, with staff, based in Oslo
Inner and Outer Coast Guard under the operational command of CG North at Sortland
and CG South at Haakonsvern.

The Coast Guard has up to 15 vessels at its disposal, four of them equipped with helicopters; three Nordkapp Class and CGN Svalbard which is specially strengthened for
operations in ice. In all, five new vessels, specially built for Inner Coast Guard tasks,
were phased in during the course of 2006-2007. During 2008-2009 three new oceangoing vessels of the Barentshav Class will enter service and three older vessels will be
phased out. In addition the Coast Guard has six Lynx helicopters as well as leasing a
number of civil aircraft for observation purposes. The Coast Guard will take delivery
of eight new NH-90 helicopters starting in 2010 and will then have a first class modern
fleet at its disposal consisting of 14-15 vessels and eight helicopters. In total the Coast
Guard currently employs approximately 700 of whom the majority are serving on
board ship or with the helicopters.

_Education and training centres_
Chief Naval Education and Training, with staff, in Bergen
Basic Training Establishment, HNoMS Harald Haarfagre, Stavanger
Royal Norwegian Navy Officer Candidate School, Horten and Bergen
Naval Academy, Laksevåg, Bergen
Naval Training Establishment, HNoMS Tordenskjold, Haakonsvern, Bergen

**Royal Norwegian Air Force**
_Force-producing units_
The Air Force organisation includes a total of nine aircraft squadrons
Bodø and Ørland (Main Air Stations)
Gardermoen, Andøya, Sola, Bardufoss, Rygge (Air Stations)
Sørreisa and Mågerø (Air Defence Control and Reporting Centres)

_Education And Training Centres_
Basic Training Establishment, HNoMS Harald Haarfagre, Stavanger
Air Force Officer Candidate School, Kjevik
The Air Force Academy, Trondheim
Air Force Flying School, Bardufoss
Air Warfare Centre (LUKS), Rygge
Air Operations Inspectorate (LOI)

21


-----

_Materiel_
57 F-16 combat aircraft
12 Sea King Search and Rescue (SAR) helicopters
6 P-3 Orion maritime patrol aircraft
6 C-130 Hercules transport aircraft
6 Lynx helicopters
18 Bell 412 helicopters
3 DA-20 Jet Falcon
15 Saab Safari aircrew training aircraft
2 NASAMS air defence units

**Home Guard**
_Operational capabilities_
_Land Home Guard (LHV):_
13 territorial district staff (static)
13 deployable rapid reaction commands
11 deployable reinforcement commands
13 rapid reaction forces capable of deployment at short notice to support the exercise
of sovereignty, national crisis management and assist the civil power in maintaining
public security
242 reinforcement/follow-on areas with resources to supplement and reinforce the
rapid reaction units

_Air Force Home Guard (LUHV):_
4 static LUHV commands
11 LUHV areas with resources for the defence of Air Stations

_Naval Home Guard (SHV):_
4 deployable mobile SHV commands
4 SHV rapid reaction forces capable of deployment at short notice to support the
exercise of sovereignty and national crisis management at sea, and to assist the civil
power in maintaining maritime aspects of public security
17 SHV reinforcement areas with resources to supplement and reinforce the rapid
reaction units

_Force production_
The Chief of Staff of the Norwegian Home Guard is responsible for force production
to man the Home Guard’s war structure, making use of his territorial district staffs,
schools and competence centres for this purpose

_Education and training centres_
The Home Guard Education and Competence Centre (HVSKS), which provides branch

22and weapon training for the Home Guard, is situated at Dombås; the Naval Home Guard


-----

and manning the SHV’s war structure, is situated at Haakonsvern; and the Home Guard
Education Centre at Værnes, with its satellite establishment at Porsanger Garrison, is
responsible for initial service in the Home Guard and for basic officer training

#### 6. PERSONNEL POLICY

One of the principal objectives of the personnel policy is to enable the armed services to recruit and retain able and highly motivated personnel with the competence
required to undertake military missions. The Armed Forces should appear as attractive employers, continuously developing the skills of their employees.

Priority is put on recruiting, competence building, career and leadership development, health and safety, payment policy and family aspects. The Armed Forces’ personnel policy is to take account of the need for the right competence at the right time
and in the right place, and to foster a shared culture that is both inclusive and open
to diversity. The personnel structure of the armed Forces is changing to include more
service personnel on regular engagements, a new category of junior officers, and
making it mandatory to accept assignments to international operations. The whole
educational system is being modernised with improved training in Officer Candidate
Schools, Military Academies offering opportunities to gain recognised qualifications
at Bachelor level, and a Staff College offering a Master’s degree.

#### 7. NATIONA L SERV ICE

According to the Norwegian Constitution, all fit male citizens are obliged to serve in
the defence of their country. Liability to military service starts at the age of 19, and
continues until the age of 44. It is the operational requirements of the Armed Forces
that will determine the number of conscripts undergoing initial military service. The
aim of the Armed Forces is to ensure that it is the best qualified and most highly
motivated young people who undertake this initial training. In order to increase the
number of women in the Armed Forces and to make sure the same information about
military service is given to all regardless of gender, young women are being invited to
attend a voluntary initial interview. Conscientious objectors may seek to be exempted
from military service and to undertake service in the community in lieu. The highest
priority will be given to the recruiting of the most suitable young people either for
regular service on contract or as junior or full career officers. The National Service
Administration, on behalf of the Chief of Defence, has responsibility for conscript
administration covering all service branches. Its tasks include initial testing, appointments and call-up for initial service. The National Service Administration is also the
holding unit for all service personnel records and has a coordinating responsibility for
all recruiting to the Armed Forces. 23


-----

#### 8. M ATER IEL A ND IN V ES TMENT S

There are clear requirements for rapid availability and cost-effectiveness where the
procurement of materiel for the Armed Forces is concerned. Where appropriate, as an
alternative to traditional purchasing, procedures such as purchasing used equipment,
entering into Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangements with other actors, or
the leasing/hiring of equipment are to be considered. In addition there is an increasingly sharp focus on establishing multinational collaboration in the procurement of
defence equipment.

There is now greater emphasis on making use of civilian expertise and commercial
products where this provides a good solution.

The Armed Forces’ spending in 2008 will be oriented towards investing in the defence
structure endorsed by Parliament in 2004 when the long-term plan for 2005-2008
was approved. Many of the structural changes involved are in the process of being
realised through current projects which are thus helping to support the further modernisation of the Norwegian Armed Forces.

Again in 2008, it is the frigate project for the Navy that is earmarked to receive the
largest single allocation from the budget with planned funding of approximately
NOK 1.2 billion. Otherwise the budget proposals imply continuation of the strong
investment in maritime capabilities, represented for example, by major payments for
procurement of the Skjold Class MTB, new anti-ship missiles, lightweight torpedoes,
helicopters for the Coast Guard and the Navy and investment associated with maritime patrol aircraft.

For the land forces there will be continued investment in armoured vehicles and
deliveries will start for a number of new projects associated with, for example, light
armoured patrol vehicles and command post equipment.

Investment in the Air Force is centred on the procurement of new transport aircraft as
well as the updating of F-16 combat aircraft and further work relating to the various
candidates for a possible future combat aircraft capability.

There is also investment in the information infrastructure including a substantial
spend on tactical data link 16 and the LOS programme. In the area of personal combat equipment, the principal investment projects will be for the procurement of new
hand weapons (HK 416) and the body armour vest m/07. Surgical units, water and
fuel distribution equipment and radio controlled countermeasures against impro
24


-----

vised explosive devices (IED) are the main logistics investments for 2008. In the area
of property, buildings and installations (EBA), the greater part of the budget will be
taken up by projects already in progress, including the Regional Training Area SouthEast Norway. In addition, two new projects will be initiated: the military training facilities at Haakonsvern and the multi-use hall at Skjold Garrison.

#### OV ERV IEW OF FORCES ENGAGED  IN INTER NATIONA L OPER ATIONS


**Bosnia       16**
NATO HQ
EUFOR
EU LO TEAM

**Kosovo       7**
KFOR

**SNMCMG1**

**Kosovo**
UNMIK         1

**Middle East**
UNTSO 12

**Sudan**
UNMIS        27
Darfur

**Ethiopia**
UNMEE       3


**Litauen** **Afghanistan 495**
Baltic A.P 57 NCC

NSE

**ISAF**
RC N
SO
OMLT

PRT
QRF
NSG

**0**

**Afghanistan**
UNAMA

12

**Sinai**
MFO     6

**Total: 625 19 January 2008**

25


-----

## Supplement – the Facts

26


-----

#### 1. THE DEFENCE BUDGE T

The consolidated defence budget for 2008 follows up the Soria Moria declaration and
continues the emphasis placed on those areas of defence and security policy set out
in the declaration. Particular priority is given to the High North, the Government’s
most important strategic target area, and to support for international peace operations and conflict management, primarily under the auspices of the United Nations
and NATO, within the framework of a world order led by the UN. The defence budget
for 2008 maintains a level of operating costs and investment approximately equal to
that for 2007. The table below shows the headline figures for 2008.

|Col1|Consolidated budget 2008|Percentage distribution|
|---|---|---|
|Total defence budget|31,540,172|100|
|Operating costs|22,066,876|70|
|Investment in property, buildings and installations|1,780,000|5.6|
|Investment in materiel|7,693,296|24.4|
|Total investments|9,473,296|30|



_Figures in NOK millions_

#### 2. INTER NATIONA L OPER ATIONS

The Armed Forces’ contribution to multinational operations abroad in terms of personnel involved an average of 740 men and women during 2007. The main area of
deployment was Afghanistan, but in addition the Armed Forces provided personnel
for UN operations in Africa and the Middle East, the multinational operation in Sinai
(MFO) as well as the EU and NATO led operations in the Balkans. During the last quarter of 2007, the number of personnel serving abroad was in excess of 600. These contributions are planned to remain at approximately the same level during 2008 and will
be allocated to the same operations.

Approximately NOK 750 million has been budgeted for the additional costs of international operations in 2007, with NOK 710 million allocated for operational costs and
NOK 40 million for the construction of a new camp in Maymaneh in Afghanistan.
These additional costs include operation-specific variable costs resulting from the
particular operations. Norway devoted 1.67 per cent of its GDP to defence in 2006.
This is slightly below the average for the European NATO countries. There are 11
nations that devote a greater proportion of GDP to defence than Norway and 13 that
devote a smaller proportion.

27


-----

#### 3. R A NKS A ND INSIGNI A

28


-----

#### 4. NON-GOV ER NMENTA L ORGA NISATIONS

The following are some of the many non-governmental organisations concerned with
defence matters in Norway. These organisations will be pleased to respond directly to
any questions. Contact addresses are given in the Addresses section of this booklet.

**The Norwegian Atlantic Committee**

was established in 1955. Its objective is to promote wider understanding of Norwegian

foreign, security and defence policy with emphasis on North Atlantic co-operation. NAC

arranges meetings, seminars and regional courses on security policy and related matters,

study tours and occasional larger conferences. NAC also produces a range of publications.

**The Norwegian Association of UN Veterans**

was founded in 1960 as The Norwegian UN Military Officers’ Association. The Association’s

aim is to maintain ties among the members and to look after the interests of those who

have served in UN and NATO peacekeeping operations – rank and file as well as officers

and NCOs. Local branches of the Association have been established and cover the whole

country. The Association publishes the quarterly magazine “Den Blå Beret, Sjekkposten”

(The Blue Beret, Checkpoint).

**People and Defence**

was founded in 1951, and its membership consists of 75 large nation-wide professional,

cultural, humanitarian, and youth organisations. Through conferences, courses, seminars,

visits to schools, lectures, study tours, etc. the organisation spreads information about

Norway’s Total Defence concept and about our foreign and security policy as established

by the Storting. The organisation publishes the magazine “Folk og Forsvar” (People and

Defence) and, at intervals, produces pamphlets/books on relevant topics/issues.

**The Norwegian Women’s Voluntary Defence Association**

was founded in 1951 and is an organisation for nation-wide co-operation between profes
sional, cultural and humanitarian organisations with a large number of women members.

The Association’s objectives are to disseminate information about the country’s Total

Defence, to work to strengthen the potential of the civil community to meet crisis situa
tions in peace and war, to seek to enhance and coordinate the preparedness of member

organisations, and to promote co-operation between the voluntary organisations and the

emergency planning authorities.

**The Norwegian Defence Association**

was founded in 1886, adopting as its motto «The question of defence is a question of

peace». Through its provision of information, the NDA seeks to increase awareness of

29


-----

defence and security policy and to foster a better understanding and appreciation of

Norway’s overall defence concept. This is achieved through contact with political authori
ties, information in the media, meetings, lectures, seminars etc. The association publishes

the magazine “Norges Forsvar” (Norway’s Defence) ten times a year, with an annual issue

in English, together with a quarterly newsletter for members. The NDA also issues a variety

of brochures and other publications.

**The Norwegian Women’s Defence League**

was founded in 1928, and is a politically neutral organisation based on voluntary efforts.

Under the motto “For home and country”, NLF works to strengthen the nation’s will to

defend itself and to train women for participation in defence-related activities in peace
time as well as in time of war. Any Norwegian woman over 16 years of age who is in sym
pathy with these aims may become a member (“lotte”) after completing basic training.

NLF publishes a membership magazine “Lottebladet” with six issues a year.

**The Norwegian Reserve Officers’ Federation**

was founded in 1896 and is a freestanding organisation for officers of all three services

and the Home Guard but is now oriented particularly towards reserve officers. The NROF’s

objective is to strengthen Norway’s Total Defence, and to promote public awareness

of the importance of a defence, by strengthening the position of reserve officers in the

community, improving reserve officers’ military qualifications, protecting their interests

during service, and promoting international co-operation between reserve officers. The

Association publishes the magazine “Pro Patria / Vårt Vern” (Pro Patria / Our Protection) in

association with the Union of Academy Trained Officers.

**The National Rifle Association of Norway**

was established in 1893 with the objective of fostering practical shooting skills among the

Norwegian people in case such skills should be needed in the cause of national defence.

The shooting clubs maintain close relations with the military, especially the Home Guard.

The shooting clubs make their ranges available to Armed Forces personnel for instruction

and practice, and the Armed Forces in turn provide support for club events.

**Oslo Military Society**

was founded under the name Christiania Military Society in 1825. The aims of the Society

were to promote a deeper interest in all aspects of defence and the military sciences

through lectures, discussions and the publication of the Norwegian Military Journal, and

to foster comradeship between officers of all service branches though congenial social

gatherings.

30


-----

**The Retirement Association of the Norwegian Defence**

The Association was founded in 1983, and is a countrywide confederation of retired

servicemen’s associations. The aims of the Association are to safeguard and promote the

financial, social and welfare interests of its members and to foster the spirit of national

defence, thus strengthening the standing of the armed forces, with their members past

and present, in the community, and to work with the central military and civil authorities,

officers’ associations and other ex-servicemen’s associations, as well as other pensioners’

associations country wide, for the common good of the members.

31


-----

#### 5. A DDR ESSES

**Ministry of Defence**
Glacisgata 1, Postboks 8126 Dep,
0032 OSLO
Tel: 23 09 80 00
Fax: 23 09 60 75
E-mail: postmottak@fd.dep.no
Internet: www.forsvarsdepartementet.no

**Norwegian Defence Estates Agency**
Postboks 405 Sentrum, 0103 Oslo
Tel: 81 57 04 00
Fax: 23 09 78 03
E-mail: post@forsvarsbygg.no
Internet: www.forsvarsbygg.no

**Norwegian Defence Research**
Establishment
Postboks 25, 2027 Kjeller
Tel: 63 80 70 00
Fax: 63 80 71 15
E-mail: ffi@ffi.no
Internet: www.ffi.no

**Norwegian National Security Authority**
Postboks 14, 1352 Kolsås
Tel: 67 86 40 00
Fax: 67 86 40 09
E-mail: post@nsm.stat.no
Internet: www.nsm.stat.no

**Defence Staff**
Glacisgata 1, Postboks 8126 Dep, 0032
OSLO
Tel: 03003
Fax: 23 09 66 88/66 91
E-mail: forsvaret@mil.no
Internet: www.mil.no
Press and information:
23 09 67 29/Mobile: 990 96 729

**Norwegian Defence Logistics**
**Organisation**
Grev Wedels plass nr. 9, 0015 Oslo
Tel: 03003
Fax: 23 09 66 34
E-mail: forsvaret@mil.no
Internet: www.flo.mil.no

32


**National Joint Headquarters**
Postboks 8085, 4068 Stavanger
Tel: 51 34 20 00
Fax: 51 34 28 09
E-mail: postmottak.fohk@mil.no
Internet: www.mil.no/fol

**Joint Warfare Centre**
Office of Public Information
Postboks 8080, 4068 Stavanger
Tel: 51 34 20 00
Fax: 51 34 21 49
E-mail: pio@jwc.nato.int
Internet: www.jwc.nato.int

**Norwegian Defence Media Centre**
Oslo mil/Akershus, 0015 Oslo
Tel: 03003
Digital photo archive: 23 09 34 66
E-mail: fms.kontakt@mil.no
Internet: www.mil.no

**Forsvarets Forum (Magazine)**
Editor-in-Chief: 23 09 20 23
Editorial office: 23 09 34 15
Branch office, Bardufoss: 77 89 60 30
Fax: 23 09 35 10
E-mail: desken@fofo.no
Internet: www.fofo.no

**Directorate for Civil Protection and**
**Emergency Planning**
PB 2014, 3103 Tønsberg
Tel: 33 41 25 00
Fax: 33 31 06 60
E-mail: postmotak@dsb.no
Internet: www.dsb.no

**Ombudsman for the Armed Forces**
Karl Johans gt. 25, 0159 Oslo
Tel: 23 35 64 70
Fax: 22 41 00 08
E-mail: off@off.mil.no


-----

Published by:
Norwegian Ministry of Defence

Additional copies may be ordered from:
Norwegian Government Administration Services
Distribution Services
E-mail: publikasjonsbestilling@dss.dep.no
Fax: + 47 22 24 27 86

Publication number: S-1002 E
Layout: Lysvold Design


-----

