Norwegian Ministry
of Foreign Affairs

Meld. St. 36 (2016–2017) Report to the Storting (white paper)
# Setting the course for Norwegian foreign and security policy


-----

Meld. St. 36 (2016–2017) Report to the Storting (white paper)
# Setting the course for Norwegian foreign and security policy

Translation from Norwegian. For information only.


-----

-----

#### Contents

**Background and summary .......** 5 **7**


**Security in the Arctic .................** 29


**Part I** **Security policy trends ................** 9

**2** **The Euro-Atlantic area** ............. 11
2.1 Security architecture ...................... 11
2.2 Economic development ................ 12
2.3 Extremism ..................................... 13
2.4 Polarisation of society .................... 13

**3** **The Arctic and Russia** .............. 14
3.1 The Arctic ...................................... 14
3.2 Russia ............................................. 14

**4** **Europe’s neighbourhood ...........** 16
4.1 The Middle East and
North Africa .................................... 16
4.2 The Sahel and the
Horn of Africa ................................ 17
4.3 South Asia ....................................... 18

**5** **Global balance of power** ........... 19
5.1 Economic centre of gravity ........... 19
5.2 Military strength ............................ 20
5.3 Political influence .......................... 21

**Part II** **Security policy choices ..............** 23

**6** **Cohesion in Europe** ................... 25
6.1 Security .......................................... 25
6.2 Freedom and human rights ......... 27
6.3 Economic strength ........................ 28


**8** **Close transatlantic**
**cooperation** .................................. 31
8.1 An effective NATO Alliance ......... 31
8.2 US-European cooperation ............ 32
8.3 Cooperation with selected allies .. 33

**9** **Disarmament and**
**non-proliferation ..........................** 34
9.1 Weapons of mass destruction ....... 34
9.2 Conventional forces ...................... 35

**10** **Stability in Europe’s**
**neighbourhood .............................** 36
10.1 Strategy for fragile states
and regions .................................... 36
10.2 Aid to fragile states ....................... 38
10.3 UN peacekeeping efforts ............. 38

**11** **The international order .............** 40
11.1 Rules and norms ............................ 40
11.2 International institutions .............. 41
11.3 Global security challenges ........... 42

**12** **Crisis management** .................... 43

**13** **Conclusion** .................................. 44

**14** **Economic and administrative**
**consequences** .............................. 45


-----

-----

## Setting the course for Norwegian foreign and security policy

##### Meld. St. 36 (2016 –2017) Report to the Storting (white paper)

_Recommendation of 21 April 2017 from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,_
_approved in the Council of State the same day._
_(White paper from the Solberg Government)_

#### 1 Background and summary


Norway’s current security situation is more chal­
lenging than it has been for a long time. Unpre­
dictability has become the new normal. The world
as we know it is changing. Cooperation is being
put to the test.

Eight years ago, a white paper on the main fea­

tures of Norwegian foreign policy was presented
to the Storting (Norwegian parliament).[1] Many of
the conclusions reached in 2009 are still valid
today. But the security environment has changed
dramatically, and this has implications for Norwe­
gian policy. In autumn 2015, the Government
launched a project entitled ‘Setting the course for
Norwegian foreign and security policy’ to review
all aspects of Norway’s security policy.

Over a period of 18 months, the project held a
series of events bringing people together for a
broad debate on the main contours of Norwegian
foreign and security policy. Input was also gath­
ered from research groups at home and abroad.
The project culminated in the launch of this white
paper, which presents the Government’s views on
the course Norway should follow to ensure that
we are as well equipped as possible to tackle

1 Report No. 15 (2008–2009) to the Storting: Interests, Respon­
_sibilities and Opportunities. The main features of Norwegian_
_foreign policy_


today’s more challenging and unpredictable secu­
rity situation.

The policy choices described are based on the
Government’s political platform, which states that:
‘In terms of shared interests and values, Norway
will continue to be closest to the Atlantic, Euro­
pean and Nordic communities. The Government
will actively seek to cooperate with new partners
and take part in global activities. At the same time,
changes in the political, economic and military
balance of power make it essential to maintain an
even stronger basis in the values and political ori­
entation of our Western community of neigh­
bours, allies and trading partners.[2]

_Trends_

Norway’s security and economic stability are
dependent on alliances and cooperation with other
countries. Changes in the political and military
priorities of close allies, in the EU, in Russia’s eco­
nomic and political situation and in the framework
for international trade have significant conse­
quences for Norway.

2 Political platform for a government formed by the Conser­
vative Party and the Progress Party. Sundvolden, 7 October
2013


-----

g y p y

ties are competing for power. Several of these are
advocating nationalist and inward-looking policies.
In a position of power, they could pose a threat to
our foreign and security policy interests and could
make binding international cooperation and trade
more difficult.

The unpredictable nature of the world today
and the increasingly complex challenges we are
facing make targeted and coordinated efforts at
the national, European and international levels
essential. The objective of this white paper is to
contribute to these efforts. Together with the
Long-term Defence Plan[3] and the white paper on
public security,[4] it forms part of the Government’s
work to strengthen security and emergency pre­
paredness.

_Policy choices_

Norway has a long tradition of continuity in for­
eign and security policy, and there is broad con­
sensus on the values that underpin our policy:
democracy, human rights, and respect for interna­
tional law. But our policy cannot be static. We
must adapt to the changing security environment
and make conscious choices in order to safeguard
Norwegian interests and defend the values we
believe in. The Government has identified the fol­
lowing three main courses of action as crucial for
safeguarding Norwegian security in these times
of change:

_Maintaining and building on the well-establis­_

_hed principles of Norwegian security policy by:_
– seeking to maintain our close transatlantic ties
and further developing our long-term security
policy cooperation with the US.

– supporting NATO adaptation with a view to
strengthening the Alliance’s collective defence
against both old and new security threats.

– strengthening Norway’s defence capabilities
and facilitating a greater Allied presence and
more frequent Allied exercises in the north.

– further developing cooperation with Russia on
the basis of common interests and a consistent
and predictable policy.

– seeking to maintain and further develop the
international legal order and to strengthen the
UN and other international institutions; pro­
moting human rights, the rule of law and
democracy; responding to serious violations of
international law.


Russia’s annexation of Crimea in spring 2014
and the destabilisation of eastern Ukraine have
changed the security landscape in Europe. State
security is being challenged once again. As a
result, NATO is turning its attention back to col­
lective defence, and expectations of the EU in the
area of security are increasing. In the north, Rus­
sia is strengthening its military capabilities and
presence. This has implications for Norway.

To the south of Europe, a long belt of instabil­

ity has developed near the EU’s external border.
This is having far-reaching and direct conse­
quences for Norwegian security. The number of
refugees and other migrants is higher today than
was envisaged a few years ago, and there are
strong indications that migratory pressure on
Europe will increase. Climate change is exacerbat­
ing risks and unpredictability, particularly in frag­
ile states and regions.

In Europe, cohesion within and between coun­

tries is being challenged. The UK’s decision to
leave the EU highlights this. At the same time, the
need for European leadership is greater than it
has been for a long time. Security threats are mov­
ing closer to Europe, and are not felt as strongly
on the other side of the Atlantic.

We are now seeing major changes in US for­

eign and security policy. This is affecting transat­
lantic relations.

Competing interests and disagreements
between major powers are undermining joint
efforts to promote international peace and secu­
rity. The UN is the world’s most important body
for conflict management. However, in certain key
areas the members of the UN Security Council are
not managing to uphold their responsibilities
under the UN Charter. Shifts in the balance of
power are undermining support for international
norms such as respect for human rights.
Increased polarisation is making it difficult to
develop new international agreements and com­
mon solutions.

The ability and willingness of states to pursue
their goals through conventional military force,
covert operations and cooperation with non-state
actors is increasing. The vast array of information
sources combined with targeted disinformation
activities can create uncertainty and sow doubt
among the population. This is making crisis man­
agement more difficult than it was in the past.

Globalisation is continuing, and its impact on
our societies is far-reaching. At the same time,
forces opposed to globalisation have gained
strength. In several countries, political protest par­


_Capable and sustainable. Long-term Defence Plan,_ 17 June
2016

Meld. St. 10 (2016–2017) Risk in a safe and secure society.


-----

g y p y

– safeguarding and strengthening multilateral
institutions and conventions that promote
democracy, human rights and the rule of law.

_Intensifying Norway’s efforts in Europe’s unstable_
_southern neighbourhood by:_
– implementing our strategy for efforts in fragile
states and regions.

– increasing aid to the unstable areas in the Mid­
dle East, North Africa and the Sahel.

Part I of this white paper provides an analysis of
security policy trends. Part II answers two key
questions: How are these trends affecting Norwe­
gian security? And what consequences should this
have for Norwegian security policy?


– working to promote balanced, mutual, irrevers­
ible and verifiable nuclear disarmament and
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.

_Strengthening the European and Nordic dimension_
_in Norwegian security policy by:_
– developing closer security policy cooperation
with selected European allies.

– helping to enhance European civilian and mili­
tary crisis management capacity, and promot­
ing effective control of external borders, close
police and intelligence cooperation, and antiradicalisation and integration measures.

– promoting closer cooperation between NATO
and the EU.

– intensifying security policy dialogue and coop­
eration in the Nordic region.


-----

-----

### Part I
 Security policy trends


-----

-----

g g g y p

#### 2 The Euro-Atlantic area


European and transatlantic cooperation based on
shared values and interests is the key to peace
and stability. This cooperation is now being chal­
lenged from within, as a result of trends such as
changes in the security architecture, economic
developments, and a tendency towards polarisa­
tion.

##### 2.1 Security architecture

The Euro-Atlantic security architecture is based
on the UN Charter. The principle of collective
defence, enshrined in Article 5 of the North Atlan­
tic Treaty, is at the core of transatlantic coopera­
tion and is fundamental to Norwegian security.
Norway also has benefited considerably from
European cooperation arrangements since the
end of the Second World War. These cover a wide
range, from far-reaching integration projects to
regional cooperation forums and pan-European
organisations. Together, they have enhanced
cooperation, trust, conflict resolution and security
in Europe.

In the late 1990s and 2000s, the European and
Euro-Atlantic cooperation structures were
expanded to include a number of new countries.
The goal of EU and NATO membership became a
powerful driver of democratic reform. Democrati­
sation and the inclusion of former Eastern bloc
countries in European and Euro-Atlantic struc­
tures erased old dividing lines and brought with it
peace, predictability and stability. Many countries
made defence cuts.

Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014
changed the security situation. As a result, NATO
has shifted its attention from out-of-area crisis
management to collective defence and deterrence
within the NATO area. Cuts in defence spending
have been halted in most countries, and NATO’s
presence in its Eastern member states has been
strengthened in response to uncertainty about
Russia’s intentions and its increased military capa­
bilities.

Through this process of adaptation, NATO has
demonstrated a high level of cohesion. However,


security threats affect the soon-to-be 29 NATO
member states[1] in different ways. This influences
national priorities. Moreover, there are growing
disparities between member states in levels of
political, economic and military development.
Over time, the NATO area has become less homo­
geneous. NATO is considering whether to begin
work on a new Strategic Concept, to be issued in
connection with its 70[th] anniversary in 2019.

Relations between the US and its European
Allies are also part of this picture. Today’s chal­
lenges are not experienced in the same way or
with the same intensity in Europe and the US. Our
shared history is receding into the past. The
major waves of migration across the Atlantic are
becoming a more distant memory. Younger peo­
ple today are not bound together as we were in
the past by shared experiences such as the libera­
tion and reconstruction of Europe after the Sec­
ond World War or security cooperation during the
Cold War.

The US contributes over 70 % of NATO’s over­

all defence spending.[2] Norway and the other
Allies cannot simply assume that the US will main­
tain its current level of military interest and
engagement in Europe in the future. In the US
public debate, investments in European security
are being weighed against other priorities. In
2014, NATO member states agreed to aim to
increase their defence expenditure and move
towards spending 2 % of their GDP on defence
within a decade.

Greater diversity within NATO is encouraging
new forms of cooperation. Closer cooperation
between smaller groups of countries, involving
both Allies and non-Allies, increasingly reinforces
and complements NATO’s efforts. Norway’s coop­
eration with countries such as France, the Nether­
lands, the UK and Germany provides examples of

1 Montenegro is in the process of joining NATO. On 10 Janu­
ary 2017, the Storting (Norwegian parliament) gave its
unanimous consent to Montenegro’s accession as the 29th
member of NATO.

2 NATO (2016), Defence expenditures of NATO countries
2008-2015. Press Release PR/CP (2016) 011. Available at
http://www.nato.int [accessed 13 March 2017].


-----

g y p y

ation is likely to be developed first between small
groups of countries.

##### 2.2 Economic development

For over 60 years, close economic and political
cooperation has strengthened the ability of Euro­
pean countries to invest in security in the broadest
sense of the word. After the fall of the Berlin wall,
even more Europeans were able to benefit from
the progress being made. The establishment of
the internal market in 1993 and the enlargement
of the EU created new opportunities for growth
across Europe. Norway has benefited from this
through its participation in the EEA Agreement.

The combined GDP of the eurozone countries
is now back to the same level as it was before the
financial crisis hit Europe with full force in 2009.
However, high levels of government debt are
reducing the economic room for manoeuvre in
many countries.

Demographic changes will put increasing
pressure on national budgets. The share of eco­
nomically active people in the population is declin­
ing in most European countries, while the share of
elderly people is increasing.[3] These trends are the
result of low birth rates and higher life expec­
tancy. In Norway too, the number of elderly peo­
ple is growing more rapidly than the number of
people in employment.[4]

Budgetary pressures, growing competition
from emerging economies, an ageing population,
technological developments and the need to limit
global warming mean that there is a need for
transformational change. Norway is one of a num­
ber of countries that are well placed to succeed in
this process, with a sound framework that creates
a fertile environment for innovation.

However, there are substantial social and eco­

nomic disparities between countries in Europe.
The continent includes some of the most competi­
tive economies in the world, but there are also
countries where corruption, organised crime and
a dysfunctional public sector are impeding eco­
nomic growth. There are also marked disparities
within countries, particularly in areas that were
hit hard by the financial crisis.

3 Eurostat (2015), People in the EU: who are we and how do
_we live? Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat [acces­_
sed 13 March 2017].

4 Statistics Norway (2014), _Befolkningsframskrivinger 2014-_
_2100 (‘Population forecasts 2014-2100’) (Norwegian only)_
Available at: www.ssb.no/befolkning [accessed 13 March
2017].


this, as does its cooperation with the other Nordic
countries and the Baltic states.

The EU binds its member states closer
together in more areas than any other organisa­
tion. By imposing conditions on candidate coun­
tries and other partners, the EU has also pro­
moted stability and democratic reform in neigh­
bouring countries. The EU’s ability to promote a
positive path of development in these countries is
of vital importance to the security of Europe as a
whole. However, major challenges remain relating
to corruption, an inability or lack of willingness to
fulfil joint commitments, and a lack of reforms in
the countries in question.

Several of the Western Balkan countries have
made significant progress in recent years, but the
stability of the region cannot be taken for granted.
Integration into the EU, which has been widely
supported in the Western Balkan countries, is a
slow process. Unemployment is high, corruption
is widespread and living conditions are poor.
External actors that oppose European integration
are becoming increasingly active. They are coop­
erating with local forces that see that it is to their
advantage to play on national and ethnic tensions
to maintain the status quo.

Turkey plays an important role in ensuring
regional stability, has close ties to the EU and is an
important ally in NATO. However, Turkey is fac­
ing major security problems relating to the Mid­
dle East conflicts just across the border, the
attempted coup in 2016, and frequent skirmishes
between terrorist and armed groups and the coun­
try’s security forces. Several million refugees
have sought refuge in Turkey. The political situa­
tion in the country gives cause for concern. There
are increasing restrictions on freedom of expres­
sion and the press, the human rights situation is
deteriorating and the rule of law is being under­
mined. The country is becoming increasingly
polarised.

Reaching agreement on an ambitious common
foreign and security policy can be difficult for the
EU. Nevertheless, the EU plays a key role in this
area, both within and outside Europe. The EU has
also developed extensive cooperation on civil pro­
tection and emergency preparedness and
response.

The heightened security situation in and
around Europe, the UK’s withdrawal from the EU
and US demands for Europe to take more respon­
sibility for its own security have revived discus­
sions about the EU’s foreign and security policy
role. In the long term, this could result in closer
cooperation between member states. This cooper­


-----

g y p y

the principles of the rule of law. The threat of ter­
rorism highlights the need to combine stabilisa­
tion efforts in countries in Europe’s neighbour­
hood with stronger civil protection and emer­
gency preparedness at the national level.

##### 2.4 Polarisation of society

There is growing support for protest movements
and protest parties in a number of countries, while
support for traditional political parties has weak­
ened. Some of the protest parties respect demo­
cratic rules, while others challenge fundamental
principles, human rights and democratic values,
and are ideologically or otherwise linked to
authoritarian models.

Political polarisation has a clear foreign and
security policy dimension. Although protest par­
ties and movements may have different starting
points, they are united by a distrust of the authori­
ties and the political system. A number of them
express a lack of faith in binding international
cooperation, are sceptical of international trade
and have an exaggerated belief in the ability of the
nation state to tackle today’s challenges alone. If
these parties are increasingly able to put their pol­
icies into practice, this could pose a threat to coop­
eration in NATO and the EU, and weaken
Europe’s ability to take collective action. We can­
not rule out the risk that security policy in Europe
will be ‘renationalised’.

Moreover, increasing polarisation could make
European countries vulnerable to negative exter­
nal influences, in the form of disinformation cam­
paigns and other destabilising activities. This
could result in further polarisation and greater dif­
ferences of opinion in and between European
countries on important foreign and security policy
issues.


##### 2.3 Extremism

Violent extremism in its various forms is a serious
security threat to Norway and other European
countries. Some extremists threaten the security
of minorities. Others direct their hatred at society
as a whole. What they have in common is a desire
to sow discord and undermine the values on
which European societies are based.

The number of people killed in terrorist
attacks in Europe has fallen since the 1970s and
1980s. However, unlike the primarily ethno-nation­
alist and separatist terrorism of previous decades,
today’s acts of terrorism are not limited to any
specific geographical area. In Norway and many
other European countries, the fear and risk of a
terrorist attack is therefore greater today.

More than 5 000 foreign terrorist fighters from
Europe have travelled to Syria and Iraq to join vio­
lent extremist groups. According to the Norwe­
gian Police Security Service (PST), some 40 peo­
ple with close links to Norway were staying in
ISIL-controlled areas at the beginning of 2017.[5]

Foreign terrorist fighters who have returned to
Norway pose a security risk. The threat from
remote radicalisation is considered to be at least
as great as that from people who have acquired
combat experience abroad. The threat from farright groups is growing.

The terrorist attacks in Europe in recent years
and the threat posed by violent extremists make it
essential to strengthen European cooperation on
information sharing, border control, intelligence,
crime fighting and asylum policy. These develop­
ments have also raised awareness of the impor­
tance of social and economic development and of
safeguarding democracy, fundamental rights and

5 Norwegian Police Security Service (2017), Threat Assess­
ment 2017. Available at www.pst.no [accessed 13 March
2017].


-----

g g g y p

#### 3 The Arctic and Russia


Developments in the Arctic are crucial to Norwe­
gian security. Increasing international interest in
the region is creating both opportunities and chal­
lenges. Bilateral cooperation between Norway
and Russia in the north functions well in many
areas, but Russia’s military actions and foreign
policy conduct give cause for concern.

##### 3.1 The Arctic

Major players such as the US, the EU, Russia and
China are increasingly promoting their interests
in the Arctic. A number of countries are demon­
strating their interest in the region through politi­
cal engagement, investments in business and
technology, and research. Climate change and
easier access to sea areas and natural resources
have led to increasing human activity in the Arc­
tic. Similar trends can also be seen at the opposite
end of the world, in the Antarctic. The growing
interest in the Arctic is creating opportunities for
closer cooperation, but also means that competing
interests may emerge.

Since the end of the Cold War, the interests of
the Arctic coastal states in the region have been
largely compatible. The level of tension has been
low, cooperation has been successful and the Law
of the Sea has been upheld. As new actors with
other interests and ambitions increase their
engagement in the Arctic, more needs to be done
to ensure continued respect and understanding
for Norway’s views.

Russia is a key player in the Arctic, not least
because of its geographical location. According to
its strategies and doctrines, Russia’s goals include
securing access to energy resources and to the
Northeast Passage as a transport corridor, and
maintaining Russian control and influence in the
region. However, Russia is investing less than
planned in the Arctic, largely because of low
energy prices. Moreover, the volume of shipping
using the Northeast Passage is smaller than
expected.

There is a high level of military activity in the
region. Russia’s nuclear deterrence and retaliation


capabilities are based on the Kola Peninsula, just
to the east of the Norwegian-Russian border.
These strategic weapons have been significantly
upgraded as part of the modernisation of Russia’s
armed forces, which began in 2008. The region
has great military and strategic significance. In
the event of a security crisis, Russia could
increase the readiness of these forces. This would
reduce Norway’s freedom of action and move­
ment on its own territory and limit Allied access to
the North Sea and the North Atlantic. A situation
of this kind would make it more difficult for
NATO to provide supplies and reinforcements for
the defence of Norway and other Allies.

Military cooperation between Norway and
Russia has been suspended following Russia’s ille­
gal annexation of Crimea and its other violations
of international law in Ukraine. However, despite
today’s more complex security situation, Norway
and Russia have maintained bilateral cooperation
in a number of important areas.

Norway and Russia share an interest in main­

taining stability and predictability in the Arctic.
Ensuring respect for the Law of the Sea is in the
interests of both countries. Russia’s conduct in the
Arctic has generally been in line with international
law and bilateral agreements and accepted prac­
tice. Practical cooperation in a number of areas
(search and rescue, fisheries management,
nuclear safety, environmental protection and peo­
ple-to-people cooperation) enhances regional sta­
bility.

##### 3.2 Russia


Russia’s great power ambitions have become
clearer since the turn of the millennium. Its rheto­
ric has become tougher and has been matched by
actions that underline Russia’s desire to dominate
parts of its ‘near abroad’ and play a more promi­
nent role internationally. Attempts to restore Rus­
sia’s international status are widely supported in
Russia.

Russia’s ambitions are being reinforced by a
considerable strengthening of its military power.


-----

g y p y

Norwegian-Russian relations will continue to
have their ups and downs in the years ahead. Rus­
sia’s desire to be the dominant power in what
Moscow regards as its sphere of influence con­
flicts with international principles relating to the
right of countries to determine their own foreign
policy and choose their own alliances.

There is a growing gap between Russia’s great
power ambitions and what the Russian economy
can support in the long term. The economy is
highly dependent on oil and gas, and lower energy
prices have hit Russia hard. Growth was already
slowing while oil prices were still high. The fall in
oil prices has accelerated the decline. Since the
end of 2014, GDP has shrunk and people’s pur­
chasing power has decreased.[1] The combination
of low, and in periods negative, population growth
and a large post-war generation that is now ageing
is creating further challenges.

Over the past few years, investment in civilian
infrastructure has been inadequate and there
have been major cuts in public spending. Until
recently, the exception has been the defence sec­
tor, where modernisation and investment have
been a high priority since 2008. During this
period, defence spending has accounted for
between 4 and 5 % of GDP, but there has been a
slight decrease in the last couple of years.[2] Russia
is expected to continue to give priority to the
defence sector even if the situation in the Russian
economy remains difficult.

Weak growth raises fears of internal unrest.
This could be one of the reasons why the authori­
ties have been tightening their grip on civil society
in recent years. Freedom of expression is highly
restricted. The media is largely under state con­
trol.

1 World Bank (2016), _The Russian economy inches forward:_
_Will that suffice to turn the tide? Russia Economic Report_
35. Available at: http://documents.worldbank.org [acces­
sed 13 March 2017].

2 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (2016),
_Trends in military expenditure, 2015._ Available at:
www.sipri.se [accessed 13 March 2017].


As a result of the modernisation process, Russia’s
military forces have become more coordinated,
flexible and mobile. During exercises in Norway’s
neighbouring areas and its operations in Ukraine
and Syria, Russia has demonstrated the use of
conventional long-range precision missiles and its
ability to conduct Anti-Access/Area Denial opera­
tions and secure control of airspace. Russia’s mili­
tary capabilities mean that it has a wider range of
options available if any kind of crisis or conflict
arises. This has implications for Norwegian and
Allied security.

Russia’s interventions in Georgia in 2008 and
Ukraine in 2014 show that Russia is willing and
able to use all the instruments of state power,
including military force, to safeguard its interests.
The use of military force in violation of interna­
tional law creates uncertainty. The current ten­
sions between Russia and the rest of Europe are
also affecting the Western Balkans.

NATO has responded by strengthening its
presence in its easternmost member states. The
EU has taken a unified stand and adopted restric­
tive measures against Russia in response to the
violations of international law in Ukraine, thus
strengthening its position as a security policy
actor. Norway is contributing to steps to
strengthen NATO’s presence on its eastern flank
and has aligned itself with the EU’s restrictive
measures.

Russia’s military campaign in Syria demon­

strates that Russia also has ambitions beyond its
‘near abroad’.

Nuclear weapons play a key role in Russian
security and defence policy, and the modernisa­
tion of weapons systems is continuing. Russia has
not wanted to make further cuts to its nuclear
arsenals.

Russia’s 2015 national security strategy
describes several aspects of NATO’s activities as a
threat. Practical cooperation between NATO and
Russia has been suspended following the annex­
ation of Crimea. NATO-Russian relations are now
at their coldest since the fall of the Berlin Wall.


-----

g g g y p

#### 4 Europe’s neighbourhood


Norway’s security is increasingly affected by
instability in Europe’s southern neighbourhood.
Parts of the Middle East, North Africa and the
Sahel are experiencing crises. While growth is
strong in several sub-Saharan countries, chal­
lenges relating, for example, to poor governance,
rapid population growth and climate change are
making the continent vulnerable. To the south
east, Afghanistan and Pakistan are still a safe
haven for violent extremists and a source of insta­
bility, both within and outside the region.

##### 4.1 The Middle East and North Africa

Regimes have fallen, and new ones have taken
their place. The Arab Spring uprisings have not
led to better living conditions for people in the
Middle East and North Africa. More people are
living in situations of war and conflict than before
the uprisings. An exception here is Tunisia, where
the population and civil society have so far man­
aged to keep democracy alive. But the situation is
fragile. Continued progress cannot be taken for
granted. International support will be necessary
for a long time to come.

In Syria and Iraq, millions of people have been
driven from their homes. Civilians have been hit
in targeted attacks on schools, hospitals and local
communities. International humanitarian law is
being violated. The suffering is immense. The
violence has put a major strain on the neighbour­
ing countries. The rivalry between Saudi Arabia
and Iran continues. The balance of power
between several of the major powers in the region
is changing.

As long as the Israeli–Palestinian conflict
remains unresolved, it may exacerbate other con­
flicts in the region. It is therefore crucial that this
conflict is resolved.

The situation in certain parts of the Middle
East and North Africa is creating a further breed­
ing ground for violent extremism. Extremism is
on the rise and brutality is increasing. Sexual vio­
lence is widespread. Inadequate government con­
trol over territory and weak governance are allow­


ing extremists to operate more freely in countries
like Syria, Iraq and Libya.

Societies in the Middle East and North Africa
are becoming less tolerant. There is a tendency
towards extremist religious interpretations. There
is less tolerance of people from other religions or
with other religious views. Hostile images are cre­
ated and extreme views on all sides are intensi­
fied.

Military and civilian efforts have, to some
extent, succeeded in halting the advance of
extremist groups. But the fight against violent
extremism will require far more. The underlying
problems related to social, economic, political and
ideological development have to be solved. Sectar­
ian and other divisions are putting nation states
under pressure.

Population growth in the region is high. A
shortage of employment opportunities and
unequal distribution of resources are creating
bleak prospects for large numbers of young peo­
ple. In parts of the region, the low level of invest­
ment in education gives cause for concern.
Women are, to varying degrees, being excluded
from the labour market, and the economic poten­
tial they represent is thus not being used. The
economic repercussions of the conflicts are affect­
ing major parts of the region. The impacts of cli­
mate change are also undermining people’s liveli­
hoods. This could further intensify existing secu­
rity threats.

A number of oil-dependent economies in the
Middle East and North Africa are feeling the
effects of lower oil prices. When an economy
shrinks, the country’s governance model can be
shaken to the core. A number of oil economies
transfer large sums of money to other countries. If
these transfers are discontinued, some recipient
countries will face serious financial challenges.

In recent years, the US has played a less prom­

inent role in the Middle East and North Africa, fol­
lowing a long period of costly military interven­
tions. The shale oil revolution has made the US
less dependent on the oil fields in the Gulf. It is
uncertain whether the US will want to increase its
military and political engagement in the Middle


-----

g y p y

The growth of terrorism is particularly evi­

dent. Both the number of African countries
affected and the number of victims have increased
considerably over the years. Groups that are
loosely connected to al-Qaida and ISIL have
gained a foothold in North Africa and in the belt of
countries stretching from the Sahel to the Horn of
Africa. In 2015, nine African countries were
included in the list of the 20 countries in the world
that are hardest hit by terrorism.[2] In the same
year, Boko Haram was the world’s second deadli­
est terrorist group, after ISIL. The terrorist
groups in the region are also a threat to targets in
sub-Saharan Africa and in Europe.

Many people in sub-Saharan countries have
experienced positive economic and political devel­
opment in recent years. Nevertheless, they
remain vulnerable to terrorism and other external
shocks such as unrest in neighbouring countries,
natural disasters, the impacts of climate change,
environmental crime and epidemics. The Ebola
outbreak in West Africa in 2014-2015 is an exam­
ple of the way in which such challenges can affect
security in Europe.

Instability in the belt of countries that extends
from the Sahel to the Horn of Africa is expected to
continue. International efforts under the leader­
ship of France and the UN have produced results
in some places, but there is still a long list of chal­
lenges waiting to be resolved. In the short term,
there are few signs that states in the region are
becoming stronger. The capacity to tackle largescale crises is limited, and government control
over large areas of land will continue to be weak.
The same is true for sea areas off the Horn of
Africa and in the Gulf of Guinea. It is difficult to
achieve effective cross-border counter-terrorism
cooperation. The African Union’s military peace
efforts have been strengthened, but the AU does
not have the capacity to address all the chal­
lenges.

The international community must therefore
be prepared for continued threats of terrorism
and organised crime in the region. This will put
considerable pressure on limited resources for
crisis management, capacity-building and longterm aid. At the same time, it will be important to
ensure that preventive efforts and economic
development continue in the areas south of the
Sahara.

2 Institute for Economics and Peace (2016), Global Terro­
rism Index 2016. Available at http://economicsand­
peace.org [accessed 13 March 2017].


East again. The country’s oil independence will, in
any case, give it greater freedom of action and
make US policy in the region less predictable than
it used to be. Nevertheless, the US has taken on a
key leadership role in the broad international coa­
lition that has been formed to combat ISIL.

The reduced US presence has created more
space for other actors. China is investing heavily
in many parts of the world, including in the Mid­
dle East and North Africa, and these investments
can contribute to economic development and sta­
bility. Russia’s military engagement in the conflict
in Syria is a new development. With its increased
military presence and the deployment of
advanced weapons systems, Russia has estab­
lished itself as a force to be reckoned with in the
eastern Mediterranean. It is difficult to judge what
role Russia will play in the Middle East in the time
ahead.

Unrest in parts of North Africa and the Middle
East is creating real security threats for Norwe­
gian individuals and companies in the region. In
addition, some Norwegian nationals are directly
involved in the fighting in Syria and Iraq. How­
ever, the number of Norwegians travelling to
Syria as foreign terrorist fighters is falling.[1]

One of the consequences of the situation in
parts of the Middle East and North Africa is that
more refugees and other migrants are travelling
to European countries. Parts of the region are also
transit areas for migrants from further south.
Even if the most acute crises are alleviated, migra­
tory pressure will remain high in the years to
come.

##### 4.2 The Sahel and the Horn of Africa

Weak governance in countries such as Libya is
making Europe more exposed to challenges from
areas further south. The unstable region that
extends from the Sahel to the Horn of Africa is
becoming part of Europe’s neighbourhood, in
terms of security. Instability in this region could
also have a negative impact on more stable coun­
tries south of the Sahara.

Africa’s ongoing conflicts are mainly internal.
Many of the parties to these conflicts are non-state
actors that are able to gain ground in areas where
government control is weak. This in turn creates a
breeding ground for organised crime and violent
extremism – challenges that also spread to
Europe.

1 Norwegian Police Security Service (2017), op.cit.


-----

g y p y

Continued international engagement is crucial
for preventing the situation from deteriorating
drastically. The withdrawal of international forces
has been postponed so that adequate support and
further training can be provided to Afghan secu­
rity forces.

In addition to military support, Afghanistan
will, for the foreseeable future, continue to depend
on a high level of aid from international donors in
order to avoid collapse.

The country still harbours violent extremists,
although less so than previously. If the level of vio­
lence increases and the central authorities are
weakened further, there is a greater risk that
Afghanistan will once again become a safe haven
for international terrorist groups.

In 2016, Afghanis made up the second largest
group of migrants to Europe,[4] and emigration
from Afghanistan is expected to remain high.

It will not be possible to achieve lasting stabil­

ity without a peace process with the Taliban. None
of the parties is expected to win a military victory.
There is still considerable distance between the
parties. Any peace agreement will require exten­
sive engagement by the international community
and the regional powers, not least to ensure the
participation and rights of women and other vul­
nerable groups. Even after a peace agreement is
reached with the Taliban, we can expect that other
violent groups will continue to operate in the
country.

Violent extremists are also a serious threat in
Pakistan. A major military operation over the last
few years has helped to reduce the level of vio­
lence, but terrorism is still impeding the country’s
development. The situation of religious minorities
is also a serious cause for concern. It will be diffi­
cult to eradicate terrorism without positive eco­
nomic development, greater focus on education,
and efforts to counter radicalisation. There are
few signs of progress in these areas.

India and Pakistan are both strengthening
their nuclear arsenals, in quantitative as well as
qualitative terms. Doctrines are changing and it is
expected that nuclear weapons will play a more
prominent role in deterrence in South Asia. This
development gives grounds for concern as the
countries’ conflict over Kashmir remains unre­
solved and tensions are running high. There are
regular skirmishes between Indian and Pakistani
forces, and there is little prospect of a solution.

4 Eurostat (2016), Asylum quarterly report. Available at http:/
/ec.europa.eu/eurostat/ [accessed 13 March 2017].


It is expected that migratory pressure on
Europe, and on more prosperous African coun­
tries and cities will remain high. This is due to fac­
tors such as continued instability in the Sahel, the
Horn of Africa and certain parts of North Africa,
rapid population growth, a young population,
weak economic development and unemployment.
Today, Africa’s population totals 1.2 billion. This
figure is expected to double by the middle of the
century.[3] The level of migration will depend on
factors such as the ability of the countries of origin
to create inclusive growth and jobs. External bor­
der control, immigration management and efforts
to combat organised crime are inadequate in
many places.

The continent faces long-term challenges that
are not in themselves threats to security, but could
affect stability and security in countries that fail to
adapt successfully. Climate change is one exam­
ple. The Middle East and Africa are among the
parts of the world that are expected to be hardest
hit. Global warming will cause widespread
drought and flooding, crop failure will be more
common, there will be less access to clean water,
and food security will be threatened. Modernisa­
tion of agriculture and a transition to climate-resil­
ient crops will help, but in some places agriculture
will no longer be possible. This will force people to
migrate and will become a source of political and
social unrest.

The capacity to build resilience and adapt var­

ies from country to country. This will have conse­
quences for Norwegian efforts in areas such as
humanitarian aid, development, promotion of
good governance, peacekeeping activities, busi­
ness promotion, consular services, and our efforts
to combat terrorism and organised crime, includ­
ing environmental crime.

##### 4.3 South Asia

After 15 years of extensive international efforts –
both civilian and military – the situation in Afghan­
istan remains fragile. Rivalry for power and influ­
ence continues. The level of conflict between vari­
ous rebel groups and the central authorities is as
high as ever. And unless there is a breakthrough
in the peace process with the Taliban, it is likely to
remain so.

3 UN (2015), World Population Prospects. Available at
https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp [accessed 1 March 2017].


-----

g g g y p

#### 5 Global balance of power


The emergence of new centres of economic and
military power is altering the political balance of
power in the world. New actors – both state and
non-state – are appearing on the international politi­
cal scene. Some of them are challenging states,
existing rules and multilateral institutions.

##### 5.1 Economic centre of gravity

The importance of a strong economy for a coun­
try’s security cannot be overstated. Economic
strength enhances resilience in the face of diffi­
cult situations and makes it possible to give prior­
ity to defence and promote national interests.

Very few countries are in a better economic
situation than Norway. We have an advanced
economy with access to abundant natural
resources, which we manage with a long-term per­
spective. Norway’s financial position is unique.
Under the EEA Agreement, Norwegian compa­
nies have access to a ‘domestic market’ of more
than half a billion people.

Developments in the international economy
and in international trade and finance policy have
a major impact on Norway’s open economy. Nor­
way is the world’s eighth largest oil exporter and
Europe’s second largest gas supplier. Changes in
global energy markets, significant fluctuations in
oil and gas prices and the green transition affect
Norway’s economic and security interests.

Norwegian companies abroad depend on sta­

ble, predictable framework conditions and an
acceptable security situation. Given the fact that
the Government Pension Fund Global has invest­
ments of more than NOK 7 700 billion, develop­
ments in the world’s financial markets are also
highly significant.

Since the start of the millennium, many Asian
countries have experienced a high level of growth.
Asia’s importance for the world economy has thus
increased. There is every indication that this
strong growth will continue, although at a some­
what slower pace. China is becoming an increas­
ingly important actor in international trade
regimes at both global and regional level. With


major foreign investments, including in Norway
and other European countries, China is now an
integral part of the world economy. The establish­
ment of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
and the New Silk Road initiative reflect China’s
ambition and capacity to take on a leading role in
global development.

Most of the world’s economic growth will be
take place in countries outside Europe. In parts of
Africa and Latin America, there is considerable
potential for economic growth in the years to
come. These markets offer major opportunities
for the Norwegian business sector.

As the economic centre of gravity moves east­

wards and southwards, more people are being
lifted out of poverty. Never before have so many
people benefited from such high levels of welfare
and cooperation as today. Globally, economic
growth has doubled in the last 20 years. The pro­
portion of people living in extreme poverty has
been halved during the same period. However,
there are many people who are living just over the
extreme poverty threshold, and the gap between
rich and poor is becoming increasingly visible in
many emerging economies.

At the same time, a middle class is emerging
in many countries. This group has a purchasing
power that allows a level of consumption beyond
mere necessity. The middle class is more asser­
tive and demands more of the authorities in terms
of economic and social progress.

In parallel with the emergence of new centres
of economic power, there has been rapidly
increasing economic integration between coun­
tries all over the world. One of the driving forces
behind this development is the reduction of
national trade barriers. Most countries are pursu­
ing a more open economic policy than previously.
Tariffs have been reduced. Protectionism has
been on the wane for many years. Now once again
there are strong voices calling for less free trade
and greater protectionism. Their words are being
translated into action. These trends towards pro­
tectionism are creating uncertainty and threaten
our fundamental interests. Norway is one of glo­
balisation’s clear winners.


-----

g y p y

Rivalry between emerging and established major
powers is creating uncertainty and unpredictabil­
ity at the global level. It is crucial for Norway’s
security that we understand these developments
and their consequences for NATO and key allies.

India and China have given their national
defence high priority. They are investing heavily
in advanced military equipment, and are develop­
ing military capabilities that will allow them to
exercise power beyond their neighbouring areas.
Several neighbouring countries are also rearming.
In addition, less wealthy countries and non-state
actors can make use of technology to develop
more effective weapons. Several countries in the
eastern parts of Europe, the Caucasus and the
Middle East are substantially increasing their
defence expenditure.[1]

Nevertheless, the US will maintain its position
as the world’s only military superpower for the
foreseeable future. The US alone accounts for
more than a third of the world’s military expendi­
ture. It also has the most technologically
advanced armed forces. With alliances covering
large parts of the globe, the US’s military power is
unrivalled. Thus, while the US’s lead has been
reduced somewhat, particularly in terms of tech­
nology, the gap between the US and other major
powers remains considerable.

Among the other NATO members, however,
the willingness to invest in the defence sector var­
ies. The goal adopted by the NATO countries to
work towards spending 2 % of their GDP on
defence with at least 20 % of this on investments,
has not been met. Europe’s advantage in terms of
military technology will shrink unless more is
invested in research and development.

The US may be drawn more closely into the
security situation in Asia in the years ahead. The
situation on the Korean Peninsula remains tense.
In the South and East China Seas, there is a risk of
heightened tension and major power rivalry. Ter­
ritorial disputes in these waters remain largely
unresolved. Civilian and military infrastructure
has been developed in disputed parts of the South
China Sea. A conflict in this area would affect
world trade and regional stability. An increase in
tension between China and the US would have
repercussions for development in the Asia–Pacific
region. It could also have negative consequences
for Norwegian economic interests.

At the same time as major regional powers are
rearming, countries with less advanced defence


Lack of progress in multilateral trade negotia­

tions has led to more regional agreements being
negotiated in their place. International trade coop­
eration has thus become more fragmented.

Technological developments play a key role in
today’s more integrated world economy. To begin
with, globalisation was driven by technological
advances in the transport and manufacturing sec­
tors. The integration we have seen in recent
decades has been made possible by the dramati­
cally improved opportunities for exchanging infor­
mation. The availability of cheap labour will
become less critical for where production takes
place. Specialised skills and access to technology
and infrastructure will become more important.
This will be a positive development for Norway’s
and other European countries’ economies, which
cannot compete on the basis of cheap labour.

A more integrated world economy and free
trade have many advantages. Peaceful develop­
ment is a prerequisite for open markets, and this
is in everyone’s interests. Today, the economies of
rival major powers are closely interconnected.
Economic interdependence between countries
has a stabilising effect and helps to prevent con­
flicts. The G20 cooperation shows that we have
come a long way from the situation we had during
the Cold War. However, closer economic ties also
mean that negative incidents in one part of the
world can more easily and more quickly have con­
sequences in a quite different part of the world, as
was illustrated during the global financial crisis of
2008.

Although free trade is good for society as a
whole, many people feel they have missed out on
the benefits of globalisation. In some countries,
distribution of wealth has been uneven and social
and economic disparities are growing. In some
advanced economies, the middle class is under
pressure and certain social groups have not seen
any increase in real earnings. This creates discon­
tent and fuels support for protectionist policies.
Turning away from free trade and open markets
will jeopardise growth both in advanced econo­
mies, like Norway, and in developing countries,
where the prospects of further poverty reduction
will be weakened.

##### 5.2 Military strength

Countries that were previous marginal in terms of
their political power are wielding more influence
in international politics. Growth and development
are being translated into increased military power.


Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (2016),
_op. cit._


-----

g y p y

well.[3] The interference of foreign powers and
other actors in democratic processes is a growing
problem. Cyberspace structures are nebulous and
largely owned by private multinational companies.
This makes it difficult for governments to keep up
with developments and protect vulnerable critical
infrastructure.

##### 5.3 Political influence

Increased polarisation in international politics is
challenging established rules and making it diffi­
cult to further develop international law. Rules
that are enshrined in the UN Charter are not
respected in many places. Universal human rights
are under pressure. Liberal democracies are los­
ing influence. This is a threat to our values and
positions in international negotiations and may
affect political developments. In the worst case,
this could undermine democracy and stability in
our own country.

Multilateral institutions and conventions that
promote democracy, human rights and the rule of
law, and that we have built up over several
decades, are under increasing pressure, both
politically and in terms of resources. Institutions
like the Council of Europe and the OSCE have
played an important role in promoting the rule of
law and stability in Europe. They are at the centre
of the battle of values that we are now seeing in
our part of the world too. Institutions in other
parts of the world are less developed. Closer coop­
eration within organisations such as the AU and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) is needed in order to promote stability.
At the global level, the institutions of the UN and
the UN system are in a class of their own, but
there is still a huge gap between the normative
resolutions that are adopted and the individual
countries’ ability to implement them in practice.

Nevertheless, most countries are still willing
to cooperate within the multilateral system, which
was developed against the backdrop of the bal­
ance of power at the end of the Second World War.
This cooperation produces results: the Sustain­
able Development Goals, the Paris Agreement on
climate change, the agreement on financing for
development, the free trade reforms, and the
nuclear agreement with Iran. At the same time,
emerging powers are calling for representation in

3 Meld. St. 37 (2014–2015), Global security challenges in
Norway’s foreign policy – Terrorism, organised crime,
piracy and cyber threats.


capabilities may offset some of the major powers’
superiority by investing in certain types of weapon
systems. Moreover, the operations in Iraq and
Afghanistan have demonstrated the limitations of
military force. Basic guerrilla warfare tactics
employed by opponents that are weaker in every
way have made it difficult to achieve the desired
results. This hard-earned experience will affect
the willingness to use large-scale military ground
forces for a long time.

The nuclear agreement with Iran is historic
and a victory for non-proliferation efforts. At the
same time, a number of states and other actors
are showing a renewed interest in weapons of
mass destruction. Tensions between the nuclear
powers India and Pakistan are high. Develop­
ments in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea (DPRK) give cause for concern. The DPRK
is in the process of taking the step from carrying
out nuclear tests to developing delivery systems
and full-scale nuclear weapons for military use.
The sanctions imposed by the international com­
munity in response to the nuclear tests have not in
themselves been sufficient to stop the weapons
programme. A DPRK with operational nuclear
capacity will have a destabilising effect and fur­
ther increase the risk of proliferation.

More than 20 years after the nerve gas attack
on the Tokyo metro, the use of chemical weapons
in Syria has again highlighted the dangers of such
highly toxic chemicals. There is a risk of weapons
of mass destruction being used in a terrorist
attack, and this includes the use of chemical, bio­
logical and radiological material. The international
community is working to secure such material
and reduce the number of sources. In the hands of
terrorists, the materials in question would not nec­
essarily constitute effective weapons of mass
destruction, but would spread fear.

The threat of cyber attack is increasing.[2] As

societies have become more dependent on infor­
mation technology, they have also become more
vulnerable. The possibility of a cyber attack is now
one of the fastest growing threats to public secu­
rity. Relatively few resources are needed to
achieve a major disruptive effect. Digital intelli­
gence operations and digital warfare are an
important part of modern defence in many coun­
tries.

The possibility of concealing one’s identity can
make such methods attractive in peacetime as

2 The Norwegian Intelligence Service (2017), _Fokus 2017._
Available at https://forsvaret.no/fokus [Norwegian only,
accessed 13 March 2017].


-----

g y p y

eration Organization, an intergovernmental
organisation for economic, political and military
cooperation in Eurasia, is strengthening Chinese
influence in the region. China is increasingly tak­
ing on a leadership role in the international arena,
for example, it is a major contributor to UN peace
operations. China is playing a key role in setting
the agenda for international cooperation.

It is not just between countries and regions
that the balance of power is changing. Urbanisa­
tion is turning major cities into centres of power.
Non-state actors are playing a more prominent
role. Multinational companies, civil society and
other groups with common interests are gaining
influence. Communications technology makes it
possible to identify and bring together forces that
share the same aims, at almost no cost.

Some non-state groups constitute a security
challenge that can undermine fragile states and
threaten global targets. Examples include militia
groups, criminal networks and violent extremists.
States may also make use of groups like these to
achieve their goals covertly through proxy wars
and hybrid warfare.


international institutions, for example in the UN
Security Council, to better reflect today’s geopolit­
ical balance of power.

The Security Council has a unique global man­

date to authorise the use of armed force, impose
binding sanctions, establish peace operations, and
refer cases to the International Criminal Court. So
far, the permanent members of the Security Coun­
cil have shown varying degrees of willingness to
introduce reforms. In the multilateral financial
institutions, such as the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank, on the other hand, vot­
ing power reflects the economic weight of the
members.

If international institutions fail to carry out the
necessary reforms, they risk losing their rele­
vance and legitimacy. As a result, informal, over­
lapping structures could partially replace the tra­
ditional multilateral frameworks. This would not
be in Norway’s interests.

China’s strong economic growth and
increased military capacity have made the coun­
try a major security policy actor both regionally
and globally. The expansion of the Shanghai Coop­


-----

### Part II
 Security policy choices


-----

-----

y p


#### 6 Cohesion in Europe


The majority of Norway’s close allies are Euro­
pean countries. In Europe, we have partners with
whom we share values and interests. And Europe
is where the economic basis for Norwegian secu­
rity and welfare is laid. That is why the Govern­
ment’s policy platform states that Norwegian for­
eign policy starts in Europe.

Today, European countries are struggling to
maintain cohesion at the national and European
level. At the same time, there is a great need for
European leadership.

NATO, the EU, the OSCE and the Council of
Europe make up the cornerstones of the Euro­
pean security architecture. Norway participates in
all these organisations, but is not an EU member.

Although we have close ties to the EU through
binding agreements and arrangements, being
inside the union is very different from being out­
side, and this applies to security policy too. Nor­
way does not participate in EU decision-making.
Nor do we take part in the ongoing dialogue – for­
mal or informal – between the member states. We
have to promote Norway’s interests vis-à-vis EU
institutions and member states in other ways. This
is why the Government considers it vital to allo­
cate more resources to Norway’s embassies in the
most important EU countries.

The other Nordic countries are of particular
importance for Norway. The rapidly changing
world we are living in highlights the need to
defend the Nordic community of shared values
and mutual understanding. We intend to intensify
our cooperation with the other Nordic countries
by taking the initiative to hold biannual foreign
ministers’ meetings.

Norway’s relationship with the EU affects how
we can, and should, promote Norwegian policies
in Europe. But the substance of the Government’s
policy is not determined by our institutional links
to the EU. Rather, it is determined by our interest
in contributing to a secure, free and economically
strong Europe.


##### 6.1 Security

The US security guarantee, as enshrined in Arti­
cle 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty on collective
defence, is essential to the defence of Norway and
all NATO Allies. But it does not absolve Norway
or other European Allies of the responsibility to
invest in their own security. Norway will shoulder
its responsibility for security by contributing to
European cooperation and helping to find com­
mon solutions to transnational challenges. A num­
ber of the current challenges in and around
Europe can only be addressed by combining tradi­
tional foreign and security policy measures with
measures in other policy areas. Terrorism and
organised crime are examples of challenges of
this kind, as are the challenges relating to migra­
tion and integration. The EU is an important part­
ner for Norway in our efforts to address these
challenges.

Norway will contribute to a strong European
civilian and military crisis management capability,
effective control of external borders, close cooper­
ation between European police and intelligence
services, and cooperation to counter radicalisation
and promote integration.

**Crisis management.** We must be prepared
for new crises, and have the necessary structures
and resources in place to deal with them. Good
coordination at the national level and binding
European cooperation are essential if we are to
succeed in this.[1] We are best able to safeguard our
security when the countries of Europe stand
together. It will therefore often be in Norway’s
interests to seek common European solutions and
support EU measures, whether this is in the con­
text of military and civilian operations, restrictive
measures, or public security. Justice and home
affairs is a priority sector for the EEA and Norway
Grants in the period 2014-2021.[2] The aim is to

1 Meld. St. 10 (2016–2017), op.cit.

2 The EEA and Norway Grants scheme consists of two finan­
cial mechanisms: the EEA Grants (EUR 1548.1 million, or
around NOK 13.75 billion) and the Norway Grants (EUR
1253.7 million, or around NOK 11.12 billion). These figures
are for the period 2014-2021.


-----

g y p y

lum field. Through EASO, Norway sends experts
to assist EU countries that receive a large number
of refugees and other migrants. The Government
intends to continue to provide this assistance and
supports the proposal to develop a stronger Euro­
pean asylum agency.

**Security and police cooperation. In order to**
be able to fight terrorism and international organ­
ised crime effectively, the Government would like
to see better information sharing and close crossborder cooperation in Europe. As part of the work
to follow up the white paper on global security
challenges, the Government will strengthen its
cooperation with the EU in these areas.[3]

The Government attaches importance to fully
exploiting the opportunities that exist under Nor­
way’s cooperation agreement with Europol, which
is the main agency for efforts to combat transna­
tional crime in Europe. This agreement facilitates
the exchange of information and makes it easier
to seek assistance in major investigations involv­
ing a number of countries. The Government has
ensured that Norway is able to participate in
Europol’s new centre for countering terrorism,
the European Counter Terrorism Centre (ECTC).
This centre is a valuable supplement to the infor­
mal Counter Terrorist Group (CTG), which
brings together security services from all EU
countries, as well as from Norway and Switzer­
land.

The cooperation between EU countries on sur­

rendering people who have committed a serious
crime or are suspected of having committed such
a crime (the European Arrest Warrant) enhances
Europe’s ability to combat terrorism and organ­
ised crime. Norway has already concluded an
agreement with the EU on joining the European
Arrest Warrant, and the Government is working
to ensure that the agreement can enter into force
as soon as possible.

New technology is making it easier for terror­

ists and other criminal networks to share informa­
tion in real time, recruit new members and carry
out operations. Under Norway’s agreement on
participation in the Prüm cooperation, the Norwe­
gian authorities are able to search directly in
other countries’ databases for fingerprints, DNA
and vehicles. Likewise, other countries’ authori­
ties can search in our databases. In order to
ensure adequate protection of privacy, the Gov­
ernment is promoting the development of strin­
gent, common European rules and standards in
these areas.

3 Meld. St. 37 (2014–2015), op.cit.


facilitate cooperation on prevention and prepared­
ness.

The Government welcomes the fact that the
EU is further developing its crisis management
capability. It will be in the interests of Europe as a
whole that the EU crisis management structures
are inclusive. The Government will seek to ensure
that non-EU countries that contribute to the EU’s
military and civilian operations have more oppor­
tunities to participate in the planning and imple­
mentation of these operations. Given its decision
to leave the EU, the UK could be a partner in this
work. The Government is also seeking to estab­
lish arrangements that will enable Norway to par­
ticipate more closely in the processes leading up
to, during and after EU decisions on restrictive
measures. This would help to ensure that Norwe­
gian views are taken into account and that the
implementation of restrictive measures is as uni­
form and effective as possible.

In the European Defence Agency, we will work
to ensure that cooperation and joint projects maxi­
mise the output and efficiency of Europe’s
defence spending. More effective use of the total
defence resources available to Europe will
increase the security of the continent.

Through the EEA Agreement, Norway takes
part in the EU Civil Protection Mechanism. The
Government will continue its close cooperation
with the other Nordic countries and with the EU
on civil protection, including prevention, pre­
paredness and crisis management. Our coopera­
tion with other European countries makes it eas­
ier for us to ask for their assistance should Nor­
way experience a crisis that is so severe that we
cannot deal with it on our own. It also means that
we can assist other countries should they find
themselves in a similar situation.

**Control of external borders and coopera­**

**tion in the area of asylum. Better control of the**
external borders of the Schengen area and
enhanced information exchange are needed to
secure the borders, ensure that border crossings
are made in an orderly manner, and reduce the
risk of terrorist attacks. The Government there­
fore supports the EU’s efforts to gain better con­
trol over the external borders of the Schengen
area.

European countries need to improve their joint
system for processing asylum applications and for
the effective return of migrants who have had
their asylum applications rejected. Norway is an
associate country of the European Asylum Sup­
port Office (EASO), which has become Europe’s
most important forum for cooperation in the asy­


-----

g g g y p y

**Promoting integration and countering vio­** international organisations, in particular the

**lent extremism.** The Government is well under OSCE and the Council of Europe. The EU is a key
way with its work to implement the Action Plan partner as donor and coordinator of the assis­
against Radicalisation and Violent Extremism, tance. We will also promote closer cooperation
both at the national level and by strengthening between NATO and Ukraine.
Nordic, European and other international cooper­ The Government will double its assistance to
ation.[4] The Government will continue to make use the Western Balkans, to support the countries’
of the recently established Nordic network for reform programmes and thus speed up their inte­
countering violent extremism. We have also gration into the EU and NATO, in line with their
played a leading role in developing cooperation at own ambitions. Strengthening the rule of law, pro­
the European level in this area, for example by moting cooperation and reconciliation between
promoting the establishment of the European the countries, advancing the development of sus­
youth network against violent extremism. tainable economies, and strengthening civil soci­

We are continuing our engagement in the EU ety are still priority areas. We will also continue
Radicalisation Awareness Network, and in the our long-standing cooperation on defence and
informal group of European countries seeking defence reform. More emphasis will be placed on
closer cooperation to address the security threat measures to combat religious radicalisation.
posed by foreign fighters. Norway will seek to strengthen the ties

New citizens must be integrated into society between Turkey and the rest of Europe, and to
swiftly through courses, training and employ­ promote stability in Turkey’s neighbouring areas.
ment. European countries have much to gain from Challenges to the rule of law and the growing con­
sharing experience of their work in this area. The straints on freedom of expression in Turkey give
Government will attach particular importance to serious cause for concern. The Government will
following up the Nordic cooperation project on the support the Council of Europe and the OSCE’s
integration of refugees and immigrants. We must efforts to promote the development of the rule of
prevent the development of parallel societies that law in the country. Civil society is playing an
could lead to marginalisation and provide fertile important role in safeguarding fundamental
ground for radicalisation. human rights.

**Wider European cooperation. Europe will**
not be stable unless there is democracy in all
parts of the continent, combined with strong state

##### 6.2 Freedom and human rights

institutions and economic development. The Gov­
ernment will therefore support reforms in coun­ Key objectives of the Government’s foreign and
tries that are seeking closer integration with the security policy are to safeguard democratic insti­
EU. The support we give has greatest effect if it is tutions, protect citizens’ rights and freedoms, and
coordinated with the efforts of the EU and its support civil society, including in our part of the
member states. world.

In Eastern Europe, the Government is concen­ **Democratic institutions. The Government**

trating its political and economic support on will continue to actively promote the rule of law
Ukraine, Georgia and Moldova, all of which have and democracy in Europe through the EEA and
entered into association agreements with the EU. Norway Grants and in cooperation with the EU,
In particular, greater stability and development in the Council of Europe, the OSCE and other organ­
Ukraine would enhance the security of Europe as isations and individual countries.
a whole. The Government will maintain a high The Government is supporting the Council of
level of assistance to the country, particularly in Europe’s efforts to promote democracy in Europe.
areas where Norway is well placed to make a con­ The fight for freedom of expression, freedom of
tribution: energy sector reform and increasing assembly and freedom of the press is now more
energy efficiency, promoting the rule of law, good important than it has been for a long time. Nor­
governance and harmonisation with EU norms way will support the OSCE’s work to promote
and standards, and economic reforms. good governance, through the organisation’s

The Government will also continue to support Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
the political reform process through regional and Rights. We will continue to participate in election

observation missions, provide project support,
4 Norwegian Ministry of Justice and Public Security (2014): and share Norwegian expertise.
_Action Plan against Radicalisation and Violent Extremism._


-----

g y p y

development; it also helps to reduce the level of
conflict between European countries.

Under the EEA Agreement, Norway is part of
the European cooperation. The Agreement links
Norway to common mechanisms for peaceful
problem-solving in Europe, promotes growth and
welfare in Norway, and enhances our economic
strength and thus our ability to invest in security.

Almost 80 % of Norwegian exports go to the
EU. Thanks to the EEA Agreement, Norwegian
companies enjoy a level playing field in the Euro­
pean market. The Agreement also helps to
strengthen Norway’s cooperation with other
European countries on common, cross-border
challenges in areas such as climate change and
the environment, research and education, health,
consumer issues, and civil protection. In the Gov­
ernment’s view, it is therefore in Norway’s
national interest to safeguard the EEA Agree­
ment.

The Government will seek to ensure that the
EEA Agreement functions well. We will imple­
ment common rules correctly and on time, and we
will promote Norway’s interests by taking part in
the development of these rules. Through the EEA
and Norway Grants, we will help to reduce social
and economic disparities. The transition to more
knowledge-based, green and digital societies is
one of the main priorities of the Government’s
European policy in the years ahead, and of the
Norwegian presidency of the Nordic Council of
Ministers in 2017.[5]

The UK’s decision to withdraw from the EU
means that the internal market will probably lose
its second largest economy. The Government
attaches importance to maintaining Norway’s
close political and economic ties with the UK. The
Government’s aim is to have close trade policy
cooperation with the UK after its withdrawal from
the EU.


Norway will also continue to participate in the
European Endowment for Democracy, a funding
mechanism that gives support directly to local
actors working to bring about democratic change
in the EU’s neighbouring countries to the south
and east.

**Rights and freedoms. Promoting respect for**
human rights is part of the Government’s efforts
to address and prevent crises and conflicts in
Europe. European countries have committed
themselves to a number of human rights obliga­
tions. The main challenge lies in ensuring that the
countries fulfil these obligations. The Council of
Europe plays a key role in this respect. The imple­
mentation of the judgments of the European
Court of Human Rights must be monitored. The
Government is deeply concerned about the fact
that certain member states of the Council of
Europe are undermining the Court’s authority
and status.

We will strengthen the European Court of
Human Rights by seeking to improve supervision
of the implementation of judgments. For example,
we will continue to use the EEA and Norway
Grants to promote the enforcement of judgments
in the beneficiary countries.
**Civil** **society. Well-functioning democracies**
depend on the existence of a strong civil society.
The EEA and Norway Grants are Norway’s main
contribution to supporting civil society in Central
Europe. In the period 2014-2017, 10 % of the fund­
ing provided under the scheme will go to NGOs.

Strengthening civil society is a key priority in
the Government’s long-term efforts in Eastern
Europe. In Russia, this work has become particu­
larly difficult, largely because of the ‘foreign
agents’ law. Despite this, the Government is main­
taining its engagement for civil society in Russia,
by providing support for cooperation between
Russian and Norwegian organisations and keep­
ing in regular contact with human rights defend­
ers and NGOs.

##### 6.3 Economic strength

Binding cooperation based on common rules is
not only essential for ensuring positive economic


The Nordic Council of Ministers (2016): Programme for the
_Norwegian presidency of the Nordic Council of Ministers in_
_2017. Available from http://www.norden.org [accessed 14_
March 2017].


-----

g g g y p

#### 7 Security in the Arctic


Stability, international cooperation, respect for the
Law of the Sea, and good neighbourly relations
are all important for ensuring security in the
north.

For many years, Norway has pursued an
active Arctic policy and a policy of engagement
with Russia. Using our common interests as a
basis, we have sought contact, we have estab­
lished cooperation, and we have built trust.
Although Norway’s relations with Russia have
changed since 2014, the Government attaches
importance to continuing most areas of our coop­
eration in the north. This applies to both institu­
tional cooperation and informal people-to-people
cooperation.

Not only is the cooperation valuable in itself; it
also has an important security policy function.
People and institutions on both sides of the border
meet and forge ties. Cooperation fosters under­
standing and builds trust, both at the local level
and between the capitals.

Most of Norway’s military cooperation with
Russia has been suspended. Nevertheless, Nor­
way is seeking to reduce the likelihood of misun­
derstandings and dangerous incidents by showing
openness about military activities. Norway has
shown greater openness concerning NATO exer­
cises and other exercises than is required under
our international obligations.

In order to safeguard security in the Arctic,
the Government has maintained the direct lines of
communication between the Norwegian and Rus­
sian armed forces, the cooperation between our
coast guards and border guards, search-and-res­
cue cooperation, and the mechanisms under the
Incidents at Sea Agreement. The Norwegian and
Russian coast guards are working constructively
together in areas such as fisheries management
and search and rescue at sea.

NATO is important for maintaining stability in
the north. The Alliance provides a clear and pre­
dictable framework and a level of security that
Norway could not achieve on its own. Whenever
we need to deal with difficult security issues, we
are stronger and more secure as part of the Alli­


ance, and as part of the community of shared
interests and values that is Europe.

International law provides clear rules and
mechanisms for dealing peacefully with disagree­
ments. Compliance with the Law of the Sea is vital
for Norwegian interests in the north.

**A strong Norwegian defence and Allied**
**exercises.** Even though there is stability and
cooperation in the Arctic, it is important that
NATO always has up-to-date information on devel­
opments in the region and is prepared for the pos­
sibility that the situation could change. The North
Atlantic Treaty sets out that all allies are to main­
tain and develop their capacity to resist armed
attack.

The Norwegian armed forces must be able to
carry out assignments within Norway as needed,
contribute to credible deterrence, and help main­
tain Norway’s role and expertise in the Arctic. At
the same time, Norway must have close ties to
key allies. Allied presence in the north strength­
ens NATO’s credibility, and regular exercises
must be carried out based on defence plans. The
measures set out in the Long-Term Defence Plan
strengthen the basis for receiving Allied support.[1]

Participating in exercises gives us and our Allies
valuable practical experience. Given the large sea
areas involved, the Government will work to
ensure that NATO strengthens its maritime capa­
bilities.

**Situational awareness and knowledge. In**
many ways, Norway is NATO in the north. With
this comes responsibility. Norway has developed
in-depth knowledge of developments in the region
through changing times. The Government will
ensure that Norway continues to follow develop­
ments in the region closely and keeps its allies
informed on an ongoing basis.

**Stationing of foreign forces. Ever since Nor­**

way joined NATO, its policy has been to have no
permanent bases for foreign combat forces on
Norwegian soil, provided that it is not attacked or
under threat of attack. This policy has not pre­
vented an Allied presence on Norwegian territory,

1 Prop. 151 S (2015–2016), op.cit. (Norwegian only)


-----

g y p y

level of investment in the coming years. New pri­
ority areas include enhancing the capacity of the
border guard, and a number of research pro­
grammes whose funding will be increased. The
Government will present a new Arctic strategy
during spring 2017.

**Regional organisations. Sound cooperation**
structures based on trust and openness will
reduce the potential for conflict. The Arctic Coun­
cil brings together all the Arctic states at govern­
ment level and is the most important arena for
intergovernmental cooperation in the region. The
Government will support the Council’s key role.

Norway will work to ensure that the fruitful
cooperation between the coastal states bordering
the Arctic Ocean (the US, Canada, Denmark, Rus­
sia and Norway) is continued and further devel­
oped.

The Barents cooperation between Norway,
Sweden, Finland and Russia – like the cooperation
between Norway and Russia in the Arctic – helps
to build trust between the neighbours in the Bar­
ents region. The cooperation comprises a number
of working groups, in which representatives of
regional and national authorities meet to find solu­
tions to common challenges, for example in the
areas of health, emergency preparedness, and
search and rescue. The Government will maintain
Norway’s strong engagement in the Barents coop­
eration.


for example in the form of stores of Allied military
equipment and periodic exercises. The Govern­
ment will continue this policy.

**Nuclear weapons policy and port visits.**

As a NATO member, Norway is part of the Alli­
ance’s nuclear weapons policy. However, Norway
has made it clear that nuclear weapons are not to
be stationed on Norwegian territory in peacetime.
This policy has helped to reduce conflict and ease
tensions. Norway has also stipulated that foreign
military vessels that call at Norwegian ports must
not have nuclear weapons on board. The Govern­
ment will continue this policy.

**Svalbard policy. The Government upholds**
the overall objectives of Norway’s Svalbard policy,
as set out in the white paper on Svalbard.[2] These
objectives have remained unchanged for a long
time, and they have a firm basis in Norway’s
national interests. A long-term and consistent
Svalbard policy helps to promote stability and pre­
dictability in the north.

**Norway’s efforts in the Arctic** promote
Norway’s interests in the north. The Government
has increased the annual allocations to these
efforts to ensure long-term investments in knowl­
edge, industry, infrastructure and emergency pre­
paredness. The Government will maintain a high

2 White paper on Svalbard (Norwegian only): Meld. St. 32
(2015–2016), Svalbard.


-----

g g g y p

#### 8 Transatlantic cooperation


Norway’s security is dependent on close transat­
lantic cooperation and the US security guarantee.
In order to maintain this cooperation, and also to
put us in a better position to address the chal­
lenges we are facing, it is vital that Europe takes
on more responsibility for allied security.

The capacity and willingness of NATO mem­

ber states to shoulder this responsibility and con­
tinue the development of NATO varies. This is
encouraging closer cooperation between smaller
groups of countries. The Euro-Atlantic area has
become less homogeneous, which means that we
need to step up our efforts to maintain political
cohesion, solidarity and a commitment to joint
solutions within the framework of the Alliance.

The Government will promote a strong and
adaptable NATO Alliance, maintain close bilateral
relations with the US and strengthen political and
military cooperation with selected allies.

##### 8.1 An effective NATO Alliance

NATO is the only organisation in Europe that has
real collective defence commitments and capabili­
ties. If NATO is to remain strong and united, it is
essential that it is able to deal with the security
challenges facing its members through credible
deterrence and defence. The military capacity,
political will and ability to adapt the Alliance to the
changing security environment are vital. The Gov­
ernment will seek to strengthen NATO as a mili­
tary alliance and as a forum for security policy dia­
logue, and will play its part in ensuring the contin­
ued adaptation of the Alliance.

**Shared political values.** The Government
will promote political cohesion within the Alliance
with a view to maintaining NATO solidarity and
effectiveness. Norway will play its part by enhanc­
ing joint situational awareness through exchange
of intelligence, regular political dialogue and pro­
moting closer links between NATO and national
defence headquarters. Norway will also propose
regular consultations between NATO and key
partner countries.


**Core tasks. Norway will play its part in ensur­**

ing that NATO is able to perform all three of its
core tasks: collective defence, crisis management
and cooperative security. The dramatic changes in
the international security environment highlight
the importance of fulfilling all three of these. The
Government will do its part by increasing Nor­
way’s contribution to NATO’s collective defence,
continuing to provide troops for NATO opera­
tions, maintaining Norway’s engagement in secu­
rity sector reform and capacity building in NATO
partner countries, and promoting cooperation
between NATO and the EU.

**Defence capabilities.** Norway will seek to
strengthen NATO’s defence capabilities. In the
new Long-term Defence Plan, the Government
sets out its intention to substantially strengthen
the defence sector. This will also benefit the Alli­
ance. The Government will follow up the decision
made at the NATO summit in Wales in 2014 to
gradually increase defence spending and to aim to
move towards spending 2 % of GDP on defence
within a decade. The Government will therefore
continue to increase the defence budget. It will
continue to use over 20 % of the defence budget on
investments and give priority to military capabili­
ties that enhance NATO’s overall defence capabili­
ties.

**Operations. The Government will give prior­**

ity to providing troop contributions to interna­
tional operations through NATO or in cooperation
with our close allies. The NATO framework pro­
vides the greatest security for our troops and
ensures the highest degree of political control.
Regular operational cooperation also promotes
cohesion within the Alliance and enhances Allied
defence capabilities.

**Partnerships.** Norway will seek to ensure
continued close cooperation between NATO and
its partners. The Government will give priority to
partnerships that strengthen the security of the
Alliance. We will continue to support the develop­
ment of closer NATO cooperation with Sweden
and Finland.

The Government will continue to provide prac­

tical support through NATO to enable partner


-----

g y p y

transatlantic relations, European Allies must
increase defence investments and contribute a
larger share of NATO’s overall defence expendi­
ture.

**Political contact. The Government will main­**

tain Norway’s close relations with the US and seek
cooperation in areas of mutual interest. We will
seek to ensure that NATO remains the preferred
forum for security dialogue across the Atlantic on
the full range of security issues. In order to pro­
mote our values and interests as effectively as pos­
sible, the Government will draw up a strategy for
Norway’s long-term relations with the US.

**Transatlantic trade.** The reduction of trade
barriers has promoted close economic coopera­
tion between Europe and the US. There is now lit­
tle prospect of a successful conclusion to the
negotiations on the Transatlantic Trade Invest­
ment Partnership (TTIP). Nevertheless, the Gov­
ernment will continue to emphasise the impor­
tance of free trade for economic development and
security in Europe and the US.

**European defence capabilities.** The Gov­

ernment will advocate that European countries
should contribute more to strengthening Allied
defence capabilities. Norway will take steps to
achieve the ambitious goals set out in the Longterm Defence Plan, and will make use of the
NATO Defence Planning Process to promote a
similar level of commitment from other European
Allies. The Government will also continue Nor­
way’s participation in multilateral cooperation and
ensure that Norwegian troops participate regu­
larly in the NATO Response Force, in NATO’s
enhanced forward presence in the Baltic states
and in Allied training and exercises.

**Troop contributions.** The Government will
encourage European countries to continue to
make important contributions to Allied opera­
tions. At a time when several countries have made
cuts in their ground forces, it is essential that Nor­
way and the other European Allies maintain the
capacity to participate in joint operations. The
Government also wants NATO to continue its
work to facilitate the participation of partner coun­
tries in international crisis management.

**Cooperation with the EU.** In order to deal
effectively with complex crises, it is important
that Europe and the US share a common threat
perception. Close and extensive cooperation
between NATO and the EU is important in this
context. The Government will support schemes to
increase exchange of information, promote closer
political dialogue and improve coordination of
training and exercises.


countries to participate in Allied operations, and
will maintain political dialogue to enhance joint sit­
uational awareness. Norway will also advocate
allocating a larger share of NATO support for
partnership tools to stabilisation and crisis preven­
tion efforts in NATO’s neighbouring areas.

The Government will support initiatives to
strengthen cooperation between NATO and other
key actors engaged in crisis management, such as
the UN, the EU, and the African Union (AU).
NATO’s partnerships across the globe are also
important in this context. Partnerships with coun­
tries in Asia enhance the Alliance’s situational
awareness and improve the capacity for coopera­
tion on common security challenges.

**Adaptation.** The Government supports
efforts to further develop NATO’s role and
responsibilities. NATO cannot and should not
replace other security policy actors, such as the
UN, the EU, the OSCE and the AU. However, in
order to maintain a strong and united Alliance, it
is important that NATO can provide a credible
response to the security challenges its member
states are facing. The Government will support
efforts to adapt NATO’s three core tasks and its
command structure in line with the changing
security environment, including in the areas of
cyber security and counterterrorism.

**Funding. The Government will play its part in**
ensuring that NATO has sufficient financial
resources to carry out its tasks. Joint NATO solu­
tions are cost-effective and an expression of soli­
darity. The Government will promote more com­
mon funding of NATO activities and seek to
ensure the effective use of resources.

##### 8.2 US-European cooperation


The US security guarantee is vital for the security
of the European Allies. Shared transatlantic inter­
ests and values underpin the willingness to invest
in each other’s security and the ability to provide a
united response to crises. At a time when policy is
changing both in the US and in various European
countries, we must seek to defend our fundamen­
tal values and maintain cooperation in areas
where we have common interests.

The US has been calling more and more
strongly for the European Allies to take on greater
responsibility for security. This would not replace
the US security guarantee, but could strengthen
Allied solidarity, and enhance our collective secu­
rity and ability to carry out joint operations. In
order to meet Europe’s needs and strengthen


-----

g y p y

deliberate steps to further develop our practical
cooperation, but are also strengthening our for­
eign and security policy dialogue with these coun­
tries.

**Defence cooperation.** The Government will
further develop particularly close military cooper­
ation with the following key Allies: France, Ger­
many, the Netherlands, the UK, and the US. In
recent years, Norway has developed increasingly
close cooperation with these countries on policy
development, force generation, defence-related
development and procurement, and training and
exercises. This cooperation enhances our defence
capabilities and is more cost-effective than if each
country were to carry out these tasks separately.
Cooperation in this area also strengthens our
political ties with key Allies. Norway will continue
to take steps to deepen its cooperation with this
group of countries and will initiate new partner­
ships that benefit both the countries involved and
NATO as a whole.

The Government considers it important to
ensure that any capabilities that are developed
directly correspond to the needs of the Alliance
and that other Allies that wish to take part in coop­
eration in this area are able to do so.

**Dialogue on foreign and security policy.**

The Government will strengthen foreign and
security policy dialogue with Allies with which we
have particularly close defence cooperation.
Closer political contact is vital for ensuring joint
situational awareness and an effective response in
the event of a crisis. Civilian instruments are also
needed to address many of today’s security chal­
lenges. It is therefore important that we have reg­
ular talks with our closest allies on all aspects of
security policy. Norway will therefore intensify its
foreign and security policy consultations with
France, Germany, the Netherlands, the UK and
the US. The Government will ensure that Nor­
way’s embassies in these countries and the Nor­
wegian Delegation to NATO have the capacity to
take on this task.


**Nordic cooperation.** Close Nordic and Nor­

dic-Baltic security cooperation strengthens
Europe’s overall contribution to peace and secu­
rity. The Nordic countries have gained valuable
experience from joint participation in interna­
tional operations and cooperation on security sec­
tor reform. Our close relations with Sweden and
Finland will be important in the event of a security
crisis in our neighbouring areas.

The Government will therefore maintain close
dialogue with Nordic and Baltic countries on
developments in neighbouring areas and will fur­
ther develop the Nordic Defence Cooperation in
areas where this will enhance our defence and
security efforts. The Nordic and Baltic countries
have different forms of association with NATO
and the EU. Cooperation between these countries
therefore also provides good opportunities for
promoting initiatives that can strengthen security
cooperation between NATO and the EU.

**Stabilisation.** The Government will support
greater European engagement in stabilisation
efforts in Europe’s southern neighbourhood,
using a broad range of tools, from military opera­
tions to conflict prevention and resolution efforts.
Instability in this region has created a breeding
ground for international terrorism, which also
poses a threat to the US. Effective European stabi­
lisation efforts will thus also strengthen transat­
lantic security.

##### 8.3 Cooperation with selected allies

A strong NATO Alliance is the best framework for
safeguarding and enhancing Norway’s security.
The Government will give priority to cooperation
with selected Allies where this will strengthen
Norway’s capacity to deal with a security crisis or
armed conflict. In recent years we have, for exam­
ple, sought to establish closer cooperation with
certain Allies on defence procurement and the
development of defence capabilities. By making
this a strategic priority, we are not only taking


-----

g g g y p y

#### 9 Disarmament and non-proliferation


Combining credible deterrence with a commit­ and mutual. Norway will take a long-term
ment to disarmament and arms control is a long- approach to disarmament in line with the Stort­
standing tenet of Norwegian and Allied policy. ing’s decision and our obligations as a NATO
This combination enhances our collective security member. For nearly 40 years, the Non-Prolifera­
and is achieved by both strengthening defence tion Treaty (NPT) has been a cornerstone of
capabilities and implementing mutual cuts and global security. It sets out clear disarmament obli­
controls on certain categories of weapons. gations that must be respected.

Since the end of the Cold War, the former East­ **Balanced** **disarmament.** Effective and

ern and Western blocs have made significant cuts legally binding agreements are essential to ensur­
in both strategic and conventional forces. The US ing further progress on disarmament. The Gov­
and Russia have made deep cuts in their nuclear ernment will work to maintain and strengthen the
arsenals through a series of bilateral agreements. existing framework, call on remaining states to
Conventional forces in Europe have been substan­ ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban
tially reduced since 1989. Treaty, and seek progress in the negotiations on

Efforts to prevent weapons of mass destruc­ the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty. There are

tion from falling into the wrong hands are another already arms control agreements in place on stra­
important element of security policy. The spread tegic nuclear weapons and medium-range ballistic
of such weapons both to new state and non-state missiles, but none on tactical nuclear weapons.
actors poses a risk to our security. Easier access Initiatives to increase transparency as regards tac­
to advanced technology is making non-prolifera­ tical nuclear weapons would be a step towards an
tion efforts more difficult. In some cases, tensions agreement on their regulation.
between the major powers are preventing agree­ **Verifiable disarmament is vital to ensure**
ment on effective countermeasures. that existing agreements are implemented in prac­

tice. The parties to these agreements and the rest
of the world must be confident that nuclear weap­
ons that are due to be dismantled are actually

##### 9.1 Weapons of mass destruction

destroyed. We must also ensure that sensitive,

On 26 April 2016, the Storting adopted a unani­ highly classified nuclear technology does not fall
mous decision[1] asking the Government to work into the wrong hands. Norway has been working
actively towards the goal of a world free of nuclear with the UK for many years to develop verification
weapons and to promote the implementation of systems with a view to preparing the ground for
the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). The decision further cuts in nuclear arsenals. This partnership
also asked the Government to play a leading role has now been expanded to include the US and
in efforts to promote non-proliferation and disar­ Sweden. The Government will continue this work.
mament, with a view to achieving balanced, At the UN General Assembly in October 2016,
mutual, irreversible and verifiable elimination of Norway put forward a resolution on nuclear disar­
nuclear weapons. The Government was asked to mament verification, and received broad support
take a long-term approach to efforts to secure a for its efforts in this area.
legally binding framework for achieving this. **Assistance in implementing agreements.**

Realising the vision of a world free of nuclear Norway has valuable experience of assisting coun­
weapons is one of NATO’s stated aims. At the tries with the practical implementation of disarma­
same time, NATO has made it clear that it will ment agreements. For example, as part of the
remain a nuclear alliance as long as nuclear weap­ nuclear agreement with Iran, we have provided
ons exist. Nuclear disarmament must be balanced funding and expertise for the transport of

enriched uranium out of Iran and its replacement
1 Storting Decision no. 623 (2015–2016) with natural uranium for use in Iran’s civilian


-----

g y p y

ity that are so vital in nuclear disarmament also
form the basis for conventional arms control and
disarmament. Today, at a time when relations
between NATO and Russia are tense, there is a
poor negotiating climate and little room for
manoeuvre. However, we should bear in mind that
some of the most important breakthroughs in dis­
armament were made at the height of the Cold
War. NATO unity on these issues is essential if we
are to make further progress.

**New arms control regime. The Government**
will participate in efforts to develop a new regime
for conventional arms control in Europe. We are
seeking an open and inclusive process, preferably
through the OSCE. We must take into account the
military developments since the CFE Treaty was
negotiated and consider including new weapons
systems in a future conventional arms control
agreement.

**OSCE chairmanship. The OSCE is the main**
arena for negotiations on conventional disarma­
ment and arms control in Europe. Much of the
security policy dialogue between NATO member
countries and Russia takes place in the OSCE.
The OSCE plays an important part in promoting
democracy in Europe, the Caucasus and Central
Asia. It is also playing a key role in Ukraine.

Norway held the chairmanship of the OSCE in
1999. The Government will put Norway forward
for the chairmanship again in 2020. A key aim for
a Norwegian chairmanship would be to promote
confidence-building, transparency and détente.


nuclear programme. Norway also participated in
the operation to remove chemical weapons from
Syria. The Government will build on this experi­
ence and strengthen Norway’s capacity to contrib­
ute to similar operations in the future.

The Government will maintain Norway’s sup­

port for the Chemical Weapons Convention and
the Biological Weapons Convention.

**Securing nuclear facilities and nuclear**
**waste. Through the Nuclear Security Summit**
process, Norway has played a role in developing
practical security measures in a number of fields.
The Government will continue and complete the
nuclear clean-up programmes in Russia and
Ukraine. The Government will also call for the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to be
adequately funded and will maintain Norway’s
support for the IAEA´s Nuclear Security Fund.

##### 9.2 Conventional forces


The system of conventional arms control in
Europe is under pressure. Russia has unilaterally
suspended the Treaty on Conventional Armed
Forces in Europe (CFE Treaty). The Treaty on
Open Skies (OS) and the Vienna Document pro­
mote knowledge and trust, and are vital in today’s
tense international situation.

Meaningful conventional arms control in
Europe is not possible without the participation of
Russia. The principles of reciprocity and verifiabil­


-----

g g g y p y

#### 10 Stability in Europe’s neighbourhood


Fragile and failed states prevent development and
undermine regional and international security.
Promoting stability and development in fragile
countries is good security policy.

The UN Millennium Development Goals were
ambitious. Nevertheless, the target to halve the
proportion of people living in extreme poverty
was met. Today, an increasing number of the
world’s extreme poor live in fragile countries. If
we are to achieve the first of the UN’s Sustainable
Development Goals, SDG 1: end poverty in all its
forms everywhere, we must turn our attention to
these countries. This is one of the main reasons
why the UN has called on the international com­
munity to give priority to efforts in fragile states.

Stabilisation efforts in fragile states do not in
any way undermine efforts to reduce poverty;
rather, they are essential to eradicating poverty.
Conflict hampers development. Inclusive growth
that also unleashes the economic potential of
women lifts people out of poverty and reduces the
risk of instability spreading. Moreover, stabilisa­
tion efforts in fragile states have a positive impact
on development in more stable developing coun­
tries and should prevent new crises from emerg­
ing.

Intensifying Norway’s efforts in fragile states
and conflict areas entails risks. The security situa­
tion in these areas is difficult, and this increases
the risks to Foreign Service employees and part­
ners. Financial irregularities and corruption are
also often widespread in these countries. How­
ever, it is important to remember that there is also
great potential to make a difference. We can
achieve far more through stabilisation and conflict
prevention than we can through post-conflict
reconstruction. There needs to be a somewhat
greater willingness to take financial risks and
more flexibility in the use of long-term aid.

In order to ensure that Norway’s efforts in
Europe’s neighbourhood have maximum impact,
any measures implemented must be coordinated
as far as possible with those of the UN and the
EU. The Government will also strengthen cooper­
ation with NATO, the African Union (AU) and cer­
tain individual countries. Close cooperation and


coordination between the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and other relevant ministries will also be
needed. Enhancing respect for human rights is a
key component of all our efforts to promote
peace, stability and security. Particular impor­
tance is attached to the rights and needs of
women and children.

##### 10.1 Strategy for fragile states and
 regions

The Government is drawing up a strategy for Nor­
way’s efforts in fragile states and regions that con­
siders the whole range of instruments that can be
used to promote stability. Aid, business develop­
ment, peace and reconciliation diplomacy, various
forms of capacity building, and military contribu­
tions can all be used. The instruments chosen and
the way they are combined will vary from case to
case.

Stabilisation is a comprehensive process that
involves building mutual trust between the
authorities and the population, and promoting bet­
ter governance and long-term development.

Norway’s stabilisation efforts are broad in
scope. Support provided by Norway is generally
used as a political tool to strengthen local social
structures. Stabilisation efforts should provide a
basis for more long-term development efforts and
peacebuilding.

In geographical terms, the Government
intends to target its stabilisation efforts towards
the belt of countries stretching from Mali in the
west to Afghanistan in the east. Developments in
these countries are having an increasing impact
on Europe.

Our work must be based on experience gained
from previous stabilisation efforts. The lessons
highlighted in the Afghanistan report are import­
ant.[1] Norway’s substantial civilian and military
contribution in Afghanistan showed that we must

1 Official Norwegian Report 2016: 8 on Norway’s involvement
in Afghanistan 2001–2014 (currently being translated into
English).


-----

g y p y

efforts to reform UN peacekeeping efforts and
strengthen the AU’s expertise in carrying out
peace operations.

Support must be provided to fragile states to
enable them to deal with security threats such as
violent extremism and organised crime more
effectively. The Government’s efforts in this area
are described in detail in the white paper on global
security challenges.[2]

Measures to prevent and combat sexual vio­

lence are to be integrated into all Norway’s peace
and security efforts, and we will work to improve
legal protection for all those who are subjected to
abuse.

**Human rights, democracy and the rule of**
**law.** As set out in the Government’s white paper
on human rights, good governance and respect
for human rights and the principles of the rule of
law are essential for achieving lasting stability.[3] In
many countries, oppression, wars and conflicts
are creating fragile and lawless states. States’
monopoly on violence is being challenged, and
some are no longer able to fulfil their duties to
their own citizens. States must be capable of per­
forming state functions if they are to uphold inter­
national law, ensure compliance with national laws
and rules, and fulfil their obligations to their own
citizens.

Strengthening the capacity of the justice and
security sector is crucial for enabling countries to
deal with challenges to their stability. Norway’s
efforts must seek to build robust states based on
the rule of law and to develop more inclusive and
open societies that help prevent structural dis­
crimination and corruption. Training activities
and efforts to strengthen government institutions
are vital components of this work. A well-function­
ing state based on the rule of law is also crucial for
the development of an effective tax system and for
combating illicit financial flows and corruption.

**Inclusive growth and basic social ser­**

**vices. In the Government’s white paper on private**
sector development in Norwegian development
cooperation, wealth creation in the private sector
is described as the engine of economic growth.
Inclusive economic growth and job creation
reduce poverty.[4] Ensuring access to basic ser­
vices such as health and education strengthens a

2 Meld. St. 37 (2014–2015), op.cit.

3 Meld. St. 10 (2014–2016), _Opportunities for All: Human_
_Rights in Norway’s Foreign Policy and Development Coopera­_
_tion._

4 Meld. St. 35 (2014–2015), _Working together: Private sector_
_development in Norwegian development cooperation_


have realistic expectations of what can be
achieved. An integrated approach is needed to
ensure that the various efforts do not counteract
each other.

Norway’s efforts in fragile states will focus on
the following six areas:

**Humanitarian efforts.** Greater engagement
by the international community is needed to
address more protracted and complex crises. The
gap between humanitarian needs and the funding
available for humanitarian efforts is growing. The
Government has significantly increased its alloca­
tions for humanitarian aid in response to the cri­
ses we have seen in recent years, and will con­
tinue to give priority to emergency aid and other
humanitarian efforts.

To be able to reach and help civilians affected
by today’s armed conflicts, it is more important
than ever to be neutral and impartial, and to target
efforts towards those who are most vulnerable,
regardless of where they come from or where
they are. These principles underpin all Norway’s
humanitarian efforts.

**Conflict prevention and peace and recon­**

**ciliation diplomacy.** Conflicts can only be
resolved through political solutions. Norway, with
its resources and experience of peace and recon­
ciliation diplomacy, is well placed to play a role in
this area. By becoming involved at an early stage
of the process, we can significantly reduce finan­
cial and humanitarian costs. Recognition of the
need for a long-term approach and for good net­
works that include all affected parties, and a will­
ingness to use aid funds to support peace pro­
cesses are among the factors that put Norway in a
particularly good position to contribute. Women’s
participation is vital for ensuring the credibility of
peace processes and for promoting a sense of
ownership.

Norway will seek to strengthen the ability of
the UN and the AU to identify potential conflicts
early on and to rapidly implement preventive mea­
sures. The Government will also support estab­
lished local conflict resolution mechanisms. In
order to strengthen our strategic partnership and
cooperation with the AU, the Government will
appoint an ambassador to the AU. The Govern­
ment will allocate more resources to Norway’s
peace and reconciliation efforts.

**Security.** Sometimes it is necessary to use
military force to promote stability. This must be
considered in conjunction with other instruments
to be used. Any action taken must be based on a
realistic assessment of the prospects for stabilisa­
tion and reconstruction. Norway will support


-----

g y p y

impact, and cooperate with partners who we con­
sider to be the most effective.

The Government will increase aid to countries
affected by the major conflicts we are seeing in
parts of the Middle East and North Africa. Certain
countries are hosting large numbers of refugees
and are having problems providing basic services,
such as education, and employment opportunities.
Other countries are struggling to gain control of
the security situation. The Government will sub­
stantially increase support to Tunisia, Jordan, Leb­
anon and countries in the Sahel region. This will
include humanitarian aid targeted towards areas
where humanitarian needs are acute.

The Government will also seek to mobilise the
international donor community to help meet the
enormous needs in fragile states. A concerted and
intensified international effort is needed.

Local and regional knowledge are vital for
ensuring that our aid and stabilisation efforts pro­
duce tangible results. It is therefore important to
maintain a presence in affected regions. With this
in view, the Government has decided to establish
two new embassies, one in Bamako, Mali and the
other in Tunis, Tunisia.

##### 10.3 UN peacekeeping efforts


country’s capacity for value creation. Norway is
giving particular priority to efforts in the areas of
health and education. We will also assist fragile
states in their efforts to create a predictable
framework for the business sector.

**Refugees and migrants.** The sudden influx
of large numbers of people is particularly difficult
for weak and fragile states to deal with. At worst,
this can lead to conflicts or humanitarian crises
spreading to new areas. It is therefore vital that
the international community strengthens the
capacity of host and transit countries to deal with
mass migration. Better coordination of develop­
ment aid and humanitarian assistance for refugees
and migrants could help to ensure a more sustain­
able approach to dealing with flows of refugees
and migrants in the neighbouring areas.

Norway will seek to ensure that the basic
needs of refugees and internally displaced people
are met. This includes ensuring access to educa­
tion for children, the right to protection and the
opportunity to work. We will also support interna­
tional efforts to strengthen border controls, recep­
tion facilities and immigration systems in fragile
states.

##### 10.2 Aid to fragile states


Aid to fragile states is part of Norway’s broader The UN plays a unique role in conflict prevention
stabilisation efforts. Our aim is to help countries and mediation, and in leading peace operations.
emerge from conflict, to prevent state collapse The number of people serving with the UN is now
and to reduce fragility. Helping people in need is a higher than ever before. However, in order to deal
humanitarian imperative in any crisis situation. At with increasingly complex crises, more special­
the same time, humanitarian aid combined with ised personnel, training and equipment are
development aid provides a basis for positive needed for UN operations. This means that there
social and economic development. This is also in will continue to be a need to strengthen the UN’s
our interests. More peaceful and more equitable capacity, primarily in the area of conflict preven­
development in fragile countries is important for tion, but also in the field of conflict management
combating violent extremism. and peacebuilding. In addition, the parties to a

There is a clear link between security and conflict must be willing to commit themselves
development. Donor countries are increasingly fully to the peace process if lasting peace is to be
recognising this, and are taking a more coherent achieved. Support for peace and reconciliation
approach to aid policy and security policy. The processes is therefore crucial to the success of a
white paper on global security challenges sets out peace operation.
the Government’s intention to strengthen Nor­ **Conflict prevention.** The Government will
way’s aid and development efforts in areas of sig­ seek to ensure that a larger proportion of the
nificance to security policy.[5] It is clear from devel­ UN’s resources is allocated to conflict prevention.
opments in fragile states that we need to do more. We will support measures that can strengthen the
Norway will take advantage of the scope for flexi­ UN’s overall capacity to prevent and resolve con­
bility in its aid management. We must provide sup­ flicts, and will continue to encourage the UN Sec­
port in areas where it will have the greatest retary-General to use his political authority to

influence peace and reconciliation processes.

**Operations. The Government will seek to**
5 Meld. St. 37 (2014–2015), op.cit. mobilise resources for UN operations, and will


-----

g y p y

**UN reform. The Government will continue to**
support efforts to reform UN peace operations.
We will provide expertise and financial assistance
with a view to improving the effectiveness of
peace operations. Our support will for example go
towards strengthening UN intelligence capacity
and its force generation procedures, and training
African personnel to enable them to participate in
both AU and UN operations. We will also support
measures that promote cooperation between the
UN and regional organisations, primarily NATO
and the AU.


give priority to providing highly qualified person­
nel from the police and the armed forces as well
as experts in relevant niche areas. We will provide
personnel who can support efforts to build capac­
ity in the justice and security sector in the country
concerned. Norway will also be at the forefront of
efforts to promote the inclusion of women in
peace operations. A broader recruitment base will
make it possible to find the best candidates. More­
over, the participation of women also increases
the opportunity for dialogue with both women and
men, making it possible to provide security for the
whole population.


-----

g g g y p

#### 11 The international order


Many of the security challenges we are facing
today require a global response. This applies to
terrorism, international organised crime, piracy
and cyber threats. It also applies to climate
change and global health challenges. These last
two often exacerbate underlying problems, which
can in turn cause instability and conflict.

Close and effective international cooperation
is dependent on respect for common rules. Inter­
national law provides the legal framework for rela­
tions between states. It provides a common set of
rules for dealing with international crises and con­
flicts. International law has played an important
role in ensuring Europe’s peaceful development
and forms the basis of the Euro-Atlantic security
architecture.

Other factors, such as trade, are also vital for
promoting peaceful development. Global trade
creates economic growth and binds countries
together. This reduces the risk of war and conflict.
The effects of increased international trade are
particularly positive when combined with demo­
cratic development.

Norway considers it important to do its part to
uphold and further develop international law, to
create and maintain effective arenas for address­
ing global challenges, to promote global trade and
encourage democratic development.

##### 11.1 Rules and norms

Helping to maintain the international legal order
and multilateral governance systems is one of the
main aims of Norway’s foreign policy. The stabil­
ity and predictability provided by international
rules and norms benefits Norway and the rest of
the international community.

Norway has an open economy and thus bene­

fits from the existence of a well-functioning legal
regime for international trade. Under the UN Con­
vention on the Law of the Sea, Norway, as a
coastal state, has access to rich natural resources.
The Convention has also contributed to global sta­
bility by balancing the various interests of states
relating to the seas and oceans.


It is in Norway’s interests that international
relations, conflict resolution and efforts to
address new challenges are based on interna­
tional law. The alternative is for instruments of
hard power and the interests of major powers to
become more prominent.

**Upholding and further developing inter­**

**national law.** Respect for international law
should never be taken for granted. In recent
years, the international debate has revealed a
growing gap in values between individual states
and various groups of states. This growing polari­
sation is reducing the prospects of successfully
negotiating major new international conventions
and agreements with the content we would like to
see included.

We must work to ensure that the world’s states
respect and apply international law and accede to
important international conventions. Strengthen­
ing international law is particularly important in
today’s unsettled world.

International law must also be further devel­

oped as social developments create new needs for
international regulation. The Government will
work with other states to ensure that international
law remains relevant to the regional and global
challenges the international community as a
whole or groups of states are facing.

**Response to violations of international**
**law.** Norway expects all states to comply with
international law. We will respond to serious viola­
tions of international rules together with other
like-minded countries and will seek to ensure that
appropriate action is taken.

It is in Norway’s interest to work to ensure
that emerging powers are included more effec­
tively in international institutions to enable these
countries to participate in joint responses to viola­
tions of international law.

**Promoting human rights, the rule of law**
**and democracy.** The Government will continue
to promote human rights, the rule of law and
democracy, in line with the white paper on human
rights in Norway’s foreign policy and develop­
ment cooperation.[1] This is a good way of safe­
guarding Norwegian values. It is also good secu­


-----

y p


rity policy and contributes to stability in fragile This makes it all the more important to ensure
states. that multilateral institutions are as effective as

Experience shows that democratic control of possible. The Government will therefore seek to
the armed forces helps prevent the use of force in ensure that multilateral institutions concentrate
violation of international law. At a time when their efforts on areas that cannot be properly
democracy is under pressure in many places, it is addressed at national or regional level and where
important to maintain our efforts in this area. a collective response is needed.

The Government is working to strengthen the **The UN. The UN plays a unique role in efforts**
efforts of the UN, the OSCE and the Council of to promote international peace and security,
Europe to promote democracy, human rights and human rights and development. At a time when
the rule of law. Recipients of Norwegian aid must we are seeing significant shifts in the balance of
show willingness to make progress in these areas. power, it is important that the UN, and in particu­
The Government also considers it important to lar the Security Council, remains strong, relevant
ensure that support provided by Norway for mili­ and effective. The Security Council is the UN’s
tary capacity building enhances democratic con­ primary body for promoting international peace,
trol of armed forces. stability and security. The Council is the only

global institution with a mandate to authorise the
use of force and make decisions that are binding
on all UN member states.

##### 11.2 International institutions

Norway is seeking to become an elected mem­

Norway will work to promote a robust, value- ber of the UN Security Council for the period
based international system, based on the UN 2021-2022. If elected, we will work to strengthen
Charter, international law and the network of commitment to international law and the princi­
international institutions that has been developed ples set out in the UN Charter. Norway has a long
since the Second World War. We will contribute to tradition of acting as a bridge-builder across estab­
the development of effective and representative lished blocs in the UN. The Security Council
arenas for addressing global security challenges, needs to be expanded to make it more representa­
and will often seek a leadership role. tive of today’s geopolitical and economic realities,

The Government will ensure that the Foreign and there must be greater transparency surround­
Service has the capacity to represent Norway in ing the Council’s decisions. Norway and the other
important forums. We will maintain our financial Nordic countries have called for the number of
support for the UN system, the international both permanent and non-permanent Security
financial institutions and other relevant networks Council members to be increased.
of regional and international institutions. **The World Trade Organization. The WTO is**

Multilateral institutions working to promote world’s best defence against protectionism. It is
democracy, human rights and the rule of law are therefore crucial that the WTO continues to pro­
coming under increasing pressure both politically duce results in the form of new agreements and
and financially. In the light of this, the Govern­ the further development of the dispute settlement
ment aims to increase Norway’s contributions to system. It is also vital to ensure compliance with
these institutions. We must safeguard and existing rules and obligations.
strengthen the institutions we have painstakingly The Government will strengthen the WTO, for
built up over several decades. example by encouraging reform of the interna­

If international institutions are to retain their tional trading system in line with developments in
prominent role in the world, emerging powers the global economy, and by upholding the system
must be included more effectively. The discus­ for dealing with trade disputes between countries.
sions about decision-making power in the interna­ We will also continue to promote plurilateral trade
tional financial institutions illustrate the impor­ agreements and bilateral free trade agreements.
tance of this. The Government will seek to pro­ **Other actors and forums. The Foreign Ser­**
mote an inclusive multilateral system. vice promotes Norwegian interests vis-à-vis estab­

In a number of countries, including those that lished and emerging centres of power. The nor­
have traditionally shown strong support for inter­ malisation of Norway’s relations with China is a
national cooperation, forces that are deeply scepti­ milestone in this respect, and opens up opportuni­
cal of international institutions are on the rise. ties for dialogue on a number of areas of impor­

tance to Norway. The Government will further
1 Meld. St. 10 (2014–2015), op.cit. develop Norway’s cooperation with China in areas


-----

g y p y

change. Effective policies in these areas are not
just good for the climate, the environment and
development. They also make good preventive
security policy and contribute to positive develop­
ment in fragile states.

**Terrorism, organised crime and cyber**
**threats.** The Government will continue its efforts
to combat terrorism, international organised crime
including environmental crime, cyber threats and
piracy, in line with the white paper on global secu­
rity challenges.[2] The white paper sets out 40 action
points to strengthen Norway’s ability to address
these global threats. The white paper makes it clear
that security policy, development policy and foreign
policy must be seen in conjunction with one
another, and highlights the need for more knowl­
edge, better coordination, and capacity building.
The Government will launch an international strat­
egy for cyberspace for Norway in spring 2017.

**Climate change.** The Government will con­

tinue its efforts to ensure that Norway fulfils its
international climate commitments. Working in
close cooperation with the EU and the other Nor­
dic countries, Norway will play an active role in the
development of robust rules in this area and pro­
mote the implementation of the Paris Agreement.
Climate finance provided by Norway, the EEA and
Norway Grants and other forms of support will be
used effectively to help other countries implement
measures to address climate change. The Govern­
ment is also seeking to raise awareness of the
security risks associated with climate change and
will make sure that this information is dissemi­
nated widely. As part of this work, the Government
will commission a report on the risks to Norway’s
security of climate change in other parts of the
world. It will increasingly be necessary to take cli­
mate change into account when providing longterm support to promote stability in fragile states
and conflict-affected countries, and measures to
reduce vulnerability will be needed.

**Global health.** Global health challenges,
such as pandemics and antibiotic resistance, are
particularly difficult for fragile states to deal with.
They can also have a direct impact on public secu­
rity in Europe. Good health systems are our first
line of defence against these types of challenges.
The International Health Regulations provide a
global legal framework for detecting, reporting
and responding to cross-border health threats.
The Government will seek to strengthen our
defences in this area through its extensive efforts
to promote education and global health.

2 Meld. St. 37 (2014–2015), op.cit.


such as peace operations, the Arctic, maritime
issues, as well as in conflict areas where both
countries are working to promote development.

Regional organisations and informal meeting
places have gained importance in several fields.
The G20 is one example. It brings together some
of the most important economies from each of the
world’s continents, and also the EU. Today, the
G20 plays a leading role in global economic gover­
nance. Norway is cultivating close relations with
influential G20 countries. Norway has been invited
by Germany, which holds the G20 presidency in
2017, to participate in the G20 as a guest country
in 2017. The Government will build on this experi­
ence and explore ways of increasing our contact
with other G20 countries like China. Our participa­
tion as a guest country will also further enhance
our close bilateral cooperation with Germany.

The Government will continue its efforts to
strengthen contact with regional organisations
such as the AU, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), and the Asia-Europe
Meeting (ASEM).

##### 11.3 Global security challenges


Norway’s security is increasingly affected by
global security challenges such as the threats
posed by terrorism and international criminal net­
works, and cyber threats. These threats often
come from non-state actors, but states too may
resort to such means to achieve their aims.

Climate change and health challenges are two
other global factors that are affecting our security.
These are not security threats in the traditional
sense, but they can exacerbate other challenges
that are already having an impact on peace and
security. This applies for example to the scale and
frequency of extreme weather events, social and
economic disparities, population pressure in urban
areas, inadequate access to food and drinking
water, competition for natural resources, and chal­
lenges relating to energy security and migration.

The risk of factors such as these leading to
instability and conflict is particularly high in states
where the capacity for crisis management and
long-term adaptation is weak. In the future, Nor­
way’s stabilisation and development efforts will be
targeted towards fragile states such as these.

The key to dealing with these challenges is not
primarily to be found in security policy in the nar­
row sense. Rather, it lies in Norway’s efforts in
fields such as humanitarian aid, development
cooperation, and environment and climate


-----

g g y p

#### 12 Crisis management


Close coordination between relevant Norwegian
authorities is essential if Norway is to be able to
deal with serious security situations. Sound
knowledge is needed to provide a good basis for
decision-making and policy development, and the
Foreign Service must continually adapt its
resources to ensure that Norway is able to meet
new challenges.

There is a growing need for effective crisis
management and coordination at the national
level. Crisis situations can arise suddenly and
without warning. In some situations, it may not be
clear at an early enough stage that there is a cri­
sis. Decisions may have to be taken fast, in com­
plex situations and on the basis of insufficient and
sometimes conflicting information.

We must be prepared for the fact that disinfor­

mation activities may be used to create confusion
about what is actually going on, create divisions
among decision-makers and slow down decisionmaking processes.

The Government will therefore continue to
strengthen Norway’s national preparedness to
respond to security crises. A great deal of work
has been done in this area in terms of improving
planning and carrying out crisis management
exercises across sectors. Improving knowledge
and expertise, carrying out exercises, and
strengthening the capacity for coordination across
all sectors and levels of the crisis management
system will be important elements in our ongoing
efforts in this area.

We must make best possible use of all Nor­

way’s resources if we are to manage threats to
public and state security effectively. The Govern­
ment will strengthen Norway’s overall defence
capabilities. In order to increase the resilience of
critical societal functions, the Government will
propose new legislation relating to preventive
national security. This will be tailored to today’s
security challenges.[1]


However, Norway’s resilience depends on
more than just an effective public administration.
Public confidence in the authorities is also vital.
We must therefore work to maintain the current
high level of confidence in government institu­
tions, the political system and the media. Increas­
ing awareness of Norway’s security situation and
of the role of the Norwegian Armed Forces and
relevant public agencies is important.

Knowledge of strategically important areas is
essential for providing a sound basis for decisionmaking. It is therefore important to promote
research on our most important foreign and secu­
rity policy priorities. Over the years, Norway has
maintained strong research capacity on the Arctic
and Russia regardless of changes in the security
environment, and the Government will continue
to support key research programmes in these
areas. In addition, there is a need for more
research on Europe. The Government has given
the Research Council of Norway an important
role in coordinating research efforts to ensure
that Norway’s long-term knowledge needs are
met.

Strengthening Norway’s security is one of the
Foreign Service’s key tasks. Unless our basic
security is assured, we will not have the freedom
to promote other interests. In order to follow
developments and safeguard Norwegian inter­
ests, Norway needs an appropriate presence
around the world with the necessary skills and
knowledge. The Foreign Service must adapt in
the face of rapid change, and continue to enhance
its ability to deal with unforeseen developments.
The Government will also continue to restructure
the Foreign Service to ensure that Norway is as
well equipped as possible to address foreign and
security policy challenges.

1 Official Norwegian Report 2016: 19 on safeguarding critical
societal functions. (in Norwegian only)


-----

y p


#### 13 Conclusion


The purpose of this white paper is to provide a
thorough account of Norway’s current security
situation. A great deal has happened since the
work to develop this white paper was started in
autumn 2015. Increased migration to Europe, ter­
rorist attacks in European cities, the UK’s deci­
sion to leave the EU, the coup attempt in Turkey
and the rise of populist movements in Europe and
North America reflect the unpredictable nature of
today’s world.

Against this backdrop, it is important for Nor­

way to strengthen existing security policy instru­
ments and to exercise strategic patience. While
maintaining the main contours of our policy, we
must also adapt to the changing security environ­
ment by promoting closer cooperation in Europe
and stabilising fragile states. This is the main mes­
sage of this white paper.

We must maintain and strengthen our transat­

lantic ties and NATO, strengthen our own defence


capabilities and manage our relations with Russia
wisely. We must also develop closer security pol­
icy cooperation with European countries and insti­
tutions. And we must do more to alleviate the situ­
ation in Europe’s unstable southern neighbour­
hood. All these efforts combined will make our
security policy more robust. In this way, we will be
better equipped to deal with unforeseen events.

This white paper focuses on security policy
from the perspective of Norway. In other parts of
the world, the security landscape looks different.
And in other policy areas, the situation is more
positive. Nevertheless, increased tensions and the
tendency away from cooperation towards greater
isolationism may pose challenges for the interna­
tional community in areas far beyond the realm of
security policy. We must take this seriously and
take steps to counter these trends.


-----

g g g y p y

#### 14 Economic and administrative consequences


All measures described in this white paper will be
funded within the current budget framework.


The Ministry of Foreign Affairs

r e c o m m e n d s :

that the recommendation from the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs concerning the future course of
Norwegian foreign and security policy dated 21
April 2017 should be submitted to the Storting.


-----

-----

Published by:
Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Public institutions may order additional copies from:
Norwegian Government Security and Service Organisation
E-mail: publikasjonsbestilling@dss.dep.no
Internet: www.publikasjoner.dep.no
Telephone: + 47 222 40 000
Cover illustration: Anne Leela / Gjerholm Design
Print: 07 Xpress 06/2017


-----

