## THE NORWEGIAN GOVERNMENT’S
 HIGH NORTH STRATEGY


-----

###### Photos/illustrations:

Page  1: Scanpix Creative, Barents Secretariat,

SINTEF Helse, Kjell Ove Storvik, Harald
Pettersen, Statoil, Christian Houge,
Samfoto, ELKEM
Page  7: Scanpix Creative
Page 12: Cartography/Design: Hugo Ahlenius,

UNEP/GRID-Arendal
Page 13: Barents Secretariat
Page 15: Per Eide
Page 17: Norwegian Coastguard
Page 18: Hydro
Page 20: Nils Petter Dale
Page 25: Governor of Svalbard
Page 27: Petroleum Geo Services(PGS)
Page 29: Governor of Svalbard
Page 31: Scanpix Creative
Page 32: Aftenposten
Page 36: Johan Marcus Kuhmunen
Page 37: Samfoto
Page 40: Scanpix Creative
Page 41: Norwegian Armed Forces’ Media Centre


Page 43: NRK Sameradioen
Page 44: Scanpix Creative
Page 47: Barents Secretariat
Page 48: Georg Bangjord
Page 50: Kjell Ove Storvik
Page 51: Samfoto
Page 52: Norwegian Coastguard
Page 53: Norwegian Coastguard
Page 54: Harald Pettersen, Statoil
Page 56: Barents Secretariat
Page 58: Bjarne Riesto
Page 59: Bjørn Frantzen
Page 60: Ministry of Fisheries and Coastal Affairs
Page 61: Norwegian Coastguard
Page 62: Christian Houge
Page 65: Hallvard Stensland
Page 66: Geir Jenssen
Page 67: Trym Ivar Bergsmo
Page 68: Scanpix Creative
Page 69: Frank Bang
Page 71: Bjarne Riesto


-----

## THE NORWEGIAN GOVERNMENT’S
 HIGH NORTH STRATEGY


-----

#### Contents


Foreword-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - **5**
Summary-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - **7**
Part 1 - A new dimension of Norwegian foreign policy-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - **13**

Stronger focus on energy and the environment -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 13
Regional forums -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - **14**
Conflicts of interest-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - **16**
Cooperation with Russia -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 17
Presence of the Norwegian Armed Forces-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - **19**

Part 2 - Knowledge generation and competence building-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 23
Meeting the knowledge needs identified in the integrated manage­ment plan-  - **24**
Marine research **-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 26**
Petroleum research and developmen­t **-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 27**
Monitoring and notification for environmental, resource and
emergency response purposes **-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 28**
Climate and polar research-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 29
Strengthening the knowledge infrastructure in the High North -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 30
International cooperation on education and research-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - **32**
Barents 2020 -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 34

Part 3 - Issues relating to indigenous peoples-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - **37**
Part 4 - People-to-people cooperation in the north -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - **41**

Culture and cultural cooperation-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - **42**

Part 5 - The environment -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 45

Climate change and long-range transboundary pollution-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - **45**
Integrated management of the northern seas-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 46
Cooperation with Russia **-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 47**
Building up expertise in Tromsø **-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 48**

Part 6 - The management and utilisation of marine resources-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - **51**

Resource management – a basis for value creation-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - **51**
Cooperation with Russia **-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 51**
Illegal, unregulated and unregistered (IUU) fishing **-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -** **52**

Part 7 - Petroleum activities **-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 55**
Part 8 - Maritime transport – safety and emergency response systems-  -  -  -  - **59**
Part 9 - Business development-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 63

Resource-based business activity -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 63
Knowledge-based business activity -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 65
Infrastructure -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 68
Cross-border business activities -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 70

Part 10 - Follow-up **-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 73**


-----

#### Foreword

One of the Government’s most
important priorities in the years
ahead will be to take advantage
of the opportunities in the High
North.

It is in the High North that
we are seeing the most rapid
developments in our immediate
neighbourhood.


through broad contact with our
neighbours, partners and allies.
We put a spotlight on traditional
policy areas and indicated that
these too must be given a stronger
High North perspective. And we
invited the nation to join in a concerted effort in the north.

During the course of the past year,
the High North has been placed
firmly on the map of Europe.
Decision makers in other countries have become aware that the
High North has significance that
extends far beyond Norway’s
borders. Take, for example, the
living marine resources that are
provided to European consumers from a unique and vulnerable
natural environment. Or global
climate change, which is becoming so clearly obvious in the Arctic.
The High North also has international significance because of the
Norwegian and Russian petroleum
resources in the Barents Sea and
future opportunities for transporting energy resources. In addition,
the Norwegian-Russian cooperation in the High North has developed into an important channel for
European dialogue.

The main purpose of the Government’s High North strategy is
to coordinate efforts in all fields
relating to the development of the
High North. We have mobilised
the whole government apparatus
in order to give our overall policy
a clearer and more coherent High
North focus. Ministries and government agencies have focused on
further developing and intensifying efforts in their policy areas.
The High North strategy outlines


###### Ü


n


We will continue to build on our


good neighbourly relations with
Russia, which were resumed at the
end of the Cold War.


n


We will continue to exercise our


neighbours, partners and allies.
But it is also a question of a broad,
long-term mobilisation of our own
strengths and resources in the
development of the entire northern part of our country. We are not
talking about a project for the High
North alone, but a project for the
whole country and for the whole of
northern Europe, with consequences for the whole continent.

There is growing recognition of
the importance of the High North
for Norway as a whole. New political working methods are taking
shape. Sustainable development
in the north is not just a regional
policy aim; it is of strategic importance for the entire country. The
focus has been mainly on marine
resources, and the Norwegian
High North tends to be primarily
associated with the opportunities and challenges relating to the
sea. But it is on land that people
live their lives. The Government’s
policy is to take a broad approach
to settlement, employment, value
creation, education, culture and
cross-border contact in the north.

The Government has had a sharp
political focus on the challenges
and opportunities in the High
North ever since it came into
power in October 2005. We have
continued to build on the foundation laid out in the white paper
_Opportunities and Challenges in_
_the North (Report No. 30 to the_
Storting (2004-2005)), which won
broad support in the Storting (the
Norwegian Parliament). We set a
new foreign policy agenda for Norway’s efforts to draw attention to
the importance of the High North


responsibility for combating illegal
fishing and managing the renewable fish resources for present and
future generations.


n


We will take advantage of the


opportunities the Barents Sea
presents as a new European
energy province in accordance
with the principles of sustainable
development.


n


We will take environmental


and climate considerations into
account in everything we do.


n


We will improve living condi

tions, opportunities and the quality
of life for all those who live in the
High North, and we will exercise
our particular responsibility for
safeguarding indigenous peoples’
rights.

All this will require us to give our
best as a nation.

This is more than just foreign
policy, and more than just domestic
policy. It is a question of our ability
to continue our tradition of responsible management of resources,
predictable exercise of sovereignty
and close cooperation with our


-----

a framework for action, which the
Government will strive to fill in the
coming years. It is not a catalogue
of measures, although it does
mark the launch of a number of
forward-looking efforts.

The strategy sets out two potential new measures for Norway’s
cooperation with Russia: firstly,
the Government is proposing an
exchange programme for Russian
students, and secondly it will consider a proposal for an economic
and industrial cooperation zone,
which would include both Norwegian and Russian territory in the
High North. The High North grant
and exchange scheme will encourage students and researchers
conduct part of their studies and
research work at North-Norwegian institutions. The cooperation
zone would serve as a laboratory
for practical Norwegian-Russian
business cooperation in the north.

An inter-ministerial committee,
headed by the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, has coordinated the work
on the strategy. Additional expertise has been provided by an external committee of experts chaired
by the Rector of the University
of Tromsø, Jarle Aarbakke, who
has drawn on the knowledge and
experience to be found in the High
North. We have also maintained
close contact with a large number
of groups and institutions in the
High North, and with regional
authorities and the Sámidiggi (the
Sami Parliament).

A long-term perspective and predictability are important features
of Norway’s High North policy.


They will be at the core of our
efforts over the next few years. As
we increase our activities, Norway’s policy in the High North will
continue to be consistent.

The key words for the strategy are
presence, activity and knowledge.


leader in knowledge in all these
areas. Knowledge is at the core of
our High-North efforts: building
people’s knowledge and experience so that we can show the way,
utilise existing opportunities, discover new ones, and attract other
countries that want to take part,
invest and share knowledge. Our
focus on knowledge will include
further developing our capacity to
safeguard Norway’s foreign policy
interests in the High North.

Our High North policy has given
rise to optimism and high expectations. A number of initiatives have
been taken in recent years that are


n


It is our ambition to ensure a


_presence in the High North both_
through maintaining settlements
and through being present in the
areas under Norway’s jurisdiction
including Svalbard, our sea areas,
coastline, and settlements and
towns on land.


n


It is our ambition to be at the


top of the league in key areas
of activity, from fisheries and
other industries to tourism and
newer endeavours such as marine
bioprospecting, i.e. searching for
valuable biochemical and genetic
resources from living marine
organisms.


n


And it is our ambition to be a


based on a real will to develop the
opportunities in the High North.
Most of these initiatives have
originated in the north, but there
is also growing interest from other
parts of the country and from our
neighbouring countries.

This strategy sets out the framework for our efforts in the High
North. The Government will act
as prime mover and facilitator, and
has already invested considerable
resources in major programmes in
the north, including research and
efforts to implement the integrated
management plan for the Barents
Sea–Lofoten area. But a modern
partnership has room for a wider
range of actors: from the public and private sectors as well as
other Norwegian and international
partners.

The Government will follow up
the strategy in coming budgets
and through carefully targeted
measures. We are inviting others
to take part in fruitful partnerships, so that a wide range of
actors gain ownership and a sense
of responsibility and are able to
take advantage of existing and new
opportunities.

Therefore this strategy is also
an invitation to everyone with an
interest in the High North.

Oslo/Tromsø December 1 2006


-----

#### Summary

In its policy platform, the Government states that it considers the
High North to be Norway’s most
important strategic priority area
in the years ahead. In this strategy, we stake out the course for
our High North policy, seeking to
improve coordination and to maximise the effect of our efforts.

The overall objective of the Government’s policy is to create sustainable growth and development
in the High North. This requires a
framework that will enable people
in the region to build up viable
local communities, where there
are promising employment opportunities in the long term, good
health care services and educational opportunities, and opportunities
to enjoy varied natural surroundings and cultural events.

The High North policy also
focuses on utilising opportunities
for more extensive international
cooperation on the use of natural
resources, environmental manage

ment and research through closer
contact with our neighbour Russia and our European and North
American partners.

Norwegian interests in the High
North will be safeguarded primarily by strengthening our presence
and increasing the level of activity in a number of policy areas at
both national and international
level. These include education
and research, environmental and
resource management, safety and
emergency response systems,
energy, fisheries, tourism and
other economic activities, health,
culture and gender equality.


The main political priorities for the
Government’s High North strategy
are as follows:

_We will exercise our authority_
_in the High North in a credible,_

### 1

_consistent and predictable way._

By maintaining its presence, and
exercising its sovereignty and
authority, Norway is making it
clear that it takes its international
and national obligations seriously.
Therefore, the presence of the
armed forces, the police and the
prosecuting authority continues to
be of great importance. The presence of the armed forces is also
vital for meeting national security
needs and maintaining our crisis
management capacity in the High
North. The close cooperation
between the Norwegian Coast
Guard, the prosecuting authority
and the police on resource management in the High North helps
to prevent conflict, and maintain
predictability and stability. This
cooperation will therefore be fur

###### Ü


-----

ther developed. The Government
also intends to continue its focus
on Svalbard in accordance with the
objectives of Norway’s Svalbard
policy.

_We will be at the forefront of_
_international efforts to develop_

### 2

_knowledge in and about the High_
_North._

Knowledge is at the core of the
High North strategy, and is closely
linked to environmental management, utilisation of resources and
value creation. As a nation, we
need more knowledge to fully
seize the opportunities ahead and
meet the challenges we are facing
in the High North. Norway has
internationally leading centres of
excellence in the fields of petroleum, maritime transport, utilisation and management of marine
resources, environmental protection, climate and polar research
and research on indigenous peoples. The Government intends to
strengthen the knowledge infrastructure in the region.

_We intend to be the best steward_
_of the environment and natural_

### 3

_resources in the High North_


The Snøhvit development shows
how local spin-off effects can be
created by petroleum activities
in North Norway. The prospects
for the petroleum industry in
the north are good, and several new developments are being
considered.

The Government will seek to
encourage operators of fields
in the High North to establish
qualification schemes for local and
regional contractors. The authorities will play an active role in promoting local and regional spin-off
effects of petroleum developments
in the region. We will also start a
project to establish the likely spinoff effects of petroleum activities in
the High North on the basis of the
experience gained so far.

_We intend the High North policy_
_to play a role in safeguarding_

### 5

_the livelihoods, traditions and_
_cultures of indigenous peoples in the_
_High North._


Indigenous peoples are stewards
of cultural values and have specialised knowledge of ways of making
a living under difficult conditions
in subarctic areas. These will be
useful assets in the implementation
of our High North policy, and the
indigenous dimension is an integral part of the policy. Integrated
resource management in the High
North includes the protection of
the natural resource base used
by indigenous peoples for their
economic activity, of their traditional knowledge, and of reindeer
husbandry areas. It also includes
protection of the environment
along the coast and of traditional


We will promote value creation through sustainable use of
resources while maintaining the
structure, functioning and productivity of the ecosystems of the
area. The Government will set
strict environmental standards
for all activities in the High North
and will establish a framework to
protect particularly valuable and
vulnerable areas against negative impacts. The Government


will also strengthen international
cooperation to limit anthropogenic climate change and reduce
environmental pressures in the
High North. Norway intends to
play a leading role in monitoring
climate change, environmentally
hazardous substances and the
marine environment in the region.

Svalbard is to be maintained as one
of the world’s best managed wilderness areas. The strict environmental legislation and comprehensive protection measures will be
continued and further developed
to meet the challenges that will
arise as economic activity expands.
In the event of a conflict with other
interests, environmental considerations will prevail.

The Government’s fundamental
premise is that the management
of living marine resources is to be
based on the rights and duties set
out in Law of the Sea, and that it is
to ensure the maximum sustainable yield from these resources.
The integrated management plan
for the Barents Sea–Lofoten will
be a useful tool for clarifying the
overall principles for the management of the resources in the High
North.

_We will provide a suitable_
_framework for further develop-_

### 4

_ment of petroleum activities in the_
_Barents Sea, and will seek to ensure_
_that these activities boost compe-_
_tence in Norway in general and in_
_North Norway in particular, and_
_foster local and regional business_
_development._


-----

examine the need for a new, ice

sea-water and salmon fisheries.
The Government will develop
existing and new forms of economic activity as a basis for Sami settlement patterns and to safeguard the
Sami culture. We will also promote
capacity and competence building in Sami institutions, and these
institutions will be encouraged to
take active part in international
cooperation.

_We will further develop people-_
_to-people cooperation in the_

### 6

_High North_

People-to-people cooperation is an
important part of Norway’s High
North policy. Health, education,
culture, sport, child and youth
work and volunteer activities are
key components. Opportunities
for people to come together to
take part in joint activities in these
areas foster mutual understanding and trust which again foster
stability and development in the
High North. The Government will
seek to ensure that the Barents
Cooperation continues to play an
important role in creating meeting
places and networks for people in
the High North.

_We will strengthen our coopera-_
_tion with Russia_

### 7

In the context of our High North
policy, it is vital to maintain close
bilateral relations with Russia,
which is both a neighbour and
the country with which we share
the Barents Sea. A number of the
challenges in the High North in
areas such as the environment and
resource management can only
be solved with Russia’s engage

ment and Norwegian-Russian
cooperation. Russia is undergoing
rapid economic development. The
changes that are taking place in
the country’s economy, society and
politics do not affect the objectives
of Norway’s policy, but developments will be followed closely and
instruments adapted accordingly.
The Government’s policy towards
Russia is based on pragmatism,
interests and cooperation.

**In following up the main priori-**
**ties of the High North strategy,**
**the Government will:**


facilitate border crossing between
Norway and Russia;


n


waters around Svalbard is to be
increased by such means as applying the Harbour Act and introducing a mandatory system requiring
the employment of local people
with thorough knowledge of the
waters around Svalbard to pilot
vessels sailing in these waters;


class research vessel with a view to
increasing the year-round Norwegian presence in northern waters;


n


strengthen knowledge build

ing and research in and about the
High North through the Research
Council of Norway;


n


increase maritime safety in the


n


further develop the active dia

logue with neighbours, partners
and allies on High North issues;


n


strengthen cooperation with


n


raise the profile of Norway’s


High North policy in regional and
international forums and ensure
that this is done in a coordinated
manner;


the authorities in Russia and other
countries in the fight against illegal, unregulated and unreported
fishing in the Barents Sea;


n


build up efforts to implement


n


further develop petroleum


activities in the Barents Sea area
through an active licensing policy
that takes into account the need to
follow up exploration results and
the need to open up new areas for
exploration ; the Government will
also encourage geological surveys
in the High North;


the integrated management plan
for the Barents Sea–Lofoten area
through surveys and monitoring
of the marine environment, and on
research on the ecosystems and
how they are affected by human
activities;


n


intensify surveying, monitoring


n


draw up a proposal for an eco

nomic and industrial cooperation
zone, which would include both
Norwegian and Russian territory
in the border areas of the High
North;


and research efforts relating to climate change and environmentally
hazardous substances in the High
North;


in efforts to ensure nuclear safety
and emergency preparedness in
the High North;


n


continue Norway’s engagement


n


identify further measures to


###### Ü


-----

n


increase research and develop

provide a suitable framework


n


ment efforts to develop environmental technology for and in the
High North;


for a greater research effort on
farming cod and other marine species of interest;


n


initiate more knowledge-gen

consider supporting efforts


n


eration and development projects
within the framework of the Barents 2020 programme;


n


establish a grant scheme for


studies at North Norwegian institutions,, which will be funded via
the Barents 2020 allocation;


to start up goods traffic along
the Northern East–West Freight
Corridor, which is an initiative to
provide a transport solution from
Central Asia to North America
through the port of Narvik;


n


consider whether there is rea

n


develop closer cultural coopera

son for the Government to assess
new transport solutions such as
a railway from Nikel to Kirkenes,
and whether there is a commercial
basis for setting up new flights
within the High North;


tion in the High North, especially
with Russia;


n


consider measures to increase


the recruitment of competent and
qualified labour to the High North
from other countries;


n


carry out a broad analysis of the


n


promote bioprospecting activi

existing transport infrastructure in
the High North and future needs
in connection with the preparation of the National Transport Plan
2010–2019. n


ties and the development of new
products derived from marine
organisms;


-----

-----

-----

#### Part 1 A new dimension of Norwegian foreign policy

##### redictability and a long-term perspective are essential as# P

##### pects of Norway’s High North policy, which is an important part of our foreign policy. They have been the hallmarks of Norway’s policy in the north for many decades.


Norway will continue to take a
consistent approach that is readily
recognisable for our neighbours,
partners and allies. We have shown
firmness in exercising our sovereignty and in fulfilling our responsibility to control resource use, but
also openness in seeking solutions
in response to new developments
through cooperation. This pattern
is being continued with the introduction of the High North as a new
dimension of our foreign policy.

This new dimension includes
increased activity and a stronger
strategic focus on maintaining
longstanding Norwegian interests, developing cooperation with
Russia, and gaining acceptance for
the importance of sound resource
management and efforts to protect
the environment and address
climate change. The focus on the
High North will make it easier to
see these issues, and how they are
interrelated, in the context of our
foreign policy vis-à-vis other countries and in international forums.

The High North is a broad concept
both geographically and politically.
In geographical terms, it covers
the sea and land, including islands
and archipelagos, stretching northwards from the southern boundary of Nordland county in Norway
and eastwards from the Greenland
Sea to the Barents Sea and the
Pechora Sea. In political terms, it


includes the administrative entities
in Norway, Sweden, Finland and
Russia that are part of the Barents
Cooperation. Furthermore, Norway’s High North policy overlaps
with the Nordic cooperation, our
relations with the US and Canada
through the Arctic Council, and
our relations with the EU through
the Northern Dimension.

This means that many of the arenas in which Norwegian foreign
policy is conducted will be influenced by the priority we are now
giving to the High North.

**Stronger focus on energy and the**
**environment**
There is growing interest in the
High North as an arena of international cooperation. This is
particularly due to developments
in areas such as energy and the
environment.

The resource potential in the north
and the associated opportunities
for cooperation have made energy
a key dimension of the High North
dialogues Norway has been conducting with the European Commission and with countries such as
Germany, France, the US, Canada
and our Nordic neighbours. The
High North is emerging as a new
petroleum province, and as much
as a quarter of the world’s undiscovered oil and gas resources may


###### Ü


From the Arctic
Council meeting in
Salekhard, Russia, 16
October 2006.


-----

be located in Arctic areas.[] According to the Norwegian Petroleum
Directorate, more than two thirds
of the undiscovered resources on
the Norwegian continental shelf
are located in the Norwegian Sea
and the Barents Sea.

The focus of Norwegian energy
policy is thus continuing its historical shift towards the north. At
the same time, energy issues are
acquiring a foreign policy dimension as energy supply and security
become increasingly important in
international relations. In many
countries, energy is becoming
more clearly defined as a part of
security policy.


and maintenance of Norwegian
settlements on the archipelago.[]

Developments in the High North
have become more dynamic as a
result of the stronger international
focus on energy and the environment. The static Cold War situation has been replaced by a vision
of broad international cooperation.


The main lines of Norway’s petroleum policy are well established.
However, we must be aware of and
respond to the increased importance of energy issues as we implement our foreign and security policy. So that our relations with other
countries better reflect the prominent role energy has acquired,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in
close cooperation with the Ministry of Petroleum and Energy, will
therefore strengthen its capacity to
handle energy issues.

The High North is increasingly
being seen as a barometer of
global climate change. The temperature rise is about twice as fast
in the Arctic as in the rest of the
world, and this will have major consequences for people living in the
north. Moreover, environmentally
hazardous substances from other
parts of the northern hemisphere


end up in the High North. The
increasing awareness of climate
change and pollution is creating a
need for closer international monitoring of the Arctic environment.

The problem of climate change
is at the top of the environmental policy agenda. Climate issues
must, however, also be reflected
in foreign and development policy
because it is clear that climate
change will have an impact on the
security of countries and people
all over the world. The Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of
the Environment will intensify their
cooperation to ensure that Norway
fulfils its commitments under the
Kyoto Protocol and plays an active
role in efforts to achieve a more
ambitious climate agreement for
the period after 2012.


Svalbard is therefore gaining
importance as an international environmental and climate research
platform. It provides unique opportunities for a wide range of experts
to build up knowledge of climate
change and the environment, and
raise awareness of this major global
problem. It is vital for Norway to
maintain the important role of this
meeting place.

The Government considers it
important to continue its efforts
in Svalbard in line with Norway’s
policy on Svalbard: consistent
and firm enforcement of sovereignty, proper compliance with the
Spitsbergen Treaty and control to
ensure compliance with the treaty,
maintenance of peace and stability in the area, the protection of its
distinctive wilderness character


These changes have figured
prominently in the High North dialogues Norway has been conducting with key Western countries.
The purpose of the dialogues is
to explain Norway’s interests and
positions in order to gain acceptance for our views of the opportunities and challenges in the High
North, and to identify new areas
and forms of cooperation.

The first phase of general briefings
has now been completed. In the
next phase, the idea is to explore
in greater detail the issues of most
common interest, with a view to
identifying specific cooperation
projects that can give the dialogues
more substance.


**Regional forums**
The Government intends its High
North strategy to direct more
attention towards Norway’s interests and to ensure better coordination of how they are presented
in different forums. We consider
regional forums particularly valuable in this connection.

Norway will give High North
issues a higher profile in Nor

 Report No. 9 (1999-2000) to the Storting,


-----

dic cooperation bodies. In close
cooperation with the Storting,
these issues will be raised in the
Nordic Council and the Nordic
Council of Ministers. So far these
forums have concentrated on
the Baltic Sea Cooperation. It
is, however, important that this
perspective is supplemented with
a stronger focus on the High
North. In this connection the
Government considers it important to continue the dialogue with
each of the Nordic countries.

The Government also intends to
step up its efforts to focus attention on its High North policy in
European institutions such as the
European Parliament. This will be
done in close consultation with the
Storting and Norwegian organisations that participate in these
cooperation bodies, including the
social partners.

We will also fully exploit the potential of the Barents Cooperation.


This cooperation was a pioneering
initiative when it was launched in
1993. It is still a unique forum for
cooperation across old dividing
lines in the north, with a strong
people-to-people dimension, in
which the indigenous peoples’ interests play a key role. The Government intends to provide favourable
conditions for the county authorities in North Norway, the Sámediggi (Sami Parliament), other public
institutions, NGOs and private individuals to continue to strengthen
the Barents Cooperation.

With a view to increasing the efficiency of the Barents Cooperation,
Norway has taken the initiative for
the establishment of an international secretariat in Kirkenes. The international secretariat is to be operational from 1 January 2008, and will
be in addition to the national Barents Secretariat, also in Kirkenes.
The Barents Institute was established in the same town to boost
knowledge about cross-border and


other regional issues. Knowledge
about the indigenous peoples in the
region will be developed, for example in cooperation with centres of
expertise in Kautokeino.

Norway will chair the Arctic
Council from 2007 to 2009. We
will use the chairmanship to gain
support for our High North policy.
We have drawn up an ambitious
programme for our chairmanship,
with particular emphasis on sustainable resource management and
efforts to combat climate change.
Through the Arctic Council we will
also seek to increase international
understanding of the urgency of
addressing climate change.

In connection with Norway’s
chairmanship, an Arctic Council
secretariat, which is planned to be
operational from 1 January 2007,
will be established in Tromsø.
Sweden and Denmark have
agreed that the secretariat should
continue its work through their Ü


-----

chairmanship periods, i.e. until
the end of 2013.

We have had good experience
of inviting decision-makers from
other countries to the High North.
This will be stepped up in the
years to come, with priority being
given to guests from the US, Canada and Russia. Due to its research
infrastructure, particularly in the
field of climate research, Svalbard
is of particular interest in this
connection.


**Conflicts of interest**
Our vision is that the Barents Sea
should become a “sea of cooperation”. Even during the tension of
the Cold War, relations between
the countries of the north were
orderly and correct. Although
there are sometimes differences of
opinion on certain legal questions
and points of international law,
Norway has been commended for
its stewardship in the north, and
this is something we will continue
to build on.

There is potential for closer
cooperation in the High North,
but there are also real conflicts of
interest related to the utilisation
of fisheries resources and future
offshore petroleum resources.


systems. These factors together
with economic interests are also
putting increasing pressure on the
Barents Sea.

Norwegian resource management
combines active use of national
regulatory authority with credible enforcement of legislation and
international cooperation. Under
current international law there is
a wide range of instruments that
Norway can apply in its efforts to
develop knowledge- and performance-based resource management.
In contrast to the situation in many
other areas, the combination of
effective coastal state management
and extensive cooperation with
other states has made it possible to
rebuild important but vulnerable
fish stocks such as cod and herring in northern waters.


We have a historic responsibility to
continue this.

Norway takes a systematic,
methodical approach to the opening of new areas for petroleum
activities and for later awards
of exploration and production
licences, based on clear rules for
the authorities, companies and
other actors.


and complex developments on
the Norwegian continental shelf.
We have thus created conditions
conducive to long-term, large-scale
investments, while at the same
time maintaining full transparency
and sound control processes, and
facilitating coexistence between
very different but important users
of these sea areas.

Norway has submitted documentation to the Commission on the
Limits of the Continental Shelf on
the extent of its continental shelf,
based on the provisions of the
Law of the Sea and international
cooperation. The same approach
has been taken to the delimitation
of the continental shelf and the
fisheries zones in the area between
Greenland and Svalbard, which
has now been settled, and to the
delimitation of the continental
shelf in the Norwegian Sea. It is
also being used in dealing with the
unresolved questions related to the
delimitation line between Norway
and Russia in the Barents Sea.


The delimitation of the continental
shelf and the 200-mile zones in the
Barents Sea is an essential basis
for the exploration and exploitation of petroleum deposits in the
area of overlapping claims, which
covers an area of 175 000 square
kilometres. The principal purpose
of a delimitation line is to determine which state has jurisdiction
over an area for specific purposes.
Agreement on a delimitation line
will thus make it possible to establish the predictable framework
that is necessary for economic and
other actors, and also for cross

There is excess capacity in the
fishing fleet, both worldwide and
in Norway’s neighbouring areas.
The world’s recoverable energy
resources have also diminished.
As a result, it is becoming more
challenging to ensure responsible resource management and
the conservation of biodiversity
and particularly vulnerable eco

Our sound regulatory framework
and predictable and effective management have ensured that impact
assessments are drawn up, based
on the precautionary principle, and
the need to adhere to strict environmental standards. They have
also ensured transparency and participation by international oil companies and contractors with broad
experience and expertise in large


-----

border cooperation schemes in the
petroleum sector.

The issue of the delimitation of
the continental shelf and zones
in the Barents Sea can only be
resolved through political agreement between Norway and Russia. Agreement on a delimitation
line would release considerable
potential for cooperation between
Norway and Russia in the petroleum sector.

There are differing views on the
geographical scope of the Spitsbergen Treaty. Norway’s position
has always been that the treaty, in
accordance with its wording, only
applies to the archipelago and the
territorial waters. With potential
economic interests in mind, other
states have claimed that the treaty
also applies to maritime areas
outside the territorial waters. This
was one of the reasons why Norway decided in 1977 until further
notice to establish a fisheries protection zone rather than a full economic zone. One of the purposes
was to ensure the protection and
sound management of the living
resources.

The Norwegian management
regime in the Fisheries Protection
Zone has generally been complied with in practice. However,
Norway’s right to regulate fishing
and exercise jurisdiction over the
continental shelf in this area is not
undisputed. For example, Spain,
Iceland and Russia have disputed
this right with reference to the provisions of the Spitsbergen Treaty.


Norway’s position is clear and has
a firm basis in international law:
as a coastal state we have the right
to unilaterally establish maritime
zones around Svalbard, and an
obligation to prevent over-exploitation of the fisheries resources.

Norway will continue to fulfil its
responsibility in a transparent and
predictable way. We expect other
actors to comply with national and
international rules and regulations.
The High North is at the top of our
foreign policy agenda, and we will
seek the support of our allies and
partners to ensure that Norway is
able to address the real challenges
we are facing in the High North.

**Cooperation with Russia**
Russia is both our neighbour and
the country with which we share
the Barents Sea, and consequently
our relations with Russia form the
central bilateral dimension of Norway’s High North policy.


###### Ü


Representatives of
the Norwegian and
Russian Coastguards
at a debriefing on
board KV Andenes
after the Barents Rescue 2006 exercise.


-----

will be followed closely and measures adapted accordingly. We will
maintain a candid dialogue with
Russia and will be clear about
Norway’s views on human rights,
the principles of the rule of law
and political rights.

Norway’s policy towards Russia
is based on pragmatism, interests
and cooperation.


In cooperation between Gazprom and
Hydro, the rig Deepsea
_Delta drilled and tested_
well no. 7 in the Russian Stockman field in
the autumn of 2006.


Today we are dealing with a different Russia from the one that
emerged in the international arena
in the first few years after the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Russia is currently undergoing rapid
economic development, due in
particular to large revenues from
the energy sector and also to a
number of reforms.

After decades of authoritarian
rule and isolationism, Russia is
now finding its place in the European cooperation between democratic states. As a neighbouring
country, Norway welcomes this
development.


It is, however, still unclear how
Russia will develop in a number of
areas of interest to the surrounding world. This applies particularly to key issues such as the rule
of law, freedom of expression and
human rights. The changes that
are taking place in the country’s
economy, society and politics do
not affect the objectives of Norway’s policy, but developments


We can only ensure sustainable use
of resources and sound environmental management in the Barents
Sea with Russia’s engagement
and Norwegian-Russian cooperation. The Government therefore
intends to strengthen cooperation
with Russia on ecosystem-based
management of the whole Barents
Sea, both in the Joint NorwegianRussian Commission on Environmental Protection and in the Joint
Norwegian-Russian Fisheries Commission. This cooperation includes
measures to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing.

The preparation and ongoing
implementation of the integrated
management plan for the Barents Sea–Lofoten area has given
Norway valuable experience. We
cannot expect a Norwegian plan
to apply to the entire Barents Sea,
but the principles and approaches
set out in the plan may, in cooperation with Russia, be applied to the
whole sea.


Our fisheries cooperation with
the Soviet Union started as far
back as 30 years ago, and has
been instrumental in ensuring
sustainable harvesting of the fish
stocks in northern waters. Our


-----

joint management of living marine
resources is based on nearly a century of Norwegian-Russian marine
research cooperation.

It is the Government’s ambition
than Norway should develop close
cooperation with Russia on sound
exploitation of the petroleum
resources in the Barents Sea. Both
the former and present Norwegian
Government accepted President
Putin’s invitation to forge a strategic partnership between Norway
and Russia in the north. Part of our
efforts related to the High North
will be aimed at giving substance
to this partnership – or vision.

In this connection the Government
intends to draw up a proposal for
an economic and industrial cooperation zone which would include
both Norwegian and Russian territory in the border areas of the
High North. The zone would help
to promote Norwegian-Russian
onshore cooperation relating to the
prospective petroleum activities in
the Barents Sea.

In this connection, it will be important to assess to what extent existing instruments can be applied.
Once Norway has prepared a
proposal, it intends to present it to
the Russian authorities. It could
then be further developed by a
Norwegian-Russian working group
established for this purpose.

Norway will advocate ambitious
environmental goals in both
countries and seek to promote
the establishment of high health,
safety and environmental standards for the petroleum activities


in the whole of the Barents Sea.
Cooperation on health, safety and
environmental issues will be further developed together with the
Russian authorities, the petroleum
industry and the social partners in
both countries. We will also build
further on the existing cooperation
with Russia on maritime safety, oil
spill response and emergency and
rescue services.

Norway intends to encourage
stronger ties with Russia at all
levels by reducing costs and simplifying the procedures involved.
We have therefore negotiated a
visa agreement with Russia. This
agreement, which is expected to
enter into force in the first half of
2007, will simplify visa procedures
for many categories of Norwegians
and Russians. It is particularly useful that the agreement will make
it easier to obtain multiple-entry
visas that are valid for longer periods of time.

Agreement has also been reached
on extending the opening hours at
the Storskog border crossing, and
the Government will facilitate their
speedy introduction. The Government will also carry out a broad
review of existing rules and procedures with a view to facilitating
border crossing between Norway
and Russia at Storskog. In this
connection the practice followed
by other countries in the Schengen
area, and particularly Finland, will
be studied.

**Presence of the Norwegian Armed**
**Forces**
The changes in the north are also
affecting the role of the Norwe

gian Armed Forces. By strengthening capacity, the Government
has made it possible for the Coast
Guard vessels and the Orion aircraft to spend more time at sea and
in the air, respectively.

Most of the security challenges in
the High North are cross-sectoral, and require close cooperation
between the civilian and military
authorities. The armed forces have
an important role to play, because
they have a clearly-defined leadership structure and chain of command, and other capacities that
can be put to use as required.

One of the primary tasks of the
armed forces is to provide background information for national
decision-making through up-todate surveillance and intelligence.
Given the challenges in the north,
it is very important that Norwegian authorities have up-to-date
information on the situation at
their disposal at all times, both
as regards natural resources and
the environment and as regards
civilian and military developments.
Surveillance and intelligence will
continue to be a key task for the
armed forces in the north.

It is important to maintain the
presence of the Norwegian Armed
Forces in the High North both
to enable Norway to exercise its
sovereignty and authority and
to ensure that it can maintain its
role in resource management.
The presence of the armed forces
increases predictability and stability, and is decisive for our ability
to respond to emergencies in the
High North. Ü


-----

By taking action on breaches
of the rules designed to protect
natural resources, Norway is making it clear that international and
national obligations are to be taken
seriously. Infringements of Norwegian fisheries legislation will
therefore be acted upon in a credible, consistent and predictable
way. With this in view, the already
close cooperation between the
Norwegian Coast Guard, the prosecuting authority and the police
will be further developed. The
cooperation between the Norwegian Coast guard and the Russian
Coast Guard will also be further
developed in order to ensure optimal coordination of the fisheries
control in the Barents Sea.

The Army’s activities are to a large
extent concentrated in North
Norway, and nearly all training of


national servicemen now takes
place there. The Army has key
units in Troms, which will continue to play an important role in the
future, and South Varanger Garrison in Finnmark is another high
priority unit.

For many years we have been
cooperating closely with allied
countries on military activities in
the north, mainly in the form of
joint exercises and training. These
are valuable because they make
our allies familiar with the conditions in the north, and ensure
greater general coordination in
allied operations. The Government
will seek to maintain our allies’ and
partners’ interest in the north, and
will encourage increased participation in military exercises and training in the region.


Defence cooperation between
Norway and Russia is also building
mutual trust and increasing our
capacity for joint problem-solving.
The Kursk and Elektron incidents
demonstrated how valuable established contact between regional
military authorities is when
emergencies or delicate situations
arise. We will make active efforts
to intensify our defence-related
dialogue with Russia. n


-----

-----

-----

#### part 2 Knowledge generation and competence building


##### nowledge is at the core of the High North policy, and
# K
##### is closely linked to environmental management, utilisation of resources and value creation. As a nation, we need more knowledge in order to fully seize the opportunities ahead and meet the challenges we are facing in the High North.


###### Ü


We must take a long-term approach
to knowledge generation. Norway
must build a broad knowledge
base. The Government’s focus on
education is therefore central. Education, competence and knowledge
will provide the key to realising the
opportunities in the High North.
It is important that the population in the north has good educational opportunities at all levels.
This means that we must focus on
improving the quality of education from the first years of school
and upwards, and seek to prevent
young people from discontinuing
upper secondary education.

Norway as a nation must carry out
surveying, monitoring and research
activities that can ensure sustainable utilisation of natural resources.
Cross-cutting knowledge is to be
developed in cooperation between
the public authorities, the business
sector, knowledge institutions in
civil society and educational and
research institutions. Knowledge
and expertise about the High
North is to be built up in the region
at the same time as close connections are maintained with centres
of excellence in other parts of the
country. We must also cooperate
with centres of expertise outside
Norway, particularly in Russia.


We have a good starting point,
and we have good prospects for
success. We have a well developed
knowledge infrastructure over the
whole of the country, including the
north. We have leading centres of
excellence at international level
within important areas such as
petroleum production, maritime
transport, utilisation and management of marine resources, environmental protection, climate issues,
polar and space research, and
research on the Sami and other
indigenous peoples. Considerable
funding is already being provided
for knowledge generation in and
about the High North through the
national research system.

Efforts to strengthen knowledge
in and about the High North will
require increased investments
through several ministries’ budgets. In 2006, the Research Council
of Norway will allocate around
NOK 350 million to research that
is directly related to the High
North. In addition, universities,
university colleges, and research
and management institutions
receive funding from other
sources, and research activities
are also carried out in the business
sector. For example, the Institute
of Marine Research has an annual
budget of nearly NOK 300 million
for its activities in and about the


High North. The Norwegian Polar
Institute also administers large
resources for knowledge generation in and about the High North.

The Government will use the
existing institutions and instruments in its efforts to promote
knowledge-generation.

**The budget proposal for 2007**
**includes two major alloca-**
**tions that directly target the**
**High North. One is a signifi-**
**cant increase in funding for**
**polar research in connection**
**with Norway’s participation in**
**the International Polar Year.**
**The other is the Barents 2020**
**programme.**

The Research Council of Norway
is a key player in the Government’s efforts to increase focus
on knowledge relating to the High
North. Funds from almost all the
ministries are channelled through
the Research Council to a number
of different High North research
programmes and projects. The
Research Council of Norway
is responsible for maintaining
an overview of these funds and
how they are used. The Government will seek to strengthen
High North research through the
Research Council.

The Government sees a need
to direct the overall system of
education and research in North
Norway more towards industrial
needs. Coordination between the
business sector and the research
system in the region also needs
to be enhanced. Research carried out and funded by industry in


-----

North Norway is approximately 30
per cent of the national per-capita
average (2003). This is partly due
to the predominance of industries
based on natural resources with a
traditionally low level of research,
and partly due to the absence of
blue-chip companies in the region.

The Research Council of Norway,
together with Innovation Norway
and the Industrial Development
Corporation of Norway, is responsible for stimulating companies
to increase their research effort
and to enhance coordination
with the research system. These
institutions are expected to review
industry-oriented funding instruments with a view to making
them more closely targeted to
the challenges we are facing in
the High North. New approaches
are needed in the international
cooperation between the business
sector and research communities.
This is particularly relevant in the
cooperation with Russia.


the High North, and these institutions will play an important role in
the priority that will now be given
to competence building in the
region. However, it is important
to direct the education system in
the north more towards industrial
and technological needs in order
to strengthen links with the private
sector. Today the High North is
home to important knowledge
institutions, especially the University of Tromsø and the university
colleges, for example those in
Narvik (technology) and Bodø
(economics). The Government
considers that such educational
opportunities should be increased
in the High North, and will stimulate expansion in this area.

It is important that we build on
the existing institutions and avoid
spreading resources too thinly.
Therefore the Government takes
a positive view of the cooperation
that is being developed between
the Norwegian University of
Science and Technology (Trondheim), the University of Stavanger,
the University of Tromsø, Tromsø
University College, Narvik University College and Finnmark
University College in connection
with development of the Snøhvit
field off the coast of Finnmark.
This is an example of how educational establishments, research
institutions and companies can
work together to develop courses
of study that meet the needs of
the local business sector. Another
example can be found in the field
of tourism, where the university
colleges of Finnmark, Harstad and
Bodø are cooperating with the
University of Tromsø to develop


**Meeting the knowledge needs**
**identified in the integrated**
**manage­ment plan**
The purpose of the white paper on
an integrated management plan
for the Barents Sea–Lofoten area
(Report No. 8 (2005-2006) to the
Storting) is to provide a framework

###### The Government wishes to strengthen the knowledge base needed for eco-sys- tem-based management of resources in the northern sea areas by meeting the know- ledge needs identified in the integrated management plan for the Barents Sea–Lofoten area.


a course of study up to doctorate
level in this field.

The higher education institutions
in the north initiated a review of
institutional structure, cooperation
and student recruitment, which
resulted in the report Universi_tas Borealis?, published in April_
this year. This discusses various
scenarios for the institutional
structure of higher education in
North Norway and for cooperation
between institutions. The Government will enter into a dialogue with
the institutions on the follow-up to
this study.


The Government’s main priorities for knowledge generation
and competence development
in and about the High North are
described below.


###### The Government wishes Norway to be at the fore- front of international efforts to develop knowledge in and about the High North. Strengthening knowledge in- frastructure in the High North and cooperation between institutions has been defined as a goal in its own right.

The university and university college system is well developed in


-----

for the sustainable use of natural
resources while maintaining the
structure, functioning and productivity of the ecosystems of the area.
A sound and well-documented
knowledge base is essential if
this goal is to be reached, and if
Norway is to win credibility and
become the best steward for the
High North. It is also essential
for Norway’s opportunity to influence international cooperation
and negotiations on environmental protection and the management of living marine resources
in the region.

In drawing up the integrated
management plan, which will be
updated in 2010, it became clear
that there are considerable gaps
in our knowledge of ecosystem
interactions and the impacts of
human activity. It will therefore be
necessary to strengthen research,
monitoring and surveying in the
management plan area in order to
fill the knowledge gaps that have
been identified. The Government
will increase knowledge generation in the period up to 2010.

**The main elements of the**
**knowledge generation initiative**
**will be:**

_The introduction of a coordinated_
_monitoring system for the marine_
_environment_
Ecosystem-based management
of resources requires continuous
assessment of the state of the environment in relation to the environmental goals that have been set.
The introduction of a coordinated
monitoring system for the state of
the marine environment, includ

ing pollution levels, will require
further research to establish background levels for environmentally
hazardous substances and continue the development of indicators.

_Surveying the seabed and the seabed_
_environment_
The implementation of the MAREANO programme to develop a
marine areal database for Norwegian waters will increase knowledge of physical, biological and
chemical conditions on the seabed.
MAREANO will be an important
tool in establishing integrated ecosystem-based management regime
and providing a framework for
increased value creation.


whole of the Norwegian seabed
from the Lofoten Islands to the
Russian border, including the
southern part of the Barents Sea,
to be surveyed by 2010.

_Surveying and monitoring seabird_
_populations_
The SEAPOP (Seabird Population
Management and Petroleum Operations) programme is intended to
improve knowledge of seabirds in
Norway and provide a better basis
for decisions in questions relating to the petroleum activities and
their impacts on seabirds.

_Surveys and research on environ-_
_mentally hazardous substances_
Knowledge about hazardous
substances in the sea will be
increased. In particular, systematic development of knowledge
on the transport routes, levels
and effects of environmentally
hazardous substances is needed.


n


The Government intends the


###### Ü


-----

This would make it possible to set
reduction targets and to consider
measures to combat such pollution at both national and international level. The establishment of
an environmental specimen bank
will be considered.

_Geological surveys_
Seismic data coverage for the
areas off the Lofoten Islands is low
at present, and the quality of the
seismic data that has been collected is in general moderate to poor.
In its integrated management plan,
the Government has announced
that surveys will be carried out to
improve knowledge about the areas off Nordland VII, Troms II and
the Eggakanten area off Troms.


example, changes in the migration
patterns of important fish species
may have significance for the management of fisheries in the future.

###### The Government will strengt- hen marine research with particular emphasis on the farming of cod and other new species, and marine biopro- specting (i.e. searching for valuable biochemical and genetic resources from living organisms). This research will strengthen the knowledge base for both management and commercialisation.


will form an important part of the
infrastructure for this research
effort. Promising results have
been achieved in cod farming, but
much basic research needs to be
done before large-scale cod farming is commercially viable.

There is an urgent need for knowledge on the environmental effects
of all types of fish-farming and searanching activities as a basis for
taking effective steps to minimise
such effects. This is particularly
the case with cod farming.


knowledge and expertise in this
area so that we are able to deal
with problems such as pressure
on wild fish stocks, cod diseases,
developing vaccines, feed, and
ensuring normal development
from larvae to harvestable fish.

_Marine biosprospecting_
Marine bioprospecting is the
search for valuable biochemical
and genetic resources from living
organisms. Rapid advances are
being made in marine biotechnology, including bioprospecting. The
northern seas contain interesting
organisms that are adapted to the
cold environment. Better knowledge about marine biodiversity
and technological expertise are
needed with a view to realising the
potential for value creation within
marine biotechnology offered by
these abundant natural resources.
Significant research is being carried out in the High North and an
industry is beginning to take form.
These efforts require expertise
and resources, including entrepreneurship and venture capital.


n


The Government will improve


n


The government budget for


2007 proposes an allocation of
NOK 70 million for seismic surveys of Nordland VII and Troms II,
so that this work, which will take
several years, can be started. The
seismic surveys will provide a better basis for decision-making when
the integrated management plan is
revised in 2010.

**Marine research**
_Long-term management-related_
_research_
The integrated management plan’s
approach is to ensure that impacts
and pressures on all components
of marine ecosystems are assessed
before harvesting strategies are
drawn up. This requires data and
models that make it possible to
produce prognoses over several
years. These prognoses will be
particularly important for assessing the likely impacts of climate
change on the northern seas. For


The Norwegian Institute of Fisheries and Aquaculture Research in
Tromsø is already giving priority
to cod farming. Brood stock facilities elsewhere in North Norway


n


The Government will promote


increased efforts in data collection
and the development of models
that can be used to forecast the
effects of changes in the marine
ecosystems in the High North.

_Fish farming_
Efforts to expand fish farming to
include new species have in recent
years focused on cod, and this is
one of the Government’s priority
areas. Large-scale cod farming
will have to take place along the
coast of North Norway, where the
necessary natural conditions and
expertise are to be found.


-----

The first products are already on
the market: enzymes from byproducts, omega 3 products and
gelatine from fish skin. Possible
future products include anti-bacterial agents, genetic superglue and
super enzymes.

A centre for research-based innovation within this area is being
established in Tromsø. The MAREANO programme will provide
valuable information for marine
bioprospecting in the High North.


n


The Government will promote


commercially and environmentally
sustainable development of marine
biotechnology in the High North.
This will involve strengthening
knowledge generation in the field,
as well as increasing the technological, industrial and marketing
expertise needed to realise the
opportunities for value creation
offered by marine bioprospecting.
Framework conditions and legislation are currently being developed
to govern commercial and intellectual property rights to the genetic
resources in the sea and on the
seabed.

**Petroleum research and**
**developmen­t**
The Government’s focus on the
High North will promote the further development of expertise and
technology that will enable petroleum exploration and production in
the High North to be carried out in
a responsible and efficient way.

The considerable technological
developments in recent decades
have increased the efficiency of
petroleum activities on the Norwe

gian continental shelf and reduced
their environmental impact. Technological advances are primarily made in connection with the
development of new fields, as is
currently being illustrated by two
major, highly advanced development projects: Snøhvit and Ormen
Lange.

###### Petroleum-related research and development is another important area for the Go- vernment. Priority will be given to research aimed at meeting the technological and environmental challen- ges in the High North.

These projects are good examples of how Norway’s oil and gas
expertise is being successfully
developed in cooperation between
companies, research centres and
higher education institutions.


###### Ü


-----

Today, Norwegian expertise is in
demand and is highly competitive
in the international arena.

OG21 (Oil and Gas in the 21st
Century) is a research and development task force, made up of representatives of oil companies, contractors, research institutions and
universities. OG21 gives advice on
private and public sector petroleum research, and has drawn up
strategies for a number of areas of
technology, including an emphasis
on developing new solutions for
the Arctic.


However, in addition to the
increased efforts on the part of
the authorities, the oil companies
will also have to step up their
research and development efforts
in cooperation with the centres
of excellence. This will create
considerable opportunities for the
research and knowledge institutions in the High North.


resources is an important part of
the basis for political decisions on
petroleum operations in the High
North.


n


The Government will promote


efforts to strengthen geological
surveys in the High North in the
years ahead.


n


The Government will strength

There is broad agreement within
the Norwegian petroleum cluster
that the challenges in the High
North can be met through further
development of the knowledge and
expertise gained in the North Sea
and the Norwegian Sea. However,
the expansion of petroleum activities in the High North will present
particular challenges that will have
to be met through the development of new knowledge and skills.


en knowledge about oil spill
response operations in Arctic
areas, particularly as regards oil
spills in ice and response measures in the dark.

This expertise will be developed through field studies in the
marginal ice zone in the Barents
Sea, the development of chemical
beach-cleaning methods, the generation of knowledge about the
use of chemical dispersants in
cold conditions, and the assessment of various vessel sensors
that can detect oil in the dark.
The Government will consider
providing partial funding for
these efforts through the Barents
2020 programme.


###### The Government will strengt- hen geological surveying in the High North.

The public sector spends around
NOK 400 million a year on petroleum-related research. Most of the
research effort is directed towards
research problems relating to the
whole continental shelf, including
the Barents Sea.


**Monitoring and notification for**
**environmental, resource and**
**emergency response purposes**
The Government will take the
initiative to improve coordination
between the various monitoring
and research actors, with a view to
establishing an integrated monitoring and notification system for the
High North for the most important
environmental and resource indicators, and to ensure the collection of
long time series of data for research
purposes. Close cooperation with
other Arctic nations will be essential. The system should provide
other users with access to information about: the seabed (e.g. through
MAREANO); the water masses
(including data on ecosystems);
the sea surface (e.g. maritime
transport); the atmosphere (e.g.
pollution and climate change); and
meteorological observations. These
efforts should also be seen in connection with the implementation of
the integrated management plan,

###### The Government will seek to provide an integrated civilian monitoring and notification system for the most impor- tant environmental and resource indicators in the Hi h N h


n


A greater research effort must


be directed towards specific issues
relating to the High North.


_Geological surveys_
One of the Petroleum Directorate’s
tasks is to carry out surveys of
the resources on the Norwegian
continental shelf. This includes
collecting seismic data and shallow drilling to provide the Norwegian authorities with the best
possible insight into the geology
and potential resources of the
continental shelf. It is in Norway’s
interest to carry out geological
surveys in northern waters. Sound
knowledge about the potential for


-----

including its focus on monitoring
the state of ecosystems.

These monitoring efforts should
form the basis for one of the
elements in an publicly available web-based information
service on the environment and
resources in the Barents Sea
or in a larger part of the High
North. Various projects, including the recently completed pilot
project Barents Online, will be
relevant in establishing such a
system. These projects will be
considered more closely by the
Management Forum responsible for the implementation of the
integrated management plan and
may be included in the research
and development efforts under
Barents 2020.

**Climate and polar research**
_Climate_
It is believed that the effects of
global warming will be greatest
and will first be felt in the Arctic.
One of the tasks in the years ahead


will therefore be forecasting the
impacts of climate change in our
part of the Arctic region.

In the long term, climate change
may make it necessary to develop
new national strategies for the
management of the High North. It
is therefore important to generate knowledge that can be used
in prognoses. Long-term monitoring and research efforts will
be essential in this connection. A
stronger knowledge base will also
give greater room for action with
regard to utilisation of the resources in the High North.

The Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA) has documented
alarming climate change in the
Arctic, where the temperature
rise is about twice as fast as in the
rest of the world. During Norway’s chairmanship of the Arctic
Council, the Government will give
priority to dialogue on climate
change with the other Member
States, and will actively promote


the implementation of the ACIA
recommendations.


rate study of the impacts of anthropogenic climate change on the
environment and natural resources
in the High North (NorACIA),
which should be completed during
the course of 2009.

The Government will furthermore
ensure the dissemination of new
knowledge in a way that raises
awareness of climate change at
national and international level.
Norway and other Arctic countries
have an important responsibility
here, as the Arctic can provide
a unique insight into the climate
change that is already taking place
and that can be expected to take
place in other parts of the world at
a later stage.

_Environmentally hazardous_
_substances_
The Arctic region is in general
an important area for monitoring


n


Norway will carry out a sepa

###### Ü


-----

###### The Government will promote efforts to develop knowledge about climate change and the challenges it is creating in the High North.

long-range transport of environmentally hazardous substances,
including both regional and global pollutants. Various physical,
chemical and biological factors,
including the cold climate, tend
to result in high levels of environmentally hazardous substances in
species at the top of food chains in
the High North. The Government
therefore attaches importance to
improving knowledge of the presence, spread and impacts of environmentally hazardous substances
in the region.


involve Russia and other leading
polar countries. Efforts in connection with the IPY will also lead to
better utilisation of Norway’s polar
research infrastructure.

_Indigenous peoples_
The indigenous dimension in the
development of knowledge relating
to the High North is important. We
will give priority to the indigenous
perspective in relation to climate
change and adaptation measures
in the Arctic Council. The Indigenous People’s Research Network
will also be strengthened and
expanded. The network links academic institutions in Norway and
other countries that study issues of
particular relevance for indigenous
peoples, and helps to ensure high
quality education and research in
this field at various institutions.


the interests of indigenous peoples
in the High North.

**Strengthening the knowledge**
**infrastructure in the High North**
_Svalbard as a research platform_
Svalbard is an important arena
for international cooperation on
higher education and research. Its
situation in the High Arctic provides excellent opportunities for
scientific studies, climate research
and monitoring the marine and
terrestrial environment and the
atmosphere. In recent years,
Norway has made substantial
investments in the research infrastructure in Svalbard. Education
and research, in addition to coal
mining and tourism, are the main
Norwegian activities in Svalbard.


n


The infrastructure that has been


_Polar research_
Norway has long traditions as a
polar nation and strong centres of
excellence within this field. The
International Polar Year (IPY) is a
worldwide focus on polar research
that will extend from 1 March 2007
to 1 March 2009. More than 50 000
researchers from at least 60 countries will take part.


built up in Svalbard should be utilised more efficiently in the future,
by both Norwegian and international researchers and students,
and the Government will take
steps to facilitate this. The aim is to
strengthen cooperation and coordination between the various institutions in Svalbard. The research
activities and infrastructure will
therefore be assessed with such
improvements in view.

_Research vessels_
Some of the Norwegian research
vessels are getting old, and it may
be appropriate to invest in new
ones. One possible solution would
be to invest in a new, larger iceclass vessel to replace the two we
have at present. A new ice-class
vessel would increase the yearround Norwegian presence in
northern waters and strengthen


n


Norway will play a leading role


in the International Polar Year. The
Government is therefore giving
high priority to the IPY, and has
proposed an allocation of NOK 80
million in the budget for 2007.

In connection with the IPY,
Norway will strengthen its polar
research efforts and build up its
international network. Most of
the Norwegian IPY projects will


###### The Government will further develop the Indigenous People’s Research Network.

Many of the challenges facing reindeer husbandry are common to all
the countries in the High North.
The International Centre for Reindeer Husbandry was established
in Kautokeino in the autumn of
2005 for the exchange of information between reindeer herders,
researchers and administrators in
the various countries, and to promote cooperation between these
countries.


n


The Government will strength

en exchange and cooperation of
this type with a view to promoting


-----

###### The Government will strengt- hen education and research in Svalbard.

the development of interdisciplinary knowledge in the High
North.

A new research vessel would have
to meet a number of research and
management requirements, relating to fields such as the environment, climate, fisheries and the
petroleum industry. It should
be possible to use the vessel for
year-round marine research in the
polar areas and as an expedition
vessel for both Arctic and Antarctic expeditions. It should have the
equipment necessary for studies
in oceanography, geology and
marine biology and meteorological observations. It should also be
equipped for teaching purposes. A
ship of this kind would strengthen
Norway’s position as a pioneer of


The research vessel G.O.Sars. The
Government will
consider the need
for a new ice-class
vessel for use in the
High North.

knowledge development in the
High North.

###### The Government will consider the need for a major new ice- class research vessel for use in the High North.


the need for Norwegian research
vessels for use in the High North.

_The Norwegian Meteorological_
_Institute_
The Norwegian Meteorological
Institute operates three weather
stations in the Arctic, on the
islands of Bjørnøya, Hopen and
Jan Mayen. These stations fulfil
important tasks in addition to
their meteorological functions. On
Bjørnøya and Hopen, the Institute is the only organisation that
employs permanent staff, and
thus ensures a Norwegian presence on the islands. The stations


n


The Government will examine


also play a part in the emergency
response services for the Norwegian fisheries zone and for oil and
gas activities in the Barents Sea.
There is activity on Jan Mayen
in connection with the operation
of the LORAN-C radio navigation
station and Telenor’s coastal radio
service, in addition to the activities
of the Norwegian Meteorological
Institute. If/when the LORAN-C
station on Jan Mayen is closed
down, the Institute will be virtually
the only organisation with a permanent presence on the island.

The Government’s intention of
maintaining a Norwegian presence on Bjørnøya, Hopen and Jan
Mayen thus requires the Norwegian Meteorological Institute to
maintain its level of activity on

###### The Government will maintain Norway’s presence on the islands of Jan Mayen, Bjørnøya and Hopen


###### Ü


-----

the islands. The Government will
initiate a review of the basis for a
continued Norwegian presence on
the islands and will consider what
types of activity and infrastructure
should be maintained on them in
the future.

**International cooperation on**
**education and research**
The other Arctic Council Member
States – the Nordic countries, Russia, the US and Canada – and key
EU countries are some of our most
important cooperation partners.
The Government also wishes to
establish closer cooperation with
other countries, including Japan,
India and China. Exchanges of
pupils, students and researchers
will play a central part in the cooperation with all these countries.


The cooperation
between Bodø University College and
MGIMO University in
Moscow could serve
as a model for joint
Norwegian-Russian
doctors and masters
degree programmes.

research, particularly in the field
of health, with the participation of
a number of institutions in both
countries. The Government will
take the initiative vis-à-vis the Russian authorities for schemes that
can ensure better coordination of
our joint efforts. This will make it
possible to take a more integrated
approach to bilateral cooperation
on knowledge generation and competence building.


the possibility of establishing joint
Norwegian-Russian doctors and
masters degree programmes. The
cooperation between Bodø University College and the Moscow
State Institute of International
Relations (MGIMO University)
could serve as a model.


and will consider establishing a
new grant scheme for Russian students, based on the same pattern
as the quota programme, through
the Norwegian State Educational
Loan Fund. This will promote educational cooperation between Norwegian and Russian institutions.
Targeting these efforts towards
masters and doctors degree students will also be considered.


n


The Government will establish


n


The Government will examine


a special grant scheme for studies
at educational institutions in North
Norway, to be financed via Barents
2020. NOK 3 million a year will be
allocated for the period 2007-2009.
The scheme will focus on studies
in the fields of tourism, fisheries,
petroleum, indigenous peoples and
business economics.


The Government will consider


The Government will renew


However, Russia is in a special
position as cooperation partner in
the High North. A broad cooperation with Russia has developed
over the years on education and


n


increasing the number of Russian
students in the quota programme,
which provides opportunities to
study at Norwegian institutions,


n


and strengthen its cooperation
programme with Russia on education and research.


-----

n The Government considers it strengthening knowledge about

important to continue and further public health, preventive medicine,
develop the cooperation that has epidemiology and the development
been established between schools of telemedicine.
in Northwestern Russia and
Finnmark county. Troms county n Expertise in public health is to
will now be included in this coop- be strengthened in Russia through
eration, and the number of schools Norwegian and Nordic support
taking part will be increased. The for a masters degree programme.
cooperation includes exchanges Knowledge about the effects of
of pupils and teachers. It fosters environmentally hazardous subcross-border friendship and under- stances on the health of mothers
standing, and mutual learning. and children in the High North is

also to be improved.

Learning about each other’s languages and learning the languages The Government will strengtthemselves has also been an

###### hen international education

important part of this cooperation,
and these efforts will be strength- and research cooperation in
ened in the years to come. The and about the High North,
use of IT facilitates contact over
the border, and joint websites and particularly its cooperation
teaching aids are being devel- with Russia.
oped. The school system in Russia
has valuable expertise in science
teaching and the use of art and cul- n The Government will promote
ture in schools, which Norway can efforts to strengthen research in
learn from. Norwegian schools, the fields of social sciences and the
on the other hand, have a stronger humanities in the High North.
tradition of adapting teaching for
pupils with special needs, and we The objective is to increase knowlcan also provide expertise in pupil edge about macroeconomic and
participation and democracy. political relations and living condi
tions in the region. Key topics will

It is important that pupils on both be differences in welfare standsides of the border gain knowledge ards between Norway and Northand understanding of environmen- western Russia, migration, the
tal problems both in their region livelihoods of indigenous peoples
and at global level. The cooperation and features of the climate and
gives high priority to this area. natural conditions that are specific

to the region. Basic research on

Cooperation in the health sec- the history, society and culture
tor and efforts to improve pub- will be necessary for studies of
lic health in the High North are these issues. The gender perspecbased on exchange of information tive should be in focus in this conand transfer of expertise. Impor- nection. Increased efforts within
tant areas for future efforts are this area will require further


efforts to strengthen cooperation
between knowledge institutions in
the circumpolar region through

###### The Government will enco- urage further development of the University of the Arctic


development of the relevant educational and research networks
in the High North and increased
cooperation with institutions in
the rest of the country.

Cooperation between Norwegian
research institutions that are
studying the High North from
the perspective of sociology, law
and natural sciences should be
strengthened in order to ensure
national coordination and knowledge development. It is also important to strengthen expertise on key
foreign policy aspects of developments in the High North. The
possibility is being considered of
establishing a special High North
programme under the Research
Council of Norway, with particular
focus on the links between geopolitics and the energy sector.

_The University of the Arctic_
The University of the Arctic is a
network of higher education institutions around the North Pole. Its
activities include coordinating the
mobility programme north2north,
running the Bachelor of Circumpolar Studies course and various field
courses. Within this network, the
Sami University College runs a
project on reindeer husbandry targeted towards Russian indigenous
peoples.


n


The Government will support


###### Ü


-----

Among the projects that will


increased exchange of teachers
and the establishment of a masters
degree programme.

**Barents 2020**
In the autumn of 2005, the Government launched Barents 2020. This
is a new arena for cooperation on
knowledge generation between
Norwegian and foreign centres
of knowledge, business interests
and public bodies, and provides its
own grant scheme. With its focus
on generating knowledge in and
about the High North and crossborder activities, Barents 2020 is a
new instrument of Norway’s High
North policy.


n


be considered in connection with
Barents 2020 are “Barents Online”,
cooperation with Russia, in particular Northwestern Russia, on
health, environment and safety,
business development and innovation, and a project on oil activities
and oil spill response operations
in ice. The Government will also
consider financing a study of the
opportunities and framework conditions for business development
in Sami areas. n


n


An allocation of NOK 20 million


The concrete tasks that are to be
solved under the Barents 2020
umbrella will be assigned on an
ongoing basis and will be based
on this strategy and input to the
Government from the committee
of experts on the High North and
the Research Council of Norway.
The integrated management plan
has identified important challenges relating to the management
of the marine environment that
can be followed up through specific projects, and in cooperation
with other countries. The report
presented to the Minister of Foreign Affairs on Barents 2020 has
identified key issues and possible
projects relating to the development of petroleum technology.


has been proposed for Barents
2020 in the budget for 2007.


-----

-----

-----

#### Part 3 Issues relating to indigenous peoples

##### ndigenous peoples possess an important body of knowl# I
##### edge on nature, the climate, the environment and tradi- tional practices. They are stewards of cultural values and have specialised knowledge of ways of making a living under marginal conditions in subarctic conditions. These are resources that the Government wishes to utilise in its High North policy.


Integrated resource management
in the High North includes the
protection of the natural resource
base for indigenous peoples’
economic activity, of their cultural
heritage and traditional knowledge, and of reindeer husbandry
areas. It also includes protection
of the environment along the
coast and of traditional sea-water
and salmon fisheries.

There has been some uncertainty
about how the land and natural
resources in Finnmark should
be administered and about the
scope of collective and individual
rights of use and ownership on
state-owned land. Pursuant to the
Finnmark Act, government-owned
land has been taken over by a new
local entity, Finnmarkdseiendommen, and a commission is to be
established to investigate rights to
land and water in Finnmark as well
as a special court to settle disputes
concerning such rights. This also
forms the basis for clarifying the
rights of indigenous peoples to the
land in Finnmark.


ment patterns and to safeguard
Sami culture.


currently examining the use and
management of land and natural
resources in areas used by the
Sami people outside Finnmark
county.

The Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA) documents how
indigenous peoples have adapted
to earlier climate change. The
climate change currently taking
place may have major impacts on
the way of life of indigenous peoples, and priority will be given to
knowledge-building in this field, in
cooperation with other countries in
the High North.


n


The Government has appointed


a committee to review the rights of
the Sami and others to fish in the
sea off Finnmark.


n


The Government will intensify


efforts to safeguard reindeer husbandry areas, for example through
the proposed amendments to the
Reindeer Husbandry Act.


n


The Sami Rights Commission is


n


The Government will develop


existing and new forms of economic activity as a basis for settle­


n


The Government is inviting rep

resentatives of indigenous peoples


###### Ü


-----

to take part in close cooperation
on the development of a national
adaptation strategy. The Government will seek to give high priority
to the knowledge and observations of indigenous peoples in
its efforts to follow up the ACIA
recommendations.

Increased internationalisation
offers new opportunities, but also
increases the pressure on the cultures and livelihoods of indigenous
peoples. If indigenous communities are to survive these processes
of global change, it is vital that
their rights are safeguarded in the
utilisation and management of the
environment and resources in the
High North.


promote the development of common standards concerning indigenous peoples, to apply to all economic activity in the High North.


###### The Government’s policy is in- tended to safeguard the live- lihoods, traditions and culture of indigenous peoples in the High North. The indigenous dimension is an integral part of the High North policy.

between indigenous peoples and
with other relevant partners in the
High North.


Indigenous peoples must have
opportunities to build up their own
capacity and competence so that
they are able to exert real influence
and participate fully in the general
development of society, particularly
in the High North.


n


The Government will con

tribute to capacity building in
research relating to indigenous
peoples in Sami educational and
research institutions. n


n


The Government will seek to


n


The Government wishes the


Cooperation on the situation of


n


indigenous peoples in the High
North to have a strong position
and to play a key role in their own
development. It will therefore
involve indigenous peoples in High
North issues and will maintain
regular contact with the Sámediggi
(Sami Parliament).


indigenous peoples is a natural and
important part of Norway’s cooperation with Russia.


white paper on the main principles
of Norwegian Sami policy in the
autumn of 2007, which will discuss
further the indigenous dimension
of the High North policy.


n


The Government will present a


n


The Government will seek to


increase opportunities for trade


-----

-----

-----

#### PART 4 People-to-people cooperation in the north

##### he cooperation in the Barents region is characterised
# T
##### by broad popular participation, which makes it unique in an international context.


The harsh climate and the long
distances are two challenges that
particularly affect living conditions
for the people in the High North.
The population of the region is
declining, particularly on the Russian side of the border. The population in the northernmost counties
of Norway has also fallen over
the last ten years, and the birth
rate is low. However, there are

###### The Government will seek to facilitate the continued efforts of the local authorities in North Norway, the Sámi- diggi (Sami Parliament), other public institutions, non-go- vernmental organisations and private persons to strengthen cross-border cooperation in the north.

signs that the tide is beginning to
turn in North Norway. The rate of
population decrease is slowing and
employment is increasing, despite
the fact that the ratio of women
to men is still low in this part of
the country. In order to ensure
progress in the High North, new
opportunities need to be created
for women, and young people must
be offered incentives to settle and
start families in the region. The
Government will also implement


measures to encourage more people to move to North Norway.

_Children and young people_
Ensuring good living conditions
for young people in the north is
not just a question of providing
employment and health services; good cultural services and
opportunities to participate in
the development of society are
also vital. The Government will
foster the development of entrepreneurship among young people
in the High North. Importance
will also be attached to measures
to encourage children and young
people to take part in organisations, which will help to strengthen civil society and democracy
in the region. The Government
is contributing to such efforts
through the Barents Cooperation
and measures such as the Barents Youth Cooperation Office in
Murmansk, which was set up to
provide information and guidance
for youth groups, organisations
and networks that are working
with cross-border youth projects
in the Barents region. This support will be continued. In addition,
priority will be given to cooperation through the Barents Regional
Working Group on Youth Issues.

_Health_
In helping to improve public health
in Northwestern Russia, we are
also reducing the risk of disease
on the Norwegian side of the bor

###### Ü


-----

The Government will promote
closer cooperation within music,
dance, literature, theatre, film and
museum activities. With this in
view, we will:


volunteer centres in operation in
Northwestern Russia.


n


The Government will promote


From “Girls on the
Bridge” by the Samovar
Theatre at the Barents
Spectacle culture and
arts festival in 2006 – a
cooperation project
between artists from
the Barents region and
the Caucasus.


der. In the years ahead, the Government will therefore continue
its cooperation with Russia in the
health sector, with focus on developing expertise on public health,
preventing infectious diseases and
improving the general health of
vulnerable groups, such as children, young people and inmates in
Russian prisons.

_Sport_
Sports cooperation in the High
North is now well established.
Sports are subject to common
rules regardless of linguistic or
cultural differences. Cross-border sports cooperation is thus
an important opportunity for
increasing people-to-people contact and cultural understanding.
Within the Barents region, there
is ongoing cooperation between
sports organisations in Norway,
Sweden, Finland and Russia. The
Norwegian Olympic Committee
and Confederation of Sports has
established a special committee to
organise Norway’s sports cooperation efforts in this region.


contact between Russian and Norwegian volunteer centres.

**Culture and cultural cooperation**
The Government will strengthen
cultural cooperation with Russia in
the north, and aims to draw up a
specific strategy for this purpose.
Cultural contact promotes understanding and communication.
Cultural activities create meeting
places and networks, build trust
and can often lead to cooperation
in other areas. In the Foreign Ministry’s part of the Government’s
budget proposal for 2007, NOK 10
million is earmarked for cultural
and information measures in the
High North, with focus on cooperation with Russia.


n


The Government will work to


promote exchange programmes


n


facilitate the further development
of people-to-people cooperation
under the auspices of the sports
organisations in the High North.

_Volunteer activities_
In cooperation with various voluntary organisations, the Government has supported a pilot
model for volunteer centres in
Russia, primarily with a view to
recruiting and organising local
volunteers. The model was tried
out in two municipalities to begin
with, and now there are eight


for music ensembles, choirs and
dance groups;


n


consider developing a pro

gramme for visits to and between
museums in the High North;


n


promote the translation of con

temporary works of literature to
relevant languages in the region,
and the role of libraries as meeting
places;


n


promote theatre exchanges and


festivals;


n


further develop and strengthen


film activities in North Norway.


-----

_Sami culture_
Practitioners of Sami culture and
the Sami population as a whole
have a natural place in the broader
cultural cross-border cooperation
in the north.

Sámi Radio is a division of the
Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation (NRK). Sami radio stations
have also been established in
Finland and Sweden; and in 2003,
a Sami radio station was set up in
Russia, currently in the form of a
pilot project.


North, and supports and inspires
cross-border film activities in the
region. The Nordic Youth Film
Festival (NUFF), which is held
once a year in Tromsø, brings
together young film-makers from
the Nordic countries. The festival
also cooperates with youth groups
from Russia. The annual Sami film
festival in Kautokeino presents
the latest indigenous films from
all over the world.


n


The Government will promote


n


The Government will help to


further develop the cooperation
between Sami radio stations in the
High North and will support the
establishment of a joint radio channel once the digital radio transmission network has been fully established in the Nordic countries.
The Government will also seek
to promote the establishment of a
permanent Sami radio station in
Northwestern Russia in cooperation with the Russian authorities.

_Film cooperation_
Film is one of the most popular cultural genres today, and is form of
expression that deals directly with
contemporary issues. Children and
young people are major consumers of film and audiovisual productions. Cinemas and film festivals
are natural meeting places for people of different cultures, linguistic
groups and ages.

There are several important
film festivals in the north: the
Tromsø International Film Festival is a central meeting place
for film enthusiasts in the High


film cooperation in the High North
by creating meeting places for film
enthusiasts, film makers and the
whole film industry. n


NRK, Sámi Radio


-----

-----

#### PART 5 The environment

##### he last large wilderness-like areas in our part of the
# T
##### world are to be found in the High North. The natural envi- ronment and cultural heritage of the region together make up a unique heritage that must be protected for future generations. This is why the environment and natural resources in the north must be protected against pollution and over-harvesting. It is also important to prevent devel- opments from causing damage to the environment, and to prevent wear and tear and disturbance from increased traffic.


###### Ü


Norway intends to be a leading
nation as regards environmental
policy and will play a long-term and
credible role as a steward of the
natural and cultural heritage in the
High North. This means that we
must be at the forefront of efforts
to monitor the climate, pollutants
and the marine environment in the
High North.

The Government will set high environmental standards for all activities and establish a framework to
protect particularly valuable and
vulnerable areas against negative environmental pressures and
impacts. The Government will also
strengthen international cooperation to mitigate climate change and
reduce environmental pressures
and impacts in the High North.
The development of environmental
technology will be important in
this context.

There is growing pressure on the
natural and cultural environment
as a result of more intensive use of
areas on land and at sea and of living resources, the development of


infrastructure, growing industrial
activity and rising transport volumes associated for example with
the petroleum industry. Motor traffic in vulnerable natural environments is also a growing problem.

It is therefore necessary to protect
the natural and cultural environment and remaining wildernesslike areas in North Norway and
Svalbard, and to raise awareness
of the value of this unique heritage
and its importance for welfare and
value creation. The outstanding
natural and cultural heritage is of
growing interest for the expanding
tourist industry, which offers new
opportunities for development in
the north. More knowledge is also
needed about the effects of use,
particularly more intensive use of
vulnerable areas and of areas of
particular cultural importance to
indigenous peoples.

The Government will lay down a
clear environmental framework
for all public- and private-sector
activities in the High North. Steps
will also be taken to maintain the


environmental value of the region
for future generations and to halt
the loss of biodiversity by 2010. In
this connection, the Government
will propose a new Act on the protection of the natural environment,
landscape and biological diversity
in the course of 2007.

Svalbard will be maintained as
one of the world’s best managed
wilderness areas. The strict environmental legislation and comprehensive protection regime will
be continued and further developed to meet the challenges that
expanding economic activity on
and around the archipelago poses.
In the event of a conflict between
environmental targets and other
interests, environmental considerations are to prevail.

The northern seas will be maintained as some of the cleanest,
richest and most productive
marine areas in the world. An integrated, ecosystem-based management regime will be established as
set out in the management plan for
the Barents Sea–Lofoten area and
the plan for marine protected areas
will be implemented as one means
of achieving this aim.

**Climate change and long-range**
**transboundary pollution**
Transboundary environmental
problems are a serious concern in
the High North, and can only be
dealt with through close, binding
cooperation with other countries.
Dealing with these problems
requires coordinated efforts in a
variety of forums, including the
Arctic Council and the Nordic
Council of Ministers.


-----

Levels of environmentally hazardous substances in certain species
of birds and mammals in the High
North are alarmingly high. The
Arctic Monitoring and Assessment
Programme (AMAP) has carried
out extensive surveys of pollutants
in plants, animals and people in the
Arctic. Better knowledge of their
occurrence in the High North will
be of great strategic importance
in further international efforts to
reduce the use and releases of
such substances.

International solutions are needed
to control inputs of environmentally hazardous substances to the
High North through long-range
transport.


tures will also reduce the extent of
the sea ice and open up opportunities for new maritime transport
routes eastwards.


n


During its chairmanship of the


**Integrated management of the**
**northern seas**
In spring 2006, the Government
presented a white paper on integrated management of the marine
environment of the Barents Sea
and the sea areas off the Lofoten
Islands (Report No. 8 (2005-2006)
to the Storting). This describes
Norway’s management plan for the
area, which is intended to provide
a framework for the sustainable
use of natural resources and goods
derived from the Barents Sea–
Lofoten area and at the same time
maintain the structure, functioning
and productivity of the ecosystems
of the area. The plan clarifies the
overall framework for both existing and new activities in these
waters.

In the plan, the Government has
set ambitious goals for management of the Barents Sea–Lofoten
area. These goals are intended to
ensure that the state of the environment is maintained where it is
good and is improved where problems have been identified.


n


Internationally, the Government


Arctic Council, Norway will give
priority to close dialogue with the
other member states on climate
issues and seek to ensure active
follow-up of the ACIA reports.

The Government will also follo­w
up the ministerial declaration
on adapting to climate change
adopted by the Nordic ministers
of the environment in Longyearbyen in August 2006, for example by improving knowledge of
the impacts of climate change
on the marine environment and
its consequences for the natural
and cultural environment. The
Norwegian chairmanship will
also provide an opportunity for
Norway to follow up the Nordic
strategy for the Arctic climate
and environmental pollutants.


will work towards a legally binding
global instrument on mercury and
possibly other metals.

The reports from the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA)
document alarming changes in the
Arctic climate. The temperature in
the region is rising about twice as
fast as in the rest of the world. This
will have impacts on the livelihoods
of people who live in the region.
Coastal communities will be more
severely affected by storms and
high waves. Our opportunities for
harvesting marine resources will
be affected by a rise in the temperature of the Barents Sea. The distribution of both marine and terrestrial ecosystems will change; some
species will shift their distribution
to areas where they find the temperature and conditions they are
adapted to, while others will be at
risk of extinction. Higher tempera

fore introduce a systematic and
integrated monitoring system for


The Government will ensure that
Norway meets its commitments
under the Kyoto Protocol and
plays an active role in efforts to
achieve a more ambitious global
climate agreement for the period
after 2012.


n


To ensure that the goals are


n


As a basis for its further work


on climate issues, the Government
will intensify monitoring of climate
change and knowledge generation
on the impacts of climate change
in the High North.


achieved, measures will be implemented to ensure sustainable
harvesting and high environmental
quality through ecosystem-based
management.

Ecosystem-based management
must be based on regular assessments of trends in ecosystems in
relation to the environmental goals
that have been established.


n


The Government will there

-----

the Barents Sea–Lofoten area. The
gaps that have been identified in
our knowledge will be filled by systematically building up knowledge
of the area, for example through
surveys of the marine environment, seabirds and pollutants.

The management plan also focuses
on the prevention of acute pollution from maritime transport and
petroleum activities. There are certain parts of the management plan
area where the environment and
natural resources have been identified as particularly valuable and
vulnerable. The Government has
established that activity in these
areas requires special caution, but
also that precautionary measures
must be adapted to the characteristic features of each area, such
as why it is vulnerable and how
vulnerable it is.

The management plan is to be
updated for the first time in 2010.


From the industrial
town of Nikkel on
the Kola peninsula.

**Cooperation with Russia**
The Government will strengthen
its broad-based environmental
cooperation with Russia. Cooperation on the marine environment
will be given high priority. Other
important fields of cooperation
are environmental protection in
areas near the Norwegian-Russian
border and building up competence particularly in relation to
polluting industries.


principle of integrated, ecosystem-based management as a basis
for its cooperation and dialogue
with Russia and other countries in
the High North, and is prepared
to provide substantial funding to
ensure environmental monitoring
of the entire Barents Sea in cooperation with Russia.

In Northwestern Russia, there are
still problems related to environmental damage from industrial and
military activity. Heavy industry


n


The Government will use the


on the Kola Peninsula is still the
most important source of pollution in eastern parts of Finnmark,
and inputs from various sources in
Russia are contributing to the high
levels of environmentally hazardous substances in the High North.

Although the levels of radioactivity from human activity are generally low in the High North, the
many nuclear facilities in Northwestern Russia still represent a
substantial security risk and pollution hazard. They include facilities that are still operating as well
as others that have been closed
down. Power generation from
the old reactors at the Kola and
Leningrad nuclear power plants is
of particular concern to Norway.
It is essential to give high priority
to nuclear emergency response
arrangements so that the population, business interests and the
environment can be protected
against radioactive pollution.


###### Ü


-----

The Government considers it
important to take an international
approach to the nuclear safety
problems in Northwestern Russia,
but as a neighbouring country,
Norway must also play a major
independent role.


n


Norway will therefore con

institutions in Tromsø, particularly with a view to follow-up of
the integrated management plan
for the Barents Sea–Lofoten area
and environmental monitoring
in the High North. The Norwegian Polar Institute will head the
Management Forum that is to be
responsible for the coordination
and overall implementation of the
scientific aspects of the integrated
management plan and the Institute
of Marine Research, including its
Tromsø department, will play a
key role in this work. n


Pollutants are transported northwards
to the Arctic by air,
ocean currents and
rivers. Here a polar
bear is being tested
for heavy metals.


tinue to play a part in resolving
the nuclear safety problems in
Northwestern Russia until the
most important tasks have been
completed. Norway will also reinforce its efforts to promote the use
of alternative energy sources in
the region.

**Building up expertise in Tromsø**
The Government will take steps
to build up expertise on climate
issues and environmentally hazardous substances in the Arctic at


-----

-----

-----

#### part 6 The management and utilisation of marine resources

##### arge parts of the Norwegian Sea and the Barents Sea
# L
##### are under Norwegian fisheries jurisdiction. The most im- portant Northeast Atlantic fish stocks spend part or all of their life cycle in our sea waters. The harvesting of marine resources depends on the overall functioning of the eco- systems and thus requires extensive knowledge of all the elements of these ecosystems and of ecosystem structure and functioning.


**Resource management – a basis**
**for value creation**
A marine environment that is
clean and rich in resources,
sustainable, ecosystem-based
management with a long-term
perspective, and systematic
generation of knowledge form
an essential basis for the utilisation of living marine resources
and hence also for realising the
value potential in the High North.
The proximity to top quality fresh
raw materials in the northern sea
areas gives Norway a competitive
advantage that the Government
considers important to utilise.

The Government’s goal is to make
the Norwegian Sea and the Barents Sea some of the best managed
sea areas in the world. Management of the living marine resources is to be based on the rights and
duties that follow from the Law of
the Sea, and the principle of optimal utilisation of these resources
within a sustainable framework.
The integrated management plan
for the Barents Sea–Lofoten area
clarifies the overall principles that
will apply to management of Norwegian sea areas.


Norway plays an important role in
the International Council for the
Exploration of the Sea (ICES), and
we base our fisheries management
and out management cooperation
with other countries on recommendations from ICES.


management regime, it is necessary to develop a common
understanding based on the best
possible scientific knowledge.
Norway will therefore give priority to marine research in the
High North.

**Cooperation with Russia**
Norway and Russia share the main
responsibility for sustainable management of the environment and
the resources in the Barents Sea.
The habitats of important stocks of
fish, seabirds and marine mammals include both Norwegian and
Russian areas. Management and
commercial activities thus have
cross-border impacts on the environment and resources.

Norway and Russia have been
cooperating on marine research
for almost 100 years, and have for
30 years also been cooperating
efficiently on fisheries manage

n


To achieve a sound fisherie­s


###### Ü


-----

ment with the overall objective of
ensuring sustainable harvesting of
the fish stocks in the High North.
Russia’s engagement and Norwegian-Russian cooperation are of
crucial importance in ensuring
sustainable utilisation of resources
in the Barents Sea.


Fisheries control in
the northern areas
will be stepped up.

and third countries. The Commission is now giving greater priority
to more long-term management
strategies. This is in line with the
recommendations of marine scientists, and ensures greater predictability for the fisheries than annual
management decisions.


n


The Government will strength

###### The Government is currently drafting legislation on marine resources, which will ensure an up-to-date management regime covering all utilisation of living marine resources and genetic material derived from them.

On 15 November 2006, following
an initiative by Norway, the North
East Atlantic Fisheries Commission (NEAFC) agreed on a new
port state control system for the
region. This is a historic decision
in relation to control of the fisheries in our part of the world. Once it
has been implemented, the control
system will close all European
ports to landings of illegally caught
fish. The EU, Iceland, the Faeroes,
Greenland and Russia are behind
the control system.


en cooperation with Russia on
ecosystem-based management of
the whole Barents Sea. The Government will also strengthen the
cooperation between regional fisheries organisations. Funds will be
earmarked for these efforts under
the budget allocation for project
cooperation with Russia.

The Joint Norwegian-Russian
Fisheries Commission is a cornerstone in the management of the
High North. The Commission sets
total allowable catches (TACs) for
shared fish stocks for the whole of
their distribution areas, and splits
them between Norway, Russia


**Illegal, unregulated and unregis -**
**tered (IUU) fishing**
The main obstacle to achieving
sustainable fisheries in the Barents
Sea is illegal, unregulated and
unregistered (IUU) fishing. IUU
fishing is against everyone’s interests, and Norway has engaged in
broad efforts to bring it to a halt.

Norway is developing new legislation that will make it possible
to take more action against IUU
fishing. This will include the legal
authority to deny vessels that
have been involved in illegal fishing the right to call at ports or use
port services.


-----

n


The Government will seek to


strengthen cooperation on fisheries management in international
forums, particularly in the Joint
Norwegian-Russian Fisheries
Commission and the North East
Atlantic Fisheries Commission
(NEAFC). Norway will be a driving force in efforts to ensure that
any decisions that are made are
implemented and enforced.


n


The Government will continue


cooperation with the authorities in
Russia and other countries in the
fight against IUU fishing. Efforts
to prevent illegal catches being
landed in foreign ports will be
intensified. Furthermore, measures will be implemented to deny
the vessels involved access to
Norwegian ports and port services. We will also seek to establish
tracing systems that can disclose
sales of illegally caught fish.


Norwegian inspection of the catch
on board a foreign
vessel.


n


The Government will make


it possible for the Norwegian
Coast Guard to carry out more
extensive fisheries control in the
northern sea areas. The cooperation between the Norwegian Coast
Guard and the Russian Regional
Coast Guard will be further developed to ensure that control of fisheries in the Barents Sea is coordinated as closely as possible. The
police and prosecuting authority
will consistently take action whenever illegal fishing is detected, in
cooperation with the law enforcement bodies in Russia.

The Russian authorities have for
several years imposed unreasonable restrictions on research cruises
by Norwegian marine research ves

sels in the Russian economic zone.
Inadequate coverage of the distribution areas of fish stocks means
that TACs are set using incomplete
scientific data. The best possible
decision base for setting TACs can
only be achieved if researchers
from both countries have access to
the whole of the Barents Sea. Norwegian marine scientists should be
able to work in the Russian zone
under the same conditions as those
that apply to Russian scientists in
the Norwegian zone.

It is increasingly being found that
applications from other countries
for consent to carry out research
cruises in Norwegian waters
include activities that go beyond
research and are more designed
to serve commercial interests.
The regulation of such activities
has become particularly important
due to the interest in bioprospecting targeting cold-water corals and
sponges on the Norwegian continental shelf .

Marine bioprospecting must be
regulated in a way that allows
Norwegian institutions to further develop their knowledge
and expertise on marine genetic
resources and safeguards Norway’s rights and a share of any
ensuing financial gain.


new rules on marine bioprospecting in the seas under Norwegian
jurisdiction, for example in connection with the drafting of new legislation on marine resources and on
the protection of the natural environment, landscape and biological
diversity. n


n


The Government will draw up


-----

-----

#### part 7  Petroleum activities

##### here will be considerable development activities in
# T
##### connection with petroleum operations in the southern Bar- ents Sea in the next few years. This may be of major signifi- cance for competence-building and for local and regional business development in the future.
 The Government’s aim is that Norway will be the best stew- ard of resources in the High North, with oil and gas opera- tions that meet very stringent environmental standards, and with continual knowledge generation, research and development in the petroleum sector.


The resources in the Barents Sea
are strategically well positioned
in relation to the rapidly growing
transatlantic liquefied natural gas
(LNG) market, and could also
make an important contribution
to meeting the growing demand
for pipeline gas in Europe. It is
also likely that the Barents Sea
will become increasingly important in the global energy supply context due to the political
will in many countries to reduce
dependency on supplies from
the Middle East. The resources
in the Barents Sea could provide
long-term secure energy supply
to the markets in Europe and the
US within an environmentally
sustainable framework. In its
integrated management plan for
the Barents Sea–Lofoten area,
the Government has established
a predictable framework governing where in the Barents Sea, and
under what conditions, petroleum activities can be carried
out. Large areas have been made
available, at the same time as particularly valuable and vulnerable


areas are ensured satisfactory
protection.

There is now considerable interest
and optimism regarding petroleum
activities in the southern Barents
Sea. More and more companies
want to participate actively in
this area, which may become an
important petroleum province in
the future. This can have important spin-off effects on local and
regional business development.

The development of the Snøhvit
field off the coast of Finnmark is
the first milestone in the establishment of petroleum operations in
the southern Barents Sea. The
future prospects are good, and several new developments are being
considered. The development of
Goliat, the oil zone in the Snøhvit
field and the building of a second
gas processing unit on the island
of Melkøya off Hammerfest could
lead to development activities in
the area well beyond 2015, and
could involve investments of over
NOK 50 billion.


The Government will encourage
operators of fields in the High
North to establish qualification
schemes for local and regional contractors in connection with these
developments. Petroleum activities on the scale that we are now
glimpsing the contours of will be
an important stimulus for growth
in the counties of Finnmark and
Troms, and will provide a considerable number of jobs in the region.
This will again make demands on
the education system. The Government will therefore strengthen
higher education capacity in this
part of the country.

It is also important to ensure sufficient exploration activities so that
additional reserves can be proven
and produced. Attention must
be directed both to the relatively
mature areas near Snøhvit and
Goliat and to the immature areas
in other parts of the southern Barents Sea. Blocks were awarded
in the 19[th] licensing round at the
same time as the publication of
the integrated management plan,
and the conditions are in line with


###### Ü


-----

the plan. The exploration of these
blocks will provide information on
larger areas. This will be important in the long-term exploration
of the Barents Sea.


Barents Sea, and future Russian
petroleum activities could be an
important market for Norwegian
industry.


n


Given its geographical posi

n


The Government will follow an


active licensing policy that takes
into account the need to follow up
exploration results and the need to
open up new areas for exploration.
The expansion of petroleum activities eastwards in the Barents Sea
would have a positive effect on the
development of eastern Finnmark.
Considerable resources have been
proven in the Russian part of the

###### The Government will pursue an active licensing policy, following up on exploration results and responding to the need for further areas for exploration. 


tion, Finnmark could benefit from
positive ripple effects from the
development of the Russian part
of the Barents Sea as well as the
Norwegian part. The Government
will cooperate actively with Russia
in the petroleum field to encourage
such benefits. n


-----

-----

-----

#### part 8 Maritime transport – safety and emergency response systems

##### t is in Norway’s interest, and also the responsibility of any
# I
##### coastal state, to ensure high standards for safety at sea, search and rescue services, and oil spill response in order to protect the riches of the sea. Increased activity on both the Norwegian and the Russian side of the border in the High North will lead to an increase in the volume of maritime transport and add to the environmental pressure.


Increasing economic activity in
the High North is making reliable
monitoring of maritime transport
increasingly important.

In the spring of 2006, Norway
submitted a proposal to the International Maritime Organization
(IMO) for the establishment of a
ships’ routeing and traffic separation scheme outside Norway’s territorial waters between Vardø and
Røst (i.e. from eastern Finnmark
to the southern tip of the Lofoten
Islands). The scheme, which is
expected to be finally approved by
IMO in December 2006, will be a
milestone in Norway’s efforts to
improve safety at sea and oil spill
response. Ships’ routeing and
traffic separation are necessary
to meet the challenges associated with increasing oil transport
along the coast of North Norway.
According to the proposal, all tankers and cargo vessels with a gross
tonnage of more than 5000 that
are engaged in international trade
will be routed further out from the
coast, to about 30 nautical miles
from land.

Shipping following the routeing
system will be within the coverage area of the Norwegian Coastal
Administration’s chain of AIS


maritime safety in the waters
around Svalbard.

###### We will strengthen maritime safety in the waters around Svalbard, for example by extending the scope of the Harbour Act and establishing a mandatory system requiring the employment of local peo- ple with thorough knowledge of the waters around Svalbard to pilot vessels sailing in these waters.

The scope of the Harbour Act will
be extended to include Svalbard
so that fairways can be regulated
in the same way and according to the same rules as on the


(Automatic Identification System)
stations, which means that it will
be possible to monitor traffic from
the vessel traffic service centre in
Vardø. The establishment of the
scheme will improve maritime
safety and mean that assistance
can be provided more rapidly if a
vessel is in difficulties.


n


The Government will improve


###### Ü


The cruise ship
_Hanseatic ran_
aground in Murchisonfjorden in
Svalbard in July
1997.


-----

In early December 2006,
IMO approved Norway’s
proposal for the establishment of a ships’ routeing
and traffic separation
scheme along the coast of
North Norway.

mainland. A mandatory system
requiring the employment of local
people with thorough knowledge
of the waters around Svalbard
to pilot vessels sailing in these
waters will also be established.
On 9 July 2006 the Government
submitted a draft maritime safety
act to the Storting and proposed
that the act should be applicable
in Norwegian territorial waters
around Svalbard and Jan Mayen.
This would pave the way for
strengthened port state control of
foreign vessels in the archipelago.


north. This would be particularly
useful in the Norwegian Economic Zone, the Fisheries Protection Zone around Svalbard, the
fisheries zone around Jan Mayen,
the Banana Hole, the Loophole
and the eastern Barents Sea. A
satellite-based AIS system would
help Norway to exercise its sovereignty and monitor resources
more effectively. It would also be
a supplementary tool for monitoring tanker traffic and releases of
pollutants and would help to make
search and rescue operations
more effective.


n


The Government will consider


establishing a satellite-based AIS
system as a supplement to the
existing land-based AIS system
along the entire coast of mainland
Norway.

A satellite-based system would not
provide continuously updated traffic information, but would cover
Norway’s entire sea territory
and other areas of interest in the


###### We aim to be leaders in the field of safety at sea, rescue services and oil spill response in the north.

Norway and Russia have developed close and effective cooperation on maritime safety and oil
spill response in the north. This


-----

cooperation has led to the decision to jointly establish the Barents
VTMIS (Vessel Traffic Management and Information System).
These measures, combined with
the new vessel traffic service centre in Vardø, will help to improve
the monitoring and control of maritime traffic in the north.

Increased activity in the Barents
Sea is creating a need to step up
search and rescue services correspondingly. Round-the-clock
readiness was introduced at the
SAR helicopter base at Banak
in 2006. In its 2007 budget, the
Government proposes allocating
NOK 16.5 million in order to make
it possible to introduce roundthe-clock readiness at the SAR
helicopter base at Bodø as well in
the second half of 2007. The Government also intends to cooperate closely with other countries in
the region on search and rescue
services and emergency response
within the framework of the Barents Cooperation.

Measures and infrastructure to
improve maritime safety, oil spill
response and search and rescue
services will provide a framework
for safe, environmentally sound
and efficient transport corridors in
the High North. This will be necessary to ensure a good transport
system, particularly for petroleum
products, to the markets. Thus,
Norway is playing an active role in
creating a framework for the use of
large sea areas, and also maintaining a presence in these areas.

Because of the strategic position of
Jan Mayen in the western part of


###### Increased activity means new opportunities for Norwegian shipping, but also new chal- lenges related to safety and emergency preparedness. Priority must be given to ac- cident prevention.

the Arctic Ocean, the installations
on the island are an important
part of Norway’s infrastructure.
They are also important in connection with the development of safe
and efficient transport corridors
in the High North. In addition,
Jan Mayen is used as a depot for
aircraft fuel. The Government has
decided to maintain the operative
status of the LORAN-C radio navigation station until the end of 2009.
This has a bearing on the level of
activity on Jan Mayen, since one
of the four Norwegian stations is
located on the island. The Govern

ment considers it important to
maintain activity and settlement on
the island.

Increased activity in the High
North, both on land and at sea,
requires high-quality meteorological services. It is therefore necessary to develop and improve the
meteorological observation system
in the High North. n


-----

-----

#### part 9 Business development

##### well-functioning labour market and business sector
# A
##### are essential in order to ensure economic development and prosperity in the north. It is important for the northern parts of country to develop a diversified business sector that it is less vulnerable to cyclical and structural changes in individual markets.


In line with its policy platform, the
Government intends to further
develop industry and promote new
industrial activity in North Norway,
as in other parts of the country.

North Norway has a considerable
energy-intensive industry that benefits from, or has benefited from,
long-term electricity contracts
with prices determined by the
authorities. The Government has
launched a broad review aimed
at identifying optimal solutions
to improve the electricity supply
situation and provide industry with
stable, long-term electricity contracts at competitive prices.

###### The Government intends to pursue a proactive and fu- ture-oriented business policy in the north by making use of North Norway’s comparative advantages and focusing on sectors where the region is particularly competitive, like the marine and maritime sectors, environmental tech- nology, energy and tourism.


The potential for value creation in
the High North should be realised
within a predictable framework
and in line with the principles of
sustainable development. The
integrated management plan for
the Barents Sea–Lofoten area is
an important part of this framework. The Government will also
facilitate further development of
the cross-border economic cooperation with our neighbouring
countries in the north.


ing considerable funds to business development and innovation


in North Norway as part of its
regional policy. In the government budget for 2007, a total of
NOK 483.6 million is earmarked
for the three counties in North
Norway and to Innovation Norway for this purpose.

In addition, there are national
programmes and a compensation
scheme for employers’ contribution. In the light of the opportunities and challenges arising from
the oil and gas activities in North
Norway, the Government intends
to review these programmes and
measures in 2007 to assess whether they can promote innovation in
the business sector in North Norway more effectively.


n


Efforts will be made to ensure


###### Ü


n


North Norway continues to


be the part of the country that is
given highest priority in the allocation of regional policy development
funds for direct business support
and general business development.

The reintroduction of the differentiated employers’ contribution provides the business
sector in the north with particularly favourable opportunities to
develop both knowledge-based
and labour-intensive business
activities. This scheme replaces
the sector-based schemes that
were introduced to compensate
for the changes to the employers’
contribution scheme in 2004.


that a robust Norwegian settlement is maintained in Longyearbyen. We will continue to
develop a sustainable community
in Svalbard, taking into account
considerations of environmental
management, research, advanced
technology, coal mining and tourism in such a way as to ensure that
the archipelago is preserved as
one of the world’s best managed
wilderness areas.

**Resource-based business activity**
The Government’s strategy is
that the natural resources in the
High North should be further
developed and utilised in a sustainable way that increases value
creation in Norway as a whole as
well as in the region.

In a European context, North Norway has vast wind energy potential. This is particularly the case in


n


The Government is allocat

-----

The Government intends to


n


###### The Government will im- plement measures aimed at compensating for the seasonality of the fisheries in the north. North Norway’s proximity to the fisheries is an advantage that should be exploited.

Finnmark county. At present, there
are two wind farms in Finnmark
with a combined capacity of 80
MW. In addition, prior notification
and applications for the construction of facilities totalling 600 MW
have been submitted, and further
projects are at the planning stage.
However, the current transmission capacity will only allow for an
increase of about 120 MW. A possible extension of Snøhvit’s train
II could increase local electricity
consumption by a few hundred
megawatts.


gramme has been developed,
aimed at increasing market focus
and strengthening the profitability of the marine sector in
areas that have particular need for
restructuring.

The aquaculture sector has significantly increased its production
and productivity during the recent
period, due in part to restructuring. However, the sector still has
major growth potential, particularly in North Norway.


promote growth in the fisheries
sector by stimulating cod farming and catch-based aquaculture.
This will play an important role in
providing the processing industry
with more stable access to raw
materials, compensating for the
seasonality of the fisheries in the
north and improving the sector’s
ability to meet the markets’ delivery requirements.


n


A marine value creation pro

###### The Government is drafting a new act on the acquisition and exploitation of mineral resources, which will pave the way for sound utilisation of mineral deposits in the north.


The fisheries are, and will continue to be, one of the cornerstones
of business activity and settlement,
and thus of Norwegian presence,
in the north. The northern sea
areas are among the most productive in the world, and the marine
fish stocks are at sustainable
levels and well managed. There is
demand for Norwegian fish products in the international markets,
and Norwegian fish achieves good
prices. Employment in the fisheries and processing industry has
been declining for many years,
partly as a consequence of modern fishing vessels, less labourintensive production methods and
the fact that processing is increasingly carried out abroad. However,
export volumes are stable, and the
total export value is on the rise,
which means that value creation
among the active players in the
sector has increased.

North Norway’s proximity to the
fisheries is a particular advantage
that should be exploited. In its
policy platform, the Government
declared that it would draw up a
national strategy for the development of the fishing industry based
on the advantage we have due to
our access to fresh raw materials
of high quality. The strategy is now
being developed.


n


The Government will promote


n


In October 2006 the Govern

aquaculture based on new species,
and is in the process of awarding
10 new licences for salmon and
trout farming in Finnmark.

Strengthening Norway’s sea food
sector, both in terms of value
creation and marketing, will create opportunities for investment
downstream in the value chain.
The authorities can contribute by
helping to develop expertise and
networks.


The Government considers it
important to promote development
in the agricultural sector in the


ment presented a new support
scheme for renewable electricity,
under which wind power producers will receive NOK 0.08 per produced kilowatt-hour for 15 years
from 2008.


The Government considers it
important that the fisheries should
continue to play an important role
in securing settlement and business activity in rural areas, and
that the revenues generated by the
fisheries should benefit the communities that are most dependent
on this sector.


-----

north, as this can help to secure
settlement and robust local communities. Measures in this area
will primarily be drawn up in connection with the annual agricultural settlements. The further development of the agricultural sector
in Arctic areas based on regional
advantages would strengthen food
production and value creation, and
would also promote innovation and
greater diversity.

Being one of the world’s richest
areas in terms of mineral deposits,
northern Scandinavia is attracting
considerable international interest. Northern Sweden and northern Finland have recently seen a
marked increase in mineral exploration and extraction. The mineral
sector is important for business
development in North Norway as
well, both locally and regionally.
There are favourable conditions
for more extensive NorwegianSwedish cooperation in this sector.


The Government is currently
drafting a new act on the acquisition and exploitation of mineral
resources. It is important that the
exploration and exploitation of
mineral resources is conducted
within a well-regulated framework
to ensure that local communities
benefit from ripple effects in the
form of value creation and employment. The Government wishes
to strengthen societal control to
ensure that resources are utilised in a responsible manner that
takes both environmental and
indigenous peoples’ concerns into
account. In drafting this legislation, importance is being attached
to sector expertise, public control
and safety and clean-up.

**Knowledge-based business**
**activity**
It is the Government’s strategy
to facilitate the further development of a knowledge-based
business sector in the High
North, with particular focus


on seizing the opportunities
in the resource-based sectors. A strong knowledge base
in North Norway will also be
important for the development
of cross-border business activity
between Norway and Russia.

Industrial restructuring has
made expertise and labour
available in North Norway,
and this has resulted in new,
future-oriented employment
opportunities in the region. The
Government’s industrial policy
will provide the conditions necessary for centres of industrial
expertise to develop.

The development and operation
of oil and gas fields on the Norwegian continental shelf has led
to considerable activity in the
contractor industry. The industry
employs about 50 000 persons in
all counties, but the heaviest concentration is southwards down the
coast from Central Norway. The Ü


-----

As regards Norwegian industry’s
participation in petroleum activities
in Russia, the Government will support the work that is being done by
contractor networks and business
associations to improve local companies’ capacity to pre-qualify for
complex tendering processes.


n


The authorities will encourage


partnerships between established
local companies and larger, competitive oil and gas companies, for
example through the Federation
of Norwegian Industries, INTSOK
and Innovation Norway.

Russian companies have expressed
an interest in using Norwegian
services and/or infrastructure in
North Norway in connection with
the transport of oil and condensate products. This is a new type
of activity that has considerable
economic potential for the actors
involved, and that may have considerable positive ripple effects
for the coastal communities in the
north. This is, however, contingent
on activities being conducted in
an environmentally sound manner
and in compliance with applicable environmental and safety
legislation.


North Norway has
very high wind
power potential.


development of the Snøhvit field
is an example of the local ripple
effects that the petroleum activities can create in North Norway.
Companies from North Norway
have signed contracts worth more
than NOK 3 billion, of which 2.2
billion has gone to companies from
Hammerfest and Alta.

###### The Government will seek to ensure that the petroleum activity in the Barents Sea has as positive an effect as pos- sible on local and regional business development.


n


It is the Government’s goal


to ensure that the ripple effects
of increased petroleum activities in the Barents Sea benefit
business development in North
Norway. Therefore, the Government intends to launch a project to
identify ripple effects based on the
experience gained so far.


There is considerable spacerelated activity in North Norway
and Svalbard. This is playing an
increasingly important role in
business development in the High

###### The Government will facilitate the development of the space industry and space-related infrastructure in the north.


-----

North. The activities span from
scientific education and research
to the production of goods and
services by advanced technology
companies.


n


Through cooperation with


actors like the Norwegian Space
Centre, the Government will promote further development of the
space industry in the north and of
space-related services in Tromsø,
at Andøya and in Svalbard.

Efforts in this area include participation in the development of
space-related infrastructure similar
to the Galileo programme. Such
infrastructure is also becoming
increasingly important for other
Norwegian business activities, for
example the utilisation of resources like fisheries, oil and gas, and
for environmental monitoring and
management.

There are many companies that
possess a high level of expertise in
maritime transport and logistics in
Norway or under Norwegian control. The maritime sector is among
our most international sectors, and
it has a broad interface with the
service sector. Container transport
of industrial goods and raw materials still has a dominant position,
but the development is towards
increasingly specialised ships
designed to carry one specific type
of cargo.

It is the Government’s aim that
Norwegian shipping and Norwegian maritime industries should
participate actively in economic
activities in the High North. Norwegian ships and offshore vessels are


among the world’s most advanced
and are therefore well suited to
operate in northern waters.

###### The Government will enco- urage the Norwegian ship- ping and maritime sectors to participate actively in econo- mic activities in the High North.


n


Norway will work actively in


the EU and IMO to ensure that
maritime transport in the north is
environmentally friendly and safe.
We will also look into whether current international rules for the construction and operation of ships
in Arctic areas are adequate, or
whether Norway should take the
initiative to change the rules.

Tourism is to an increasing degree
providing employment and value
creation in the High North, but
there is still room for further
growth in this sector. The authorities will therefore continue their
efforts to promote North Norway
and Svalbard as tourist destinations. It is, however, important to
ensure that the natural and cultural
heritage, on which the tourism is
largely based, is safeguarded.

###### The Government intends to intensify efforts to promote North Norway and Svalbard as tourist destinations.


The Government
will provide a good
framework for the
development of
tourism in Finnmark
and the rest of
North Norway.


###### Ü


-----

n


The Government will provide


Gimsøy bridge.


a favourable framework for the
development of culture-based tourism in North Norway.

North Norway and Svalbard will
be promoted as attractive destinations in the colder seasons as well.
The purpose is to increase activity
in the tourism sector during periods when there is a lot of surplus
capacity and the level of activity
is generally low. In cooperation
with public and private actors,
Innovation Norway has launched
a three-year marketing campaign
in selected markets abroad to promote Finnmark in particular as a
winter tourist destination.


n


The Government will develop a


national tourism strategy, built on
closeness to nature and culture.
It will be in line with the efforts to
promote green tourism and will
seek to develop the role of the tourism sector as a regional industry.

Access to seed capital may be crucial for companies with considerable potential for development and
value creation. The Government
has therefore established two
rural seed capital funds in North
Norway with a total of more than
NOK 510 million, of which the
Government has contributed NOK
350 million. Through public-private


###### Good infrastructure is a pre- requisite for the development of trade and economic acti- vities. It is the Government’s strategy to further develop the infrastructure in the north, particularly with this in
 i


cooperation, the funds, which are
located in Tromsø and Bodø, are
intended to ensure that companies
in the whole of North Norway
have better access to risk capital.

**Infrastructure**
At the end of 2008 or beginning
of 2009, the Government is planning to present a white paper on
the National Transport Plan for
the period 2010–2019. During the
preparation of the plan, the Government will discuss infrastructure
needs in the High North with the
Nordland, Troms and Finnmark
county authorities, with a view to
reducing distance costs for individuals and businesses. The county
authorities will first be asked to
share their views on how a transport policy for the High North
should be designed, and subsequently invited to discuss infrastructure projects and particularly
important measures. The transport
infrastructure in North Norway
must provide for good communication north–south and east–west.


n


A well-developed road network


will increase the efficiency of the
business sector in the region. For
the period 2006–2015, there are
plans for several large construction
projects (in Helgeland, Ofoten and


###### The Government has estab- lished two seed money funds targeted at rural areas in North Norway to ensure that businesses in the region have
 i k i l


-----

###### The Government supports the initiative to establish an international transport corri- dor from Central Asia to North America through the port of Narvik.

tion from Narvik to North America.
The port of Narvik would be connected by rail with the Russian railway network via the Ofoten railway
and the Swedish and Finish railway
networks. In line with its policy
platform, the Government will support the development of Narvik’s
port facilities and railway terminal
as freight volumes increase. It
these volumes grow significantly, it
will be necessary to build efficient,
modern port and railway terminal
facilities. Initially, only minor modifications to the existing infrastructure would be needed to handle
smaller volumes. Should the need
for increased capacity on the Ofoten railway line become necessary,


###### Ü


Alta) on the trunk roads as well as
measures to improve the standard, maintenance and operation of
other national roads. Preventive
measures against avalanches and
snowdrifts are also intended to
improve transport conditions.


n


The Nordland railway line


plays an important role in freight
transport. In order to maintain
this important role, priority will be
given to measures that increase
speed and capacity and improve
punctuality.


n


The Government will ensure


good transport services along the
coast from Bergen to Kirkenes.
In this connection, implementation of the agreement between the
authorities and Hurtigruten Group
regarding public purchase of coastal steamer services between these
two points in the period 2005-2012
is important.
The agreement ensures a direct,
daily, year-round passenger trans

The port of Narvik
will play an important role in the
North East West
Freight Corridor.

port service between Bergen and
Kirkenes, and freight transport
between Tromsø and Kirkenes. In
the budget proposal for 2007 we
have therefore proposed introducing a net wage scheme for employees on the vessels that provide the
services on this route. The coastal
steamer service is also important
for the development of the tourist
sector in the north.

It is important to secure North
Norway direct access to major
international markets, since
this will open up new opportunities for industrial and business
development.


initiative to establish an international transport corridor through
the port of Narvik.

The corridor, known as the North
East West Freight Corridor, consists of a rail link between Central
Asia and Narvik and a sea connec

n


The Government supports the


-----

The Government intends to


the Government would look into
this at a later stage.


n


###### In the years to come, the Government will prepare the implementation of the North- ern Maritime Corridor (NMC) project under the Interreg programme.

Another project that could have
great impact on transport in the
High North is the Northern
Maritime Corridor (NMC) project
under the Interreg programme.
Norway, Russia and six other
countries are participating in the
project.


reduce the maximum fares on the
air connections in Finnmark and
northern Troms and to improve
connections between eastern and
western Finnmark.

The Government attaches great
importance to ensuring good air
services in this part of the country,
where air transport fulfils a particularly important function, and it
will carefully monitor the effects of
the planned price reduction.


n


A regional air connection has


Nikel to Kirkenes. The national
transport authorities, Sør-Varanger
municipality, the Barents Secretariat and the regional council for eastern Finnmark have started a rough
assessment of the project based on
previous studies and reports. This
assessment will be an important
basis for the Government’s own
assessment of the matter.

High-quality electronic communication systems are crucial
for future activity and business
development in the north. These
systems need to be reliable, have
sufficient capacity to handle large
amounts of data and be adapted
to new areas of application. The
Government is aware of the challenges connected with providing
infrastructure for electronic communication in the northernmost
counties, due in part to the large
distances involved and the limited
demand in some areas. An assessment will therefore be made of
how the Government can help to
provide future-oriented solutions.


**Cross-border business activities**
Cooperation with Russia is developing rapidly, and trade is growing at a quick pace. An increasing
number of Norwegian businesses
are active in Northwestern Russia,
and contact across the border is
closer than ever. Norwegian and
Russian companies are engaging
in close and extensive cooperation
in a growing number of fields. The
Norwegian authorities will facilitate business development in the
High North and promote Norwegian business interests in Russia.


n


In the years to come, the Gov

ernment will develop this project
through cooperation aimed at
linking the ports in the corridor
and developing them into logistics hubs. In Moscow, the NMC
is regarded as part of the Northern Sea Route from Murmansk
in the west to the Russian Pacific
coast in the east. In Brussels the
NMC is regarded as an important
transport link between Europe and
Northwestern Russia and as one of
the EU’s “Motorways of the Sea”.

Air transport, which ensures quick
transport of goods and passengers,
is becoming increasingly important in the High North. The Ministry of Transport and Communications provides support for regional
air connections. A large number of
these tendered air services serve
routes in the High North.


###### The Government intends to ensure that a future-oriented communications infrastruc- ture is developed in the three northernmost counties.

in this connection continue to consider the transport needs across
the Norwegian-Russian border and
whether there is reason for the
Government to carry out a new
assessment of a project to extend
the Russian railway network from


been established on the route
Tromsø-Kiruna-Luleå, with connection on to Murmansk. This
has been possible due to the EU’s
Interreg programme for the High
North. Together with regional
actors, the airport operator Avinor
is conducting surveys that may
provide a basis for further development of air connections and other
measures to provide infrastructure
for air transport in the High North.
It is a goal to develop efficient
cross-border transport solutions
in the north. The Government will


-----

###### It is the Government’s strate- gy to facilitate a considerable increase in economic activity between Norway and Russia in the north, for example by promoting knowledge gene- ration, innovation and busi- ness development.

Russian membership of the WTO
and subsequent membership of
the OECD is important in order to
create a transparent and predictable framework for economic
activity. It is an aim to initiate
negotiations on a free trade agreement between EFTA and Russia
once Russia has become a member
of the WTO. Such an agreement
could help to increase bilateral
trade between Norway and Russia.

The Government will consider
the possibilities of establishing an
economic and industrial cooperation zone that would include both
Norwegian and Russian territory
in the border area in the north.
Norway intends to develop a
proposal with a view to presenting
it to the Russian authorities. The
proposal could then be further
developed by a Norwegian-Russian working group established for
this purpose. In the development
of the proposal it will be important
to assess to what degree existing
measures can be used. At the same
time, the Government will continue its efforts to facilitate increased
business cooperation by means of
other measures.


n In order to stimulate increased themselves in the region. SIVA’s

investment from North Nor- activities will focus particularly on
way across the border, Innova- the Norwegian equipment industion Norway’s regional office in try and subcontractors.
Vadsø is stepping up its activities
focused on Northwestern Rus- The technological expertise and
sia. In August 2006, an Innovation experience Norway has gained
Norway representative took up from building a strong petroleum
work at the consulate general in cluster is likely to be useful in our
Murmansk. cooperation with Russia. The trans
fer of expertise between contrac
SIVA’s (Industrial Development tors and oil companies on the NorCorporation of Norway) engage- wegian continental shelf can also be
ment in Murmansk and Arkhan- of benefit to foreign partners. The
gelsk is an important contribution same applies to efforts to establish
to the economic ties between Nor- industry associations and supplier
way and Russia in the north. An networks. Increased transfer of
innovation centre and a business expertise between Norwegian and
incubator are being established Russian companies could also make
to promote economic relations it easier for Norwegian companies
and improve Norwegian compa- to meet the Russian authorities’
nies’ opportunities for positioning requirements as regards the partici
pation of local contractors in the

###### The Government will help to

development of petroleum activities

###### promote Norwegian business in the Barents Sea. interests and investments in

n The Government supports the

###### Russia. establishment of Norwegian-Russian


###### Ü


-----

contractor networks in the petroleum industry. INTSOK’s partnership
project for the Barents Region and
Russia will be stepped up.

###### The Government supports the establishment of Nor- wegian-Russian supplier networks in the petroleum industry.


Russian economic and industrial
cooperation zone.


maritime infrastructure in North
Norway, the Government will
introduce measures that make it
easier for ports, supply bases and
shipyards on the Norwegian side
of the border to provide goods
and maintenance, repair and other
services for activities and commercial interests on the Russian side


n


In order to strengthen the


###### The Government will coope- rate with the Russian autho- rities to reduce technical and legal trade barriers.

Government will seek to ensure
that this decision is implemented
as soon as possible as a trial
arrangement. If warranted by traffic volumes, the Government will
seek to have the extended opening hours made permanent.


n


The Government intends to


The Government will cooper

n


strengthen economic cooperation
with our neighbours in the Barents
Region – Sweden, Finland and Russia. Norway also intends to continue the cross-border cooperation
with Russia under ENPI (European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument), the Kolarctic
neighbourhood programme, the
Northern Periphery programme
and other EU programmes. In this
context the three northernmost
counties play an important role.

Fish and seafood constitute a large
part of Norway’s exports to Russia. The regulatory obstacles to
which this export is subject should
therefore be limited to a minimum. At the same time, Russian
labour is essential to our fishing
industry, and a scheme has been
established under which Russian
manpower can be employed in the
industry. An assessment will be
made of whether similar schemes
should be established to facilitate the employment of Russian
manpower in other sectors. This
could be relevant in connection
with the assessment of the plan for
the establishment of a Norwegian

It is vital that the restrictions
on freight and passenger traffic
across the Norwegian-Russian
border are kept to a minimum.
Agreement has been reached
with the Russian authorities on
extending the opening hours at
the Storskog border crossing. The

###### The Government will pro- pose the establishment of an economic and industrial cooperation zone that would include both Norwegian and Russian territory in the border area in the north. In the de- velopment of the proposal it will be important to assess to what degree existing measu- res can be used


ate with the Russian authorities to
reduce technical and legal trade
barriers (customs procedures,
technical standards, etc.). A bilateral working group will also be
established to work on technical
and legal harmonisation.


Norway and Russia have signed
a new visa agreement, which is
expected to enter into force in the
first half of 2007. This agreement
will make border-crossing simpler
for many categories of travellers.


n


The Government will estab

lish a working group including
representatives of affected public
bodies at the national, regional and
local level to review the Norwegian procedures at Storskog and at
Norway’s foreign service missions
with a view to simplifying bordercrossing still further. The Russian
authorities will also be approached
in connection with these efforts. n


-----

#### part 10 Follow-up

The Government’s High North
strategy will be followed up as
follows:

The Government will launch an
open Internet consultation on the
strategy with 15 January, 2007 as
the deadline for input. Submitted comments will be published
throughout the process so that
they can also be discussed.

The strategy will form the basis
for the Government’s further
High-North-related efforts. These
efforts will have budget implications. Allocations for specific measures will be considered in connection with the ordinary budget
process.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs
will on behalf of the Government
report regularly on the implementation of the strategy. n


-----

-----

-----

-----

