Norwegian Ministry of Defence
Norwegian Ministry of Justice and Public Security

# Support and Cooperation

A description of the total defence in Norway


-----

-----

# Support and Cooperation

A description of the total defence in Norway


-----

-----

# Foreword

The international security situation has become
ever more demanding, and necessitates a higher
than ever level of civil-military cooperation to
safeguard civil protection as well as public and
national security. Today’s threat- and risk picture
is very different from that of a few years ago. The
increased flow of migrants to Europe, a number of
serious terrorist attacks, more frequent extreme
weather events and flooding, cyber-attacks and
a demanding security policy development, are
but some examples. One of the Government’s
measures to meet many of these challenges is
to further develop the civil-military cooperation
within the framework of the total defence
concept.

There is a clear division between civil and military
responsibilities that is built on solid political and
constitutional foundations. The Government
has the overall responsibility for upholding
public- and national security. Civil authorities
and agencies are responsible for ensuring public
safety. The Norwegian Armed Forces are primarily
responsible for the preservation of Norway’s
independence and sovereign rights, and for
maintaining national security by defending the
country from external attacks. However, civil
and military emergency preparedness and crisis
management are interdependent, and continuing
cooperation is therefore a necessity. Civil-military
cooperation is also important in maximising the
utilisation of society’s total resources, and thereby
contributing to good social economy.

Thus, the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of
Justice and Public Security have key roles in the total
defence. The Government places great emphasis on
cooperation, coordination and joint training exercises
between all actors in civil protection and emergency


preparedness, in order for society to be as well
prepared as possible in the face of serious incidents
and crises.

To achieve cooperation in the best possible way, it
is vital that the relevant players in both the civil and
military sectors have thorough knowledge of the
applicable systems and mechanisms of civil-military
cooperation within the total defence. The purpose
of this work of reference is to contribute to ensure
that the current total defence concept is grounded
in the civil- and military sectors. At the same time,
the description of the applicable systems and
mechanisms will form an important element in the
basis for further development of the total defence.
The target group is primarily people engaged in civil
protection and emergency preparedness, but the
publication could also be relevant for all interested
parties. We aim to update the work of reference
on a regular basis. This edition replaces the edition
published in 2015.

Oslo, 8 May 2018

PHOTO: Sturlason / UD PHOTO: Olaf Heggø,PHOTOvisjon


_Minister of Defence_


**Tor Mikkel Wara**
_Minister of Justice and_
_Public SecurityTor Mikkel Wara
Minister of justice, public security and immigrationFrank Bakke-Jensen
Minister of Defence_


-----

-----

### INNHOLD

FOREWORD 5

2. THE TOTAL DEFENCE, CIVIL PROTECTION AND CIVIL-MILITARY COOPERATION 8

2.1 Introduction 8

2.2 Development of the total defence concept 9

2.3 A broad security concept 13

2.4 Hybrid threats 14

2.5 War and armed conflict 14

2.6 Civil-military cooperation and the total defence concept 15

2.7 The institutionalization of the total defence concept 15

3. ORGANIZATION OF EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND CRISIS MANAGEMENT 16

3.1 General principles for work related to emergency preparedness and crisis management 16

3.2 The publicly-organised rescue service 17

3.3 The Ministry of Justice and Public Security’s coordinating role in public security,

civil protection and emergency preparedness 18

3.4 Critical societal functions 19

3.5 Important participants in the civil emergency preparedness 20

3.6 National emergency preparedness system 26

3.7 Security policy crises 27

3.8 Serious cyber attacks 28

3.9 Nuclear preparedness 29

4. THE ROLE OF CIVIL SOCIETY IN THE TOTAL DEFENCE 30

4.1 The role of civil society in the total defence 30

4.2 General on supply preparedness and civilian support to the Norwegian Armed Forces 31

4.3 Current framework conditionsfor civilian support to the Norwegian Armed Forces 32

4.4 Collaboration with business and industry 33

4.5 International rules of war and the total defence 34

4.6 Key legislation relating to emergency preparedness and response 35

4.7 The key responsibilities of the emergency preparedness Ministries in the total defence 39

5. THE ROLE OF THE DEFENCE SECTOR IN THE TOTAL DEFENCE 48

5.1 Security- and defence policy objectives and the defence sector’s role in the total defence 48

5.2 The Ministry of Defence 49

5.3 Defence sector agencies 50

5.4 The Norwegian Armed Forces support to civilian society 60

5.5 The Norwegian Armed Forces support to the Police 60

5.6 The Norwegian Armed Forces support in security of vital and important

objects with security forces 63

5.7 The Norwegian Armed Forces’ support to other public authorities 63

5.8 Other Norwegian Armed Forces support to civil society 64

6. CENTRAL CRISIS MANAGEMENT AND COOPERATING AGENCIES WITHIN THE TOTAL DEFENCE 68

6.1 National crisis management- and cooperating agencies within the total defence 68

6.2 Cooperation- and readiness agencies within the total defence 71

7. CIVIL-MILITARY COOPERATION IN AN INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT 80

7.1 Civil-military cooperation in the UN, NATO, EU and OSCE 80

7.2 UN 81

7.3 NATO 83

7.4 EU 85

7.5 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe 87

7.6 Bilateral- and multilateral cooperation 87

8. APPENDICES 95

8.1 Appendix 1 95

8.2 Appendix 2 97

8.3 Appendix 3 98


-----

2. THE TOTAL DEFENCE, CIVIL PROTECTION AND CIVIL-MILITARY COOPERATION


**2.1 Introduction**

“Support and Cooperation» is designed for actors
in both the civil and military sectors with roles
within the total defence. Although the target
audience is primarily people engaged in emergency
preparedness and response, the publication should
also be relevant for all interested parties. The
publication is a work of reference that describes
responsibilities, roles and authorities within
the total defence, and places emphasis on the
provision of information on the applicable systems
and mechanisms within the total defence concept.
The main emphasis is placed on describing
the systems and mechanisms at the national
level. Total defence systems- and mechanisms
include support arrangements, interaction
mechanisms and coordination fora governed by
laws, regulations, royal decrees, instructions and


relevant agreements within the total defence in the
military and civil sectors.

In a complex threat situation, it is vital to have
good cooperation between civil and military
actors. Society has become more vulnerable
because of centralization, specialization and
reliance on information- and communication
technologies. At the same time, society is expected
to function more or less as usual during a crisis.
Although the Norwegian Armed Forces’ main
task is to defend the country against external
aggression or pressure, their ability to contribute
to civil protection is also important. In addition,
the Norwegian Armed Forces have become
more integrated with civil society as a source of
competence, the supply of goods and services,
and technology. This further enhances the need
for cooperation, based on a mutual understanding


-----

of roles and responsibilities through joint training
exercises and interaction between military and
civilian actors.

In the decades after the Cold War, the work of
civil support to the Norwegian Armed Forces
was paid little attention. At the same time, the
Norwegian Armed Forces’ dependence on civil
support increased. Now, the security changes
has also increased the need for the Norwegian
Armed Forces to strengthen their readiness. Today,
there is renewed emphasis on the work of civilian
support to the Norwegian Armed Forces, while the
civilian state of readiness must to a greater extent
meet the challenges associated with security crises
and armed conflict.

This chapter provides an introduction to the
development of the total defence concept and a
number of key terms. Chapter 3 gives an overview
of how the work of emergency preparedness
and crisis management is organised. In addition,
a description is provided of important actors in
the civil emergency preparedness sector. Chapter
4 outlines the key emergency preparedness
legislation and the various ministries in the civil
sector with their responsibilities within emergency
preparedness and crisis management. The relevant
directorates and agencies are described under
each ministry. Chapter 5 presents a summary of
the defence sector’s role in the total defence, and
a selection of relevant legal authorities. Chapter
6 provides a description of crisis-management
agencies and collaborating agencies at the national
level. Cross-sectoral agencies that are called upon
when needed are referred to under the relevant
ministries. Chapter 7 provides an overview of civilmilitary cooperation in international organisations,
multilateral fora and Norwegian contributions to
operations outside Norway.

**2.2 Development of the**
**total defence concept**

**_2.2.1 The traditional total defence concept_**
The total defence concept was developed in
the period after the Second World War. The
recommendations of the Defence Commission of
1946, underlined the importance of strengthening
the Norwegian Armed Forces by means of a total


defence concept. The defence of Norway should be
built on both a military defence and a broad civil
emergency preparedness. The objective was both
to safeguard Norway’s territory, independence
and national values, and to protect the civilian
population.[1]

The total defence concept was thus closely
linked to the civil protection and emergency
preparedness legislation, and was based on the
idea of utilizing society’s limited resources as
effectively as possible, primarily at the upper level
of the crisis spectrum (armed conflict).

**_2.2.2 The development of the_**
**_modernized total defence concept_**
The disintegration of the Soviet Union and the
Warsaw Pact in the early 1990’s changed the
security policy situation. The invasion threat
against Norway was dramatically reduced, and
more attention was given to the importance of civil
protection. This made it necessary to adapt the total
defence concept to meet the challenges.

From a civilian viewpoint, the Report to the
Storting No. 24 (1992-1993) emphasises that future
_civil protection and emergency preparedness is an_
important milestone. The report underscored,
among other things, that emergency preparedness
in peacetime and in war had to be seen in context,
and that a reduction in society’s vulnerability
would be a key tool in the effort of making society
more robust.[2]

The so-called Vulnerability Commission, led by
Kåre Willoch, delivered its report in 2000. The
Commission put forward a number of proposals
aimed at reducing the vulnerability of society
within the various sectors of society.[3] The report
was followed up with the White Paper to the
Storting No. 17 (2001-2002) Civil protection – the
_path to a less vulnerable society, which presented_
the concept of civil protection, and a broad
approach to addressing society’s vulnerability.

The extreme terrorist attacks against the USA on

1 The Total Defence. Historical, contemporary- and future
challenges, p. 21. Published by The Norwegian Directorate for
Civil Protectionand FO in February 1998.

2 The Total Defence. Historical, contemporary- and future
challenges, p. 24.

3 NOU 2000: 24. A vulnerable society. Challenges to the security- and
_emergency preparedness and response efforts in society._


-----

September 11, 2001 illustrated with full clarity the
severity of the threat posed by international terror
networks to our society and, ultimately, to our
national security. This led to increased emphasis
on civil protection and emergency preparedness
designed to counter malicious acts and the role of
the Norwegian Armed Forces in such situations.

The changing threat- and risk situation after the
end of the Cold War resulted in the Norwegian
Armed Forces’ contribution in dealing with
civil protection and emergency preparedness
challenges becoming more important, and the
traditional total defence concept had to be
reconsidered in the light of this development.

4 5 cf. Recommendation to the Storting No. 318 (2007-2008) for

**The modernized total defence concept**
The Storting approved expansion and
modernization of the total defence concept
in the Recommendation No. 234 (2003-2004)
for the White Paper No. 42 (2003-2004) and
the Recommendation No. 49 (2004-2005) for
the White Paper No. 39 (2003-2004) for an
expansion and modernization of the total
defence concept

The Storting has also later addressed this
subject, and has emphasized that the total
resources available in wartime also should be
available for use in difficult, crisis-like events in
peacetime[4]. This underlines the importance of
the Norwegian Armed Forces - and to a greater
extent than before - emphasises support to civil
society during crises in peacetime. Today, this
is incorporated as one of the Norwegian Armed
Forces’ specific tasks in contributing to the
safeguarding of civil protection and other key
societal responsibilities.

The modernised total defence concept
encompasses mutual support and cooperation
between the Norwegian Armed Forces and
civil society in connection with contingency
planning, crisis management and consequence
management across the entire crisis spectrum

- from peace via security policy crisis to armed
conflict. It is no longer a prerequisite that

the White Paper No. 48 (2007-2008 – 2008) A defence for the
_safeguarding of Norway's security, interests and values_


emergency preparedness legislation enters into
force for the support to be said to lie within the
framework of the total defence concept.

Comprehensive and obligatory civil support
to the Norwegian Armed Forces in crisis
situations will still be contingent on whether
emergency preparedness legislation may be
applied. Today, the main principle in respect of
civil support to the Norwegian Armed Forces
is based to the greatest possible extent on
commercial arrangements and cooperation
with civil protection and emergency
preparedness agencies. This also applies in
cases where civil protection and emergency
preparedness legislation may be applied.

The Infrastructure Committee[5] designated several
measures to strengthen the security of critical
infrastructure. Several of these were followed
up in the White Paper No. 22 (2007 – 2008)
_Civil protection and emergency preparedness –_
_cooperation and coordination, which also focused on_
collaboration and cooperation both nationally and
internationally to address future risk, threat- and
vulnerability situations.

Following the debate in the Storting regarding
Recommendation No. 265 (2004-2005) cf.
White Paper No. 37 (2004 – 2005)[6], the Storting
approved the Government’s proposed measures
to strengthen the system for crisis management
abroad and national crisis management, including
the establishment of the Emergency Council, the
Emergency Support Unit and the Lead Ministry
arrangement. An important basis for this was the
report of the Tsunami Evaluation Committee on the
disaster in South Asia.

In the White Paper to the Storting No. 48 (2007
– 2008)[7], the Storting was advised that a review
and an update would be made of the civil-military
cooperation arrangements and mechanisms within
the framework of the total defence. In 2010, a
working group presented a report which concluded

5 NOU 2006:6 When security is the most important.

6 Report to the Storting No. 37 (2004 – 2005) The tidal wave disaster
_in South Asia and central crisis management._

7 The White Paper to the Storting No. 48 (2007 – 2008) A defence to
_protect Norway's security, interests and values_


-----

that most of the arrangements are, in the main, still
adequate for the challenges facing Norway. The
weaknesses that were revealed mainly concerned
civil society’s preparedness systems for supporting
the Norwegian Armed Forces in the event of a
security policy crisis or armed conflict. The project
that was initiated to follow up on the report was
finalized in 2016, while some remaining measures
were to be implemented by the responsible
agencies.

The terrorist acts in Oslo and on Utøya island on
July 22, 2011 led to a comprehensive evaluation of
civil protection and emergency preparedness. One
of the main conclusions of the report from the 22
July Commission [8] was that too much went wrong,
and that important elements of the authorities’
civil protection and emergency preparedness and
crisis management capabilities were not good
enough. 22 July was followed up in White Paper
73 S (2011-2012)[9], White Paper 29 (2011-2012)[10]
and White Paper 21 (2012-2013)[11], all of which
emphasised the importance of strengthening
general civil-military cooperation, in particular
related to preparedness for acts of terrorism.

The White Paper No. 73 S (2011-2012) concluded
that the main elements of the Norwegian Armed
Forces’ structure basically are dimensioned to
resolve the Armed Forces’ primary tasks. At
the same time, support to civil society must
be considered in assessing the organisation

8 NOU 2012:14 Report from the 22 July Commission.

9 The White Paper No. 73 S (2011-2012) A defence for our times.

10 White Paper No. 29 (2011-2012) Civil Protection.
11 White Paper No. 21 (2012-2013) Terrorism preparedness.


and dimensioning of the Norwegian Armed
Forces’ individual capabilities. This is relevant
when planning dedicated missions, emergency
preparedness instructions, localisation, training
requirements, exercises and training, as well as
the ability to interact with actors outside of the
defence sector.

Since the end of the 1990’s, Norway, like
other countries, has been engaged in ongoing
international operations and has extensively
restructured the defence sector. Focus on
international operations also contributed to the
fact that - over a long period of time - planning
and preparation of civil support to the Norwegian
Armed Forces was not prioritised. Following the
Norwegian Core Initiative in 2008, the importance
of defending Member States, preventing armed
conflict and deterring potential adversaries was
given renewed emphasis in the alliance. In 2010,
the Norwegian Chief of Defence was commissioned
to update operational plans for the defence of
Norway. Since then, this has been followed up to
ensure the Norwegian Armed Forces an updated
overall military strategy at all times. This ongoing
planning also clarifies the need for civil support
to the Norwegian Armed Forces’ structure and
operations at the highest level of the crisis
spectrum. Due to changes to the threat and risk
picture and the need to revitalize planning for
defence of national territories, this work has been
given higher priority in both Norway and NATO.
NATO has developed new plans for reinforcing the
defence of Member States and conducts cyclical
revisions of the overall planning work. In 2017, the Flowers in memory of 22 July 2011


-----

Chief of Defence was instructed by the Ministry
of Defence (MOD) to adapt the national plan to
NATO’s plan for reinforcing the defence of Norway.
As part of this work, it is also intended that the
planning and preparation of civil support to the
Norwegian Armed Forces will also take into account
support to allied reinforcements.

White paper No. 151 S (2015 – 2016)[12] stated that
the Government will further develop the defence
sector’s ability to support civil authorities in
civil protection and emergency preparedness.
The principle that the Norwegian Armed Forces’
support should lie within the frame of the available
capabilities at any time is continued. Nevertheless,
in certain areas the support should to a greater
extent be determining for the organisation and
dimensioning of the Norwegian Armed Forces’
capabilities. Furthermore, renewed emphasis
must be placed on support the other way, i.e. civil
support to the military that has been given little
attention in recent years. At the same time, the
Norwegian Armed Forces’ dependence on civil
support has increased, and security policy changes
have increased the need for the Norwegian Armed
Forces to strengthen their preparedness.

12 White Paper No. 151 S (2015 – 2016) Combat force and

_sustainability — Long-term plan for the defence sector._


The White Paper No. 10 (2016 – 2017)[13] discussed
the need for civil protection and emergency
preparedness to also meet challenges related
to security policy crises and armed conflict.
Plans need to be worked out for civil support
to the Norwegian Armed Forces in crisis and
armed conflict, also including support to allied
reinforcements. Such support must also be
exercised. At the same time, several measures
for improvement must be implemented in order
for civil crisis management and civil protection to
better be able to take advantage of the support
from the Norwegian Armed Forces. The report also
states that a designated programme is going to be
established to further develop the total defence,
and to fulfil NATO’s seven baseline requirements to
resilience of critical societal functions.

The White Paper No. 38 (2016 – 2017)[14] was the
first White Paper to the Storting on ICT security
and was a follow-up of the report from the Digital
Vulnerability Committee (Lysne Committee).[15] The
White Paper defined four areas of importance

13 The White Paper No. 10 (2016-2017) Risks in a safe and secure

_society – Civil Protection_

14 The White Paper No. 38 (2016 – 2017) ICT Security — A common

_responsibility._

15 NOU 2015: 13 Digital vulnerability - a safe society — protecting

_individuals and society in a digitized world.Military patrol and a shepherd in Afghanistan_


-----

_national security. That is to safeguard the security_
needs associated with the State’s existence,
sovereignty and integrity. When national security is
threatened, it can legitimize the efforts of many, or
all, of the state’s available resources. Such threats
will often have security policy aspects.

Traditionally, national security has been particularly
linked to territorial defence (defence from
invasion). National security can also be challenged
by political and military pressure against the
Norwegian authorities or through more limited
plots and attacks against Norwegian authorities
and interests.

The emergence of new security challenges has led
to exposure to new hazards to the social structure
itself, including plots by non-governmental actors,
as well as a number of challenges related to
increased dependence on, and vulnerability in
respect of, critical infrastructure, environmental
and climate-related events etc. A consequence
of this is the need for increased emphasis on civil
_protection and emergency preparedness.[16] Civil_
protection and emergency preparedness is about
protecting the safety of the civilian population, and
securing critical societal functions and important
infrastructure from attacks and other damage.
The need for civil protection and emergency
preparedness must be addressed in all serious
situations, including situations defined as a threat
to national security.

International developments since 1990 have also
resulted in more attention being paid to human
_safety and security. This is about the protection of_
individuals, whereby human rights and the right to
life and personal safety are the focus of attention.
Human safety and security have been the focus
of the development we have seen in recent years,
where the international community has felt forced
to intervene, including with military means.

The Norwegian Armed Forces’ primary tasks are to
uphold Norway’s sovereignty and sovereign rights,
and to defend the nation from external attacks
(national security), while the primary responsibility
of civil authorities is to secure civil protection.

16 The White Paper to the Storting No. 48 (2007 – 2008) A defence to

_protect Norway's security, interests and values, p. 24; White Paper_
No. 318 (2007–2008), p. 39.


for national ICT security. Preventive ICT security,
ability to detect and deal with cyber-attacks, ICT
security competence and critical ICT infrastructure.
A changed security policy situation, combined with
hybrid threats, makes civil-military cooperation
in cyberspace more relevant than ever before.
The defence- and civil sectors increasingly
utilise a shared ICT infrastructure, and services
are purchased from commercial enterprises.
When digital vulnerabilities are an issue, good
cooperation between civil and military authorities
is essential.

**2.3 A broad security concept**

The development of the total defence concept
can be viewed in the context of changed security
needs, and perceptions of the national civil
protection and emergency preparedness – from a
strong focus on national security to an increased
emphasis on civil protection as well.

The design of national emergency preparedness
is based on the idea that the security concept
encompasses national security, public security, civil
protection and the security of the individual. The
central purpose of security policy is to safeguard


-----

This is an established division of responsibilities
which has solid political and constitutional roots
in Norway. The Storting has determined that the
Norwegian Armed Forces, as one of its tasks,
should also support civil protection and other
critical societal functions.

The Norwegian Armed Forces’ assistance to
civil society is normally a supplement to the civil
authorities’ crisis management. The Norwegian
Armed Forces basically provide support within
the areas where they have unique expertise or
resources that others do not have. This includes
assisting civilian authorities in connection
with accidents, rescue operations and natural
disasters. Through its resources and capabilities,
the Norwegian Armed Forces also have special
capabilities in helping to prevent and combat plots
and attacks against the country’s population,
infrastructure and capacity to govern.

The sectors’ mutual interdependence entails a
comprehensive need for cross-sectoral cooperation
in order to meet new security challenges. For
example, most sectors are today extremely
dependent on a well-functioning energy sector
and a robust information- and communications
infrastructure.

**2.4 Hybrid threats**

Hybrid threats and instruments, in this context,
are understood to mean threats from state- or
non-state actors, or the use of a combination
of political, military, and economic instruments,
as well as information and civilian means to
exploit vulnerabilities, create turmoil and achieve
objectives[17]. The use of the term hybrid threats has
increased in recent years, although it really does not
imply anything fundamentally new. The term may
have its foremost value in raising awareness of how
actors can influence through a combination of overt,
and covert, military and non-military measures.

The purpose of the use of hybrid threats is to
influence the authorities of a country to make
decisions in favour of the aggressor - decisions
that would not have been reached without such

17 The White Paper No. 10 (2016-2017) Risks in a safe society – Civil

_Protection p. 112._


a hybrid campaign. Such a method creates
uncertainty and confusion about what is happening
and about the intention behind the activities.

Individual incidents may occur within various
sectors, and at considerably long intervals. To
uncover incidents as part of a unified campaign,
and to be able to deal with them in the best
possible way, is thus a demanding task.

A situation with hybrid threats and incidents
will often be challenging in terms of attributing
individual incidents to a single aggressor. It creates
doubts as to whether individual incidents can be
seen in context, and it may be unclear what the
aggressor wants to achieve. Since the distinction
between peacetime, security crises and armed
conflict may be unclear, it may be challenging
to determine whether a threat situation is of a
civilian- or military nature. This calls for good
civil-military coordination in order to agree on
countermeasures.

**2.5 War and armed conflict**

The international rules of war distinguish between
two types of armed conflict: international- and
non-international armed conflicts. Previously
it was more common to use the term “war” for
international armed conflicts, which involved a
conflict between two or more states, and implied
that one of the parties formally had declared war.
Today, the term “war” is used in many different
contexts and often imprecisely. The debate around
the war term relating to Norwegian participation
in international operations is one example of this.
The term “war” has its own meaning according
to Norwegian law, for example in relation to
civil protection and emergency preparedness
legislation. This would not be natural to use if
Norwegian forces were to participate in an armed
conflict that does not affect Norwegian territory,
or if Norway was to be struck by terrorist attacks
that, due to their nature, would be regarded as an
armed attack on the nation according to the UN
Charter.

Today, it is more common to use the term armed
_conflict. An armed conflict is a conflict between_
states or groups involving the use of armed force.


-----

There are two types of armed conflict: international
and non-international armed conflicts. In this
publication, we have chosen to mainly use the
term armed conflict since it covers several types
of conflicts that it is relevant to discuss in today’s
threat picture, rather than the more traditional and
narrow term war. However, in some cases the term
_war is used. This is when it is most appropriate_
to use it for historical reasons, or when it is used
based on sources that use this term. It should be
noted, however, that key legislation within the
concept of the total defence uses the term war.

**International armed conflicts**

**•** [Armed conflict between two or more states]

**•** [Occupation]

**Non-international armed conflicts**

**•** [Armed conflict between a state and a group ]

in the state’s territory

**•** [Armed conflict between a state and a group ]

in another state’s territory

**•** [Armed conflict between different groups]


mutual support and cooperation between the
Norwegian Armed Forces and civil society linked to
crises, from crises in peacetime to security policy
crises and armed conflict. Civil-military cooperation
also includes other forms of cooperation between
civil and military authorities which are not directly
linked to crises and armed conflict. One example
of civil-military cooperation that falls outside the
framework of the total defence concept is the
Norwegian Coast Guard’s permanent fisheries- and
environmental supervision duties.

**2.7 The institutionalization of**
**the total defence concept**

Within the framework of the total defence concept,
a number of formal and informal professional fora
and civil-military cooperation bodies at the central,
regional and local levels have been established.
These contribute in many ways to reinforcing the
institutionalization of the total defence concept.
Most of these cooperating bodies are subjectspecific, and thus have their mandate within a
limited area of the total defence concept.

At the ministerial level, the Emergency Council and
the Ministerial Advisory Board for Public Security
are two important discussion fora for current
issues relating to civil protection and emergency
preparedness.

The National Total Defence Forum is the forum
at the agency level that to the greatest extent
represents the breadth of the total defence. In
the forum, the principal civil and military agencies
and directorates cooperating in the total defence
are represented, and it is a forum for mutual
orientation, collaboration and overall coordination
of all relevant total defence related issues, and
matters related to civil-military cooperation, civil
protection and emergency preparedness.

The various professional fora and cooperating
bodies are discussed in more detail in Chapter 6.


**2.6 Civil-military cooperation and**
**the total defence concept**

The term civil-military cooperation, in principle,
comprises all civil-military cooperation at every
level and spans a very broad field with many
different actors. The content of the concept
is to a large extent situational. In some cases,
the Norwegian Armed Forces support civilian
operations, while in other situations the Norwegian
Armed Forces are supported by civil resources.

The total defence, as a concept, is intended to
ensure the best possible utilization of society’s
limited resources when it comes to prevention,
contingency planning and consequence
management across the entire spectrum of crises.
The total defence concept is thus a part of the civilmilitary cooperation, but is delineated to covering


-----

3. ORGANIZATION OF EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND CRISIS MANAGEMENT


**3.1 General principles for work**
**related to emergency preparedness**
**and crisis management**

The Government has the highest executive
responsibility for both military and civilian emergency
preparedness in peacetime, and for dealing with
crises and armed conflict. The responsibility
for prevention, emergency preparedness and
responsibility for crisis management is mainly
assigned to the individual ministry, its underlying
government agencies and the municipalities. The
work of civil protection and emergency preparedness
is based on four main principles:[18]

**The principle of responsibility means that**
the authority, department or agency, which

18 The White Paper No. 10 Risks in a safe and secure

_society(2016-2017) and White Paper 326 S (2016 – 2017)._


is responsible on a daily basis for an area, is
also responsible for prevention, emergency
preparedness and for the implementation of
necessary measures in emergencies and disasters.

**The principle of similarity means that the**
organization that comes into operation during
crises should be as similar as possible to the
organization that operates on a daily basis.

**The principle of proximity means that crises are to**
be handled at the lowest possible organizational level.

**The principle of collaboration demands that the**
public authority, private enterprise or government
agency has an independent responsibility to ensure
the best possible cooperation with relevant actors
and agencies in the work of prevention, emergency
preparedness and crisis management.Personnel in charge of preparedness gathered for operational planning


-----

The principles of responsibility, similarity, proximity
and cooperation apply at all levels of management.

There has always been an extensive collaboration
between the participants in the total defence.
After the lessons learned from the terrorist
attacks on July 22, 2011, this was evidenced by the
collaboration principle being included as one of the
fundamental principles.

Security policy crises and nuclear accidents will,
by their nature, always require an overall control
and coordination at the national government level,
but could nonetheless lead to the initiation and
implementation of actions and management at all
levels.

The joining of forces between relevant actors
is implemented both in the form of direct
cooperation, and through a number of cooperating
agencies in the total defence. Their main function
is to contribute to coordination and the exchange
of information between the various ministries and
agencies. Most have only a consultative function,
however some also have an operational function in
crises and armed conflicts.

An appropriate crisis management system
presupposes an adequate level of flexibility, so that
the established structures may be easily adapted
to suit different situations. At the same time, it
will be imperative to have clear lines of command,
roles and responsibilities during crises. The Lead
Ministry[19] is responsible for coordinating crisis
management at the ministry level. The designation
of a Lead Ministry does not entail changes in
constitutional responsibilities, and all ministries
retain the responsibility and decision-making
authority for their respective sectors. The Ministry
of Justice and Public Security (MOJ) is designated as
the permanent Lead Ministry in civil national crises,
unless otherwise determined. In the event of a
security policy crisis and armed conflict, the Ministry
of Defence (MOD) and the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs (MFA), by virtue of their sector responsibility,
will have a special responsibility for dealing with
defence-, security- and foreign policy issues.

19 Instructions for the Ministries’ work on civil protection (the Civil

Protection Instruction), established by the Ministry of Justice and
Public Security on September 1, 2017.


The ministries’ crisis-management tasks are
primarily related to the collection and processing of
information, development of the basis for decisionmaking and making administrative and political
decisions on actions, including the assessment of
need for international support. In addition, they are
to ensure good communication with the underlying
agencies, the media and the public and provide the
underlying agencies with the necessary powers. This
work must be coordinated with other ministries and
especially with the ministry that is designated as the
Lead Ministry.

The overall principles of responsibility, similarity,
proximity, and collaboration form the basis of all
security- and emergency preparedness efforts.
In addition to sector responsibility, the MOJ is
assigned a coordinating role on the civilian side
to ensure a holistic and coordinated emergency
preparedness, and to coordinate preventive
ICT security. Similarly, the MOD has an overall
responsibility for both emergency preparedness
and ICT security in the defence sector.

The framework for the national crisis-management
apparatus is described in the civil protection
instructions.[20]

**3.2 The publicly-organised rescue service**

The Norwegian Rescue Service is organized
according to the collaboration principle. This
implies that all Government agencies, including
the Norwegian Armed Forces, are obliged to
participate in rescue operations with appropriate
and available resources. Furthermore, all
Government agencies taking part in rescue
missions will have their additional costs to their
normal budgets covered. Private and voluntary
resources that are suited to emergency efforts
to save lives, may also be mobilized to assist the
public rescue service[21].

The MOJ has the overall administrative
responsibility for coordinating land-, sea- and air
rescue services. The operation of the rescue service
is organised by the Joint Rescue Coordination

20 Ibid.
21 Royal Decree of June 19, 2015. Organization plan for the rescue

service.


-----

Centres, located in Bodø and Sola, and 12 local
rescue centres located in the regional police
districts. The Governor of Svalbard is responsible
for the local rescue centre within its jurisdiction.
The Joint Rescue Coordination Centres have the
overall operational responsibility for the rescue
service and direct all sea- and air rescue operations.
Responsibility for land rescue is in the hands of
the local rescue centres, which are led by the local
police commissioner. The local rescue centres alert
the Joint Rescue Coordination Centres immediately
of any possible rescue operation.

The Norwegian Armed Forces are important actors
in the rescue service and, whenever needed, assist
civil society in the event of accidents and disasters.
The Norwegian Armed Forces’ Operational
Headquarters has an overview of the military
assets that can be made available for rescue
operations at any time.

Rescue helicopters are a very important resource for
the rescue service. The Government owns, and the
MOJ has the operational- and budget responsibilities
for, the rescue helicopter service and, among other
things, sets targets related to readiness, availability
and reaction time. The Norwegian Armed Forces
educate, train and man the rescue helicopters with
the necessary crews. The Norwegian Armed Forces
operate the helicopters according to the agreement
with the MOJ, and are responsible for maintenance
and logistics for the public rescue helicopters. The
duties of the helicopters in peacetime are to conduct
search- and rescue missions, air ambulance missions


and other publicly beneficial missions as quickly
and safely as possible by commission from the Joint
Rescue Coordination Centres. The rescue helicopters
may also provide support for crisis management in
Norwegian onshore- and offshore territories. They
are to have a supporting role both in the Police’s and
the Norwegian Armed Force’ efforts, in maritime
counter-terror operations at sea, and with the need
for other transportation support to the Police.

The Joint Rescue Coordination Centres are the
authorities that decide which operations the
standby rescue helicopters are to carry out. The
rescue helicopters are stationed at six locations in
Norway - at Banak, Bodø, Ørland, Florø, Sola and
Rygge respectively. In addition, the Norwegian
Armed Forces are capable of operating rescue
services using all their helicopters, vessels and
maritime surveillance aircraft, as well as other
resources when required.

**3.3 The Ministry of Justice and Public**
**Security’s coordinating role in public security,**
**civil protection and emergency preparedness**

The MOJ has a general coordinating role in the
civil sector for public security, civil protection
and emergency preparedness. The Ministry is
responsible for holistic, systematic and risk-based
efforts at the national level across all sectors[22].

22 Established by Royal Decree March 10, 2017


-----

**3.4 Critical societal functions**

In accordance with the civil protection instruction[23],
as mentioned above, the MOJ is responsible for
developing and maintaining an overview of critical
societal functions. This overview is embedded in
the Ministry’s annual budget proposition, and is
detailed and concretized in the “Critical societal
functions[24]” report.

Responsibility for coordination and collaboration
between the 14 critical societal functions is
distributed between a total of eight different main
responsible Ministries. The main responsible
Ministries are to keep track of the vulnerability
situation, and to develop status- and situation
assessments for the societal function(s) for which
they are responsible.

The following societal functions are signalized as
vital to civil protection, with the main responsible
Ministry[25] in parentheses:

**1.** Management and crisis management (MOJ)

**2.** Defence (MOD)

**3.** Law and order (MOJ)

**4.** Health and care services (Ministry of Health
and Care Services)

**5.** Rescue service (MOJ)

**6.** ICT security in the civilian sector (MOJ)

**7.** Nature and the environment (Ministry of
Climate and Environment)

**8.** Supply security (Ministry of Trade, Industry
and Fisheries)

**9.** Water and sewerage (Ministry of Health and
Care Services)

**10.** Financial services (Ministry of Finance)
**11.** Power supply (Ministry of Petroleum and

Energy)

**12.** Electronic communication services (Ministry of

Transport and Communications)

**13.** Transport (Ministry of Transport and

Communications)

**14.** Satellite-based services (Ministry of Transport

and Communications)

23 Instructions for the Ministries’ work on civil protection (the Civil

Protection Instruction), established by the Ministry of Justice and
Public Security on September 1, 2017.

24 «Vital societal functionality – which functional capabilities must

society maintain at all times?” report from the Norwegian
Directorate for Public Security, 2016.

25 Further reference to the table in Appendix 1.


The MOJ is to have an overview of the status of civil
protection, based on the Ministries’ status- and
situation assessments, inspections, exercises and
other reports from the Ministries.

Furthermore, the Ministry is to devise national
strategies and prepare the basis of overall national
planning, ensure that cross-sector problems and
critical societal functions are managed, and assist
the Ministries in clarifying responsibilities. The MOJ
is also responsible for developing and maintaining
an overview of the functions which, in a crosssectoral perspective, are vital to civil protection.
Coordination responsibilities include ICT security in
the civilian sector.

The Directorate for Civil Protection supports
the MOJ in its general coordination efforts. The
National Security Authority has a corresponding
role in the field of ICT security.

The Ministry of Justice and Public Security’s
responsibilities in the field of national security
have been evidenced in recent years, and have
also been strengthened through the creation of a
Civil Situation Centre and located at the Emergency
Support Unit within the Department of Public
Security. The Emergency Support Unit is intended
to be able to provide support to the Lead Ministry
and the Emergency Council, cf. Chapter 6. The
Emergency Council meets at secretaries general
level not only in emergency situations but also
as an administrative body to ensure coordinated
public security efforts.

The Ministerial Advisory Board for Public Security
meets at deputy director`s general level and
represents an important shared venue in the
Ministerial community for discussion of major
issues and the framework for the work of security
and emergency preparedness.

The MOJ further develops and publishes the Civil
Emergency Preparedness System. This is part of the
National Emergency Preparedness System discussed
later in the chapter.


-----

There is a total of 40 different capabilities in
the area of critical societal functions, with
corresponding requirements to functional ability
that must be maintained at all times.

**3.5 Important participants in the**
**civil emergency preparedness**

**Directorate for Civil Protection**
The Norwegian Directorate for Civil Protection under
the MOJ, has a key role in prevention, preparedness
and crisis management in the area of civil protection.
The Directorate also plays an important role in the
further development of the total defence.

By Royal Decree of June 24, 2005[26], the Directorate
is granted responsibility for registering
developments in national vulnerability and
emergency preparedness.

26 Royal Decree June 24, 2005 Instructions to the Directorate for Civil

Protection and Emergency Preparedness for its coordination roles.


The Directorate has official responsibility for the
Counties Governor in the area of civil protection
and emergency preparedness, and, through
the Counties Governor, works to improve
municipal and regional public security emergency
preparedness. The Directorate conducts
supervision of the ministries on behalf of the MOJ.

The Directorate is the national contact point for
requests from the NATO Euro-Atlantic Disaster
Response Coordination Center (EADRCC), the EU
Emergency Response Coordination Center (ERCC)
and the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). This contact
point receives and processes requests for foreign
assistance, among others. When necessary,
Norway will also be able to request civil support
from abroad through these channels whenever its
own resources are inadequate.

In accordance with these instructions, the
Directorate will also assist the MOJ and other


-----

Ministries in their coordination of civilian efforts
in the event of major crises and disasters in
peacetime, as well as during security policy crises
and armed conflict. In the event of crises, the
Directorate collects and compiles information
from the County Governors, involved agencies
and, where appropriate, from EU, NATO and UN,
analyses this and reports back to the MOJ. The
Directorate exchanges situation reports with key
players, including by liaison with the National Police
Directorate and the Norwegian Armed Forces
Operational Headquarters. Whenever necessary,
the Directorate takes the initiative to establish
collaboration conferences for actors at the agency
level involved in crisis management.

As of March1, 2017, the Directorate overtook
responsibility for civilian emergency and
preparedness communications, including the
operation and management of Nødnett (the
national emergency communication network).

The Directorate assists the MOJ in coordinating
the work relating to national follow-up of the EU
Action Programme and the EU Civil Preparedness
Programme, as well as the work of NATO’s Civil
Preparedness Committee (CEPC).

By means of information retrieval, research and
reporting activities, dialogue, advice and guidance,
the Directorate establishes the groundwork
for effective preventive work and satisfactory
preparedness in the areas of public administration
and critical societal functions. Furthermore, the
Directorate has responsibility for supervision
according to the Product Control Act, the Security
Act, the Fire- and Explosion Prevention Act and the
Civil Protection Act.

**Civil Defence**
The Civil Defence is a uniformed, protected
governmental reinforcement resource subordinate
to the Directorate for Civil Protection, and is
organized in 20 regional districts. Its primary
objective is to ensure civil protection measures in
war time in accordance as laid out by the Geneva
conventions. The Civil Defence has an operational
force (task force) of 8,000 people who have civilian
service duty and are called out according to the Civil


Protection Act.[27] The initial response groups are
experienced and can be mobilized
within an hour.

In peacetime it assists the rescue service,
emergency -and preparedness agencies and
other authorities with personnel and materials in
connection with injury-prevention and damagelimiting measures. It leads rescue efforts at the
injury site, and has order and security authority
in the absence of emergency agencies with such
authority. Authority under this provision should
wherever possible be exercised in consultation
with the Police[28]. Typical events in which the Civil
Defence is used are major accidents, large-scale
fires, floods, landslides, oil spills or searches for
missing persons.

The Civil Defence also forms part of the nuclear
preparedness, operates the public shelters, can
arrange evacuation of a geographical area and
issue warnings to the population during crisis or
armed conflict. Today they operate the nationwide
typhoon warning service.

Internationally, the Civil Defence supports other
relief agencies through the Norwegian Support
Team, which establishes and operates tent camps,
and the Norwegian UNDAC Support that assists
with ICT support during humanitarian disasters.

The Civil Defence has an independent
responsibility for ensuring the best possible
cooperation with relevant actors and agencies in
prevention, emergency preparedness and crisis
management.

During the period 2007-2015, the Civil Defence
underwent a major restructuring. Several
mobile reinforcement units have been built
up, centralization of school activities has been
implemented and investments made, for example,
in new uniforms and personal equipment for
those on civilian service duty. In addition, funds
have been allocated to equip the Civil Defence
Competency Centre at Starum and for replacement
of materials and equipment.

27 Act of 25 June 2010 no. 45: on municipal preparedness, civil

protection measures and the Civil Defence (Civil Protection Act).

28 The Civil Protection Act Section 4 e).


-----

**The County Governor**
The County Governor is the government’s
representative at the county level. The County
Governor has regional coordination responsibility
for civil protection. This coordination responsibility
is authorized in a special instruction[29].

The County Governor is to maintain an overview
of risks and vulnerabilities by preparing a risk- and
vulnerability analysis for the county, in close
cooperation with regional actors. Failures of
critical societal functions and knowledge from
the municipalities’ overall risk- and vulnerability
analyses are to be included in the analysis. The
risk- and vulnerability analysis is to form a common
platform for the prevention of undesirable
incidents and is to strengthen the coordination
of regional work on civil protection, emergency
preparedness and crisis management. The County
Governor also has a role as primus motor for
evaluation and learning from events and exercises.

29 Instructions for the County Governor and the Governor of

Svalbard's work with civil protection, emergency preparedness
and crisis management (the County Governor's Civil Protection
Instructions) of June 19 2015.


The County Governor’s regional coordination
agency is the County Readiness Council which is
comprised of leaders of the regional emergency
preparedness agencies[30].

The County Governor also follows up the
municipalities in their work on civic protection
by providing advice and guidance and acting as
the primus motor for a targeted and systematic
civil protection initiative in the municipalities. The
County Governor is given the role of a supervisoryand objection authority in respect of the
municipalities. His municipal duties are authorized
by the County Governor’s Security instructions,
the Civil Protection Act and Regulations[31]and the
Planning- and Building Act[32].

The County Governor’s coordination role in the
framework of the total defence is established in the
County Governor’s civil protection instructions. The

30 More about the County Readiness Council in Chapter 7.
31 The Act on Municipal Emergency Preparedness, Civil Protection

Measures and the Civil Defence (the Civil Protection Act) of June
25, 2010 with Regulation on Municipal Emergency Preparedness
of August 22, 2011.

32 The Planning and Building Act of June 27, 2008.The Civil Defence


-----

County Governor assists in establishing contact
and facilitating mutual assistance and collaboration
between civilian and military authorities, and
coordinates the civilian sector of the total defence.

In the event of armed conflict, risk of war or similar
situations, the County Governor is responsible
for ensuring that the County’s resources are
distributed and utilized in a manner that meets
the needs of the population, in accordance with
guidelines from the relevant Ministry. If necessary,
and in collaboration with other authorities, the
County Governor will coordinate and prioritize
the needs of the civilian population and distribute
additional resources to the municipalities. The
County Governor will contribute to the provision,
coordination and prioritization of civilian support
to the Norwegian Armed Forces.

The Emergency Preparedness Act can be
implemented in the event of war, risk of war or
similar situations. By implementing the law, the
King may grant the County Governor and other
regional and local authorities additional powers
to take action on behalf of national authorities.
This applies if a situation arises whereby the
County Governor is cut off from contact with the
Government, or where danger may arise from
a situation if decisions are delayed. In such a
situation, the County Governor will make decisions
and exercise authority under the provisions of
the Emergency Preparedness Act, to the extent
necessary to protect critical societal functions.
In such a situation, the County Governor may
be given authority to impose orders on public
administrative agencies and the Police in the
county and revoke their decisions if necessary.
In the event that a combat zone is declared, the
County Governor is obliged to hand over the
management of the county administration to the
military authorities to the extent required under
the provisions of the Emergency Preparedness Act.

In addition to the County Governor’s civil
protection instructions and the Emergency
Preparedness Act, both of which include general
provisions concerning the County Governor’s
regional coordination role in the event of
undesirable events in peacetime, security policy
crises, armed conflict and war, there are a
number of sectorial laws that contain provisions


relating to the County Governor’s roles and
responsibilities within the sectors’ work on civil
protection. For example, this applies to the County
Governor’s function as the regional link of the
Crisis Committee for Nuclear Preparedness[33]
and the County Governor’s responsibility as
the supervisory authority for health and social
preparedness[34] and industrial preparedness[35].

**Municipalities**
The municipal authorities form the foundation
of the work of civil protection and emergency
preparedness. Their function is to coordinate and
to take account of the civil protection challenges
in their local communities, in respect of both their
own and other important actors’ activities.

Pursuant to Act of June 25, 2010 No. 45 on
Municipal Emergency Planning, Civil Protection
and the Civil Defence (Civil Protection Act), the
municipalities are obliged to make a survey of
the type of undesirable incidents that might
occur in the municipality, assess the likelihood
of them occurring and how they could affect
the municipality. The result of this work will be
assessed in further detail, and compiled into an
integrated risk- and vulnerability analysis. The
municipalities will then prepare emergency plans
based on this analysis, establish a municipal crisis
management body and conduct exercises and
other competence-giving measures to ensure their
ability to deal with undesirable incidents.

In addition, the municipalities have emergency
preparedness obligations within a number of
disciplines. The Fire and Explosion Prevention Act
obliges the municipalities to have a fire service that
will act as a response force in the event of fire and
severe accidents, as well as carry out preventive
work within its field of expertise. The fire service
should also be able to perform more specific
preventive and emergency preparedness tasks in
wartime and crisis situations.[36]

33 Royal Decree of August 23, 2013 Mandate and composition of

the Crisis Committee for Nuclear Preparedness with advisers, as
well as the mandate to the County Governor.

34 The Health and Social Preparedness Act (The National Health

Preparedness Act) of June 23, 2000.

35 The Industrial Safety and Emergency Response Act (Industrial

Preparedness Act) of December 16, 2011.

36 Act No. 20 of June 14, 2002 relating to the prevention of fire,

explosions and accidents and the fire service (Fire and Explosion
Prevention Act).


-----

The municipalities have a responsibility under
the National Health Preparedness Act to provide
adequate health preparedness, and to ensure
that necessary health care and social services are
available to the population in the event of war, and
in the event of crises and disasters in peacetime.[37]

In accordance with the Planning and Building
Act, municipalities are obliged to include civil
protection in their planning, and to ensure that
risk- and vulnerability analyses are carried out for
any planned development areas. Municipalities are
responsible for ensuring proper use and protection
of areas and buildings. Special consideration must
be given to particular areas of risk or hazard in land
use planning, and adequate consideration must be
given to civil protection.[38]

Most municipalities have established a Municipal
Emergency Management Planning Committee
as a forum for information and discussion. The
Committee comprises members of various
agencies, enterprises and organizations.

**The Police**
The Police play a major role in civil society’s
emergency preparedness. The Police have
responsibility for maintaining general law and
order, for crime prevention, investigating criminal
offences, protecting the citizens and their lawabiding activities, safeguarding public safety
and protecting critical societal functions and
infrastructure from undesirable incidents.

The Police are tasked with conducting and
coordinating rescue operations on land, in the
event that no other authority has been given this
responsibility, cf. section 27 of the Police Act. The
Police are responsible for implementing necessary
measures to avert danger and for damage
limitation. The Police are responsible for organizing
and coordinating relief efforts until such time as
another authority can take over responsibility. The
latter provision means that the Police are given
cross-sectoral operational responsibility in the
event of accidents and disasters during peacetime
and within all areas of society. This coordination

37 Act of June 23, 2000 no. 56 on health- and social preparedness

(The Health- and Social Preparedness Act).

38 The Planning and Building Act of June 8, 2009 No. 27. Act of

June 25, 2010 No. 45 on Municipal Emergency Planning, Civil
Protection and Civil Defence (the Civil Protection Act).


responsibility may later be transferred to the
County Governor, when conditions allow.

The Police’s total resources comprise the general
police service (the Police and the regional
police force), divided into 12 police districts, the
Norwegian Police Security Service and special
agencies. The Police’s operative personnel alone
constitute a significant emergency preparedness
resource in a crisis situation. The following is a
description of some of the Police’s preparedness
resources, and the systems that the agency has at
its disposal in the event of extraordinary incidents:

The Emergency Response Unit is the Police’s
dedicated task force for combating terrorism,
organised crime and other serious criminal
offences. The unit is organized under the Oslo
Police District, but also assists the other police
districts and the Governor of Svalbard. The
Emergency Response Unit is capable of carrying
out actions against any type of land object, against
ski at speed and offshore installations (see also the
reference to the Norwegian Armed Forces’ Special
Operation Forces in Chapter 6.6). The Emergency
Response Unit also provides tactical advice to the
Police at all levels. The personnel of the Emergency
Response Unit undergo more than 900 training
hours each year, operate regular patrols and are on
standby to assist other police districts.

Emergency response personnel are available in
all police districts. These are specially trained and
equipped to deal with extraordinarily demanding
situations and armed incidents (IP3). These are
service personnel that normally perform daily
operational service.

The main role of the Police Explosive Ordnance
Disposal Unit is to resolve situations involving
explosives, CBRN (chemical, biological, radiological,
nuclear) and to conduct bomb searches prior to VIP
visits. The Police Explosive Ordnance Disposal Unit
also provides advice in the field of explosives and
CBRN.

The Police helicopter service has a fifteen minutes
response time 24/7. The Police helicopter service
is used for search, observation and surveillance
operations. The Emergency Response Unit can also
use police helicopters as a marksman platform. As


-----

of 2019, three new police helicopters will come into
service that also will have transportation capacity.
The Crisis- and Hostage Negotiator Service represents
the Police’s negotiation expertise in terrorist-, hostage
and kidnapping situations. It may either assist
the Police districts independently or support the
Emergency Response Unit in aid missions.

**Voluntary rescue- and emergency**
**preparedness organisations**
Norway has a widespread population, and
resources are often few and far between. The
voluntary rescue- and emergency preparedness
organisations organize local involvement and
local emergency preparedness resources that
are available throughout the country. Voluntary
organizations are the primary resource that can
be drawn on for searches for missing persons, in
mountain rescue and avalanche searches.

The voluntary organizations are also able to
contribute with a number of resources such as
rescue boats, smaller aircraft, cross-country
vehicles, rescue dogs etc.

A wide range of voluntary rescue- and emergency
preparedness organisations exists; spanning from
small local alpine rescue groups to larger, national
organisations with headquarters and permanent
staff. The Norwegian Voluntary Professional
Rescue Organizations’ Forum is an umbrella
organization for segments of the Norwegian
voluntary rescue service. This organization
represents a wide range of rescue services: at sea,
on land and in the air. The following organizations
are members: Norwegian People’s Aid First Aid
and Rescue, the Norwegian Red Cross Emergency
Service, Norwegian Rescue Dogs, the Norwegian
Caving Association, Rovernes Scouting Emergency
Group, Norwegian Aero Club Flying Service and
the Norwegian Radio Relæ Lega Amateur Radio
Club. The Forum is allowed to participate in the
rescue leadership at local rescue centres in all
police districts. Thus, one permanent member of
the rescue leadership represents the voluntary
resources in each police district.

There are also a number of voluntary rescue- and
emergency preparedness that are not members of
the Forum, including the Norwegian Society for Sea
Rescue.


**Civil-military exercises**
Security policy developments indicate that many
threats and challenges will be of a complex and
cross-sectoral character. This necessitates broad
collaboration across agencies and sectors. Thus,
civil-military collaboration exercises are important.

Exercises in civil-military collaboration and crisis
management are carried out regularly between
MOJ, MOD and other relevant Ministries, as well
as between executive agencies and other actors.
Considerable emphasis is placed on collaborative
exercises between the Norwegian Armed Forces
and the Police, as well as other emergency
preparedness actors. The exercises cover both
the Norwegian Armed Forces’ assistance in civilian
crisis management and civilian support to the
Norwegian Armed Forces in security policy crises
and armed conflict. Work is ongoing with the
aim of achieving realistic and targeted civilianmilitary exercises, and of experience from these
being actually used to further develop planning
and practical collaboration. This is necessary to
achieve good dialogue, proper role understanding,
effective collaboration, coordinated planning and
procedures, as well as a mutual knowledge of
needs and capacities.

**Security of vital and important objects**
Securing of vital and important objects (buildings,
factories, installations, areas, etc.) against security
threats can be divided into three different main
categories.

Firstly, the object owner himself is responsible for
preventive object securing, i.e. defensive security
measures. This responsibility is based on The
Security Act and the Object Security Regulation.
Preventive object security is also established in
sector legislation within a number of sectors. This
applies to ports, power supply and airports, to give
some examples. In many cases, sector legislation
is based on international rules regarding such
securing. The Norwegian Armed Forces’ and the
Police’s planning of object securing using security
forces should take into account whether the
objects are subject to preventive basic security
rules. However, this does not preclude the use of
security forces.


-----

The Police are to protect objects from situations
that threaten the general safety of society. The
Police’s use of security forces may be appropriate
in the event of threats to civil protection, such
as terrorist attacks against civilian objects. The
statutory authority for this securing lies in the
Police Act, the Criminal Procedure Act, regulations
and internal agency regulations. In principle, the
Police’s responsibility and duties related to object
securing against crime also apply during crises
and armed conflict. In accordance with relevant
instructions, the Norwegian Armed Forces may
support the Police in securing objects. This
support is provided on the basis of the Police’s
statutory authority. Any need that the Police
may have for pre-planned assistance from the
Norwegian Armed Forces in object securing,
and the objects to which this applies, should be
communicated to the Norwegian Armed Forces.
The Police and the Norwegian Armed Forces are
to collaborate in planning the securing of these
objects. This is regulated by the Instruction for
the securing and protecting of objects with the
use of security forces from the Norwegian Armed
Forces and the Police in peacetime, crises and war.
Military guards and officers have the necessary
military policing authority (cf. the Military Police
Authority Act) and thus have independent
authority to secure military areas.

The Norwegian Armed Forces are also responsible
for securing objects using security forces as part
of the military defence against armed attacks
based on the statutory authority of the rules of
International Law on Self-Defence. Implementation
of such securing objects can only occur if the Nation
is at war, if there is a threat of war,or if the Nation’s
independence or security is at risk; and should only
be carried out using combatant military security
forces. The Norwegian Armed Forces are both
responsible for, and implement the securing. The
Norwegian Armed Forces’ securing of objects
against a military threat may cover both military
and civilian objects that have decisive importance
for defence capability and military defence in
wartime, and that are to be regarded as legitimate
military targets in the event of war. The Norwegian
Armed Forces’ object securing is further regulated
in the Chief of Defence’s key point directive. In
many cases, the Norwegian Home Guard will be the
Norwegian Armed Forces’ most important resource


for both assisting the Police with object securing
and for the Norwegian Armed Forces’ independent
responsibility for object securing.

In situations which could potentially actuate
object securing both against crime and armed
attacks, or where it is unclear which of the two
regimes may be activated, the Police and the
Norwegian Armed Forces should establish mutual
contact, without delay, in order to carry out the
necessary coordination of further planning and
implementation of object securing. If the issue
raises problems of a political or fundamental
nature,or for other reasons does not allow
coordination between the Police and the
Norwegian Armed Forces, it should be referred
to the MOJ and the MOD which will effectuate the
necessary coordination and, if necessary, raise the
issue at the governmental level.

The Instruction for the securing and protecting
of objects with the use of security forces from
the Norwegian Armed Forces and the Police in
peacetime, crises and war was established by
Royal Decree of August 24, 2012. This is based
on other regulations, as mentioned above, but
clarifies responsibilities and sets requirements to
collaboration.

Moreover, see Chapter 6 on the Norwegian Armed
Forces’ assistance to the Police in object securing
and the Security Act.

**3.6 National Emergency and**
**Response System**

The National Emergency Preparedness and
Response System comprises a Civil Preparedness
System and the Emergency Preparedness System
for the Defence Sector. Both are built on the same
structure as NATO’s crisis-management system,
the NATO Crisis Response System (NCRS), but
adapted to national conditions and needs. The
Civil Preparedness System and the Emergency
Preparedness System for the Defence Sector
consist of procedural descriptions, actions and
measures that may be implemented at various
levels of authority. These measures may be
implemented according to the situation and to
achieve an appropriate increase in emergency


-----

preparedness. The field of action of the system
is cross-sectoral crises in peacetime caused by
serious intentional events or threats of such, crises
with a security policy dimension and armed conflict
or threats of such. Non-intentional events, such as
natural disasters, pandemics, etc. do not fall within
this field of action and are handled in accordance
with other relevant contingency plans.

The MOJ is responsible for coordinating the Civil
Preparedness System on the civilian side and for
providing guidelines for updating and publication,
whereas the MOD has corresponding responsibility
for coordinating the Emergency Preparedness
System for the Defence Sector. The National
Emergency Preparedness and Response System
is subject to annual audits, which take place in
civil- and military collaboration, led by the MOJ and
the MOD. All Ministries and subordinate agencies
have to prepare their own contingency plans
based on the National Emergency Preparedness
and Response System. The County Governor is
responsible for coordinating underlying civilian
planning at the regional level.

**3.7 Security policy crises**

The security policy situation of today is
characterized by a broad and complex risk
and threat picture. Thus, unpredictability is a
significant feature of the security policy challenges
that Norway may be faced with. Future political
pressure against Norway cannot be ruled out with
the threat of military force or, at its most extreme,
an armed attack against Norwegian territory. Nor
can it be ruled out that terrorist- and cyber attacks
may represent a challenge to national security. The
boundaries between peace, security policy crisis
and armed conflict are no longer as clearly defined.
The possibility cannot be ruled out that a foreign
state could use a combination of different methods
for political gains. In addition to threats of military
force, there is the possibility of hidden attacks
on critical societal functions, and specific actions
aimed at sowing discord among the population and
distrust of legal authorities.

In this context, a security policy crisis would be
closely approaching an armed conflict or risk of
war situation, whereby our territorial integrity


and national sovereignty are threatened. This
implies a threat to basic and fundamental national
interests, values and objectives. A security policy
crisis could be provoked by both intentional
events or unpremeditated escalation. Important
characteristics of such a situation will be that the
crisis lies in the grey area between peace, security
policy crisis and armed conflict, and has both
a military and international dimension. Thus, a
security policy crisis is normally characterised
by such a situation creating considerable fear
in society and by the measures used, or that it
is feared will be used, having the potential to
threaten the authorities’ ability to protect national
interests. In a security policy crisis and armed
conflict, the implications for national security and
relations with other countries suggest that control
and overall coordination of crisis management
must be handled at the national level of authority.
It is stressed, however, that although the strategic
level will always have a more active and decisive
role in such situations, the responsibility for crisis
management and ongoing administrative tasks by
regional- and local authorities is not necessarily
changed.

Based on the UN pact, NATO is the foundation of
Norwegian security and defence policy. To a great
extent, Norway will endeavour to deal with security
policy challenges in close cooperation with its
allies. However, episodes and security policy crises
may arise that are of such a nature that they will
need to be tackled with the sole use of national
capacities.

Basically, security policy crises will be of a political
nature and will require political action. Measures
taken will be multifaceted, complex and adapted
to the relevant situation. These could range
from diplomatic measures (such as protests
and negotiations), via economic measures and
measures pertaining to international law (such
as sanctions), to military action. The Norwegian
Armed Forces and the Police are the Government’s
machinery of power. While the Police’s tasks are
primarily directed internally, against persons and
actors that violate national laws, the Norwegian
Armed Forces’ tasks are primarily directed
externally, against other States or actors that
violate national sovereignty or threaten the
nation However, military measures must always


-----

be viewed in the context of diplomatic measures
or other measures that are relevant in dealing
with a security policy crisis. The composition and
use of measures will depend on the situation.
Depending on the scope and nature of the crisis,
civilian emergency preparedness resources may
also be used within the total defence concept, i.e.
both to protect civilian needs and to support the
Norwegian Armed Forces.

**3.8 Serious cyber attacks**

Norway is one of the most digitalised countries in
the world. ICT developments provide increasingly
new capabilities to the defence sector and society
at large. At the same time, digitalisation has led to
a change in the risk picture. Errors and failures in
ICT systems occur due to human error, software
faults, equipment failures, as the result of natural
events or a combination of the above. Intentional
adverse events are a growing problem, and
represent a threat to individuals, business and
industry, and public authorities. Attacks can come
from both governmental and non-governmental
actors. This challenges our civil protection, but can
also pose a threat to national security if critical
societal functions are put out of play. The goal of
the attackers may be to commit criminal offences,
to destroy or change information or functionality.
It may also be to acquire information on
national- and business secrets, research findings
or technological innovations from commercial
enterprises.

Each cabinet minister has an overarching
responsibility to maintain ICT security in his or her
own sector. This applies to preventive measures
and the handling of ICT security events in the
sector both in normal situations and in crisis.
Because national ICT security is a cross-sectoral


challenge, the MOJ has a coordination
responsibility for ICT security in the civilian sector,
while the MOD has responsibility for the defence
sector. The MOJ draws up the Government’s policy
for ICT security, including establishment of national
requirements and recommendations in the area of
ICT security for both public and private enterprises.

ICT security is primarily the responsibility of each
individual enterprise. In practice, this means that
responsibility for dealing with ICT security events
lies with the owner of the enterprise, whether
it be in the private or public sector. National
Security Authority is responsible at the national
level for coordinating the handling of serious ICT
attacks on critical societal infrastructure or other
important societal functions, and for organizing
and operating a national warning system for
digital infrastructure. To ensure that all relevant
actors receive the correct warning information
and are enabled to take the necessary action,
each sector Ministry must evaluate the need
to establish response authorities within its
own sector of responsibility. Several such
environments have been established, among
them within the power sector, electronic
communications and the health sector
(called KraftCERT, EkomCERT and HelseCERT
respectively). A framework for dealing with ICT
events was established in December 2017 by the
MOJ in consultation with the MOD. This describes
how the interaction between agencies, sectors,
and the national level should take place.

A Joint Cyber Coordination Centre has been
established for national coordination of cyber
events between the national agencies of the
National Security Authority, the Intelligence
Service, the Police Security Service and the
National Criminal Investigation Service.


-----

**3.9 Nuclear preparedness**

As is the case with security policy crises, nuclear
events will also always be controlled and
coordinated at the national authority level, even
though a number of actors also have executive
duties at the regional and local levels. The Ministry
of Health and Care Services is responsible for
national nuclear preparedness, with the Norwegian
Radiation Protection Authority as the agency
responsible for radiation protection and nuclear
safety. The national emergency preparedness
organization for nuclear events is established by
Royal Decree of August 23, 2013.[39] The mandate
of the Nuclear Emergency Preparedness Crisis
Committee also includes events occurring outside

39 Royal Decree of August 23, 2013 on the delegation of the King's

authority under the Radiation Protection Act Section 16, second
paragraph, to the Nuclear Emergency Preparedness Crisis
Committee.


Norway that may not have direct consequences for
Norwegian territory, but may affect Norwegians or
Norwegian interests.

The nuclear emergency preparedness organization
has been established to provide expertise in
addressing nuclear events and to provide rapid
implementation of measures to protect life, health,
the environment and other important societal
interests. Nuclear events include both accidents
and events resulting from intentional acts in
peacetime and in the event of security policy
crises or armed conflict. The nuclear emergency
preparedness organization is discussed in more
detail in Chapter 6.


-----

4. THE ROLE OF CIVIL SOCIETY IN THE TOTAL DEFENCE


**4.1 The role of civil society**
**in the total defence**

The ordinary constitutional responsibility
underlies the civil protection and emergency
preparedness efforts, both in terms of preparation
and management. This means that the Ministry in
charge of a sector on a daily basis is also responsible
for contingency planning, initiation of crisis
response measures and crisis management within
its own sector (the principle of responsibility). In
addition to its sectoral responsibilities, the Ministry
of Justice and Public Security (MOJ) has also been
given a coordination role to ensure a holistic and
coordinated emergency preparedness in the civilian
sector (see also chapter 3).[40]

40 Cf. Royal Decree of March 10, 2017, Responsibility for civil

protection in the civilian sector at national level and the Ministry
of Justice and Public Security’s coordination role in the area of
civil protection and ICT security.


Further development of the total defence is one
of the Government’s four priority areas for the
further development of the Norwegian Armed
Forces.[41] Civilian support to the Norwegian Armed
Forces has been given increasing attention in
recent years. At the same time, the Norwegian
Armed Forces’ dependence on civilian support has
increased. Renewed emphasis must therefore be
placed on civilian support to the Norwegian Armed
Forces. This is given further relevance in that
security policy developments increase the need for
the Norwegian Armed Forces to strengthen their
emergency preparedness.

Today, the Norwegian Armed Forces are more
closely integrated with civilian society than
before. The Norwegian Armed Forces are largely

41 White Paper No. 151 S (2015-2016) Capable and Sustainable.


-----

dependent on goods, services, competence, and
technology from the civilian sector. This is true
both in peacetime and in crises and armed conflict.
Particularly in armed conflict and in the most
severe security policy crises, the Norwegian Armed
Forces will have a considerable need for the supply
of goods, services and personnel from the civilian
sector.

The Norwegian Armed Forces are thus dependent
in many areas on civilian society also functioning
normally in crisis and armed conflict. This
applies both to the specific civilian support to the
Norwegian Armed Forces and to the goods and
services that the Norwegian Armed Forces need
from other actors. These conditions reinforce the
interdependence of the Norwegian Armed Forces
and civilian society. In 2016, a programme was
established to further develop the total defence and
to increase the resilience of critical societal functions
(The Total Defence Programme) (see also Chapter
7). Increased robustness and resilience in both the
public and private elements of the civilian sector
will also strengthen their ability to support the
Norwegian Armed Forces.

Society has become more vulnerable as a result
of centralization, specialization and increased
reliance on power supply and information- and
communications technology. Loss of power
supply will quickly have a significant impact on
the population, business and industry, the public
sector, and critical societal functions. The same
is true in the case of loss of information- and
communications services, whether this may be
due to the failure of power supply or to other
circumstances. This implies that events that
challenge society’s vulnerability require good
collaboration between affected actors, based on
mutual understanding of roles and responsibilities
developed through joint training exercises and
interaction between military and civilian actors.

**4.2 General on supply preparedness**
**and civilian support to the**
**Norwegian Armed Forces**

The principle of extensive civilian support to the
Norwegian Armed Forces in crisis and in war
represents the core of the total defence concept,


and stands firm. If necessary, society’s total
resources should be able to be mobilized in the
defence of the nation. Support to the Norwegian
Armed Forces may come from both the public and
private sectors. The total defence concept is linked
to the emergency preparedness- and requisition
legislation (which is discussed later in this chapter).

The Norwegian Armed Forces’ operational plans
for the defence of Norway, and plans for the
reception of Allied reinforcements, form the basis
for concretising the Norwegian Armed Forces’
need for support from civilian society. These plans
presume that the entire national military structure
and allied reinforcements must be supported
simultaneously. In addition to covering known and
quantifiable requirements to civilian support, the
civilian sector must also support the unforeseen
needs of the military forces as far as possible.
Reduced preparation time for military units also
means that the support needs to come into place
much quicker.

The Norwegian Armed Forces logistics needs
are met by their own resources, other official
resources, commercial agreements, cooperation
with business and industry and requisition. The
Norwegian Armed Forces’ needs should be based
as much as possible on commercial agreements, if
necessary with contingency clauses, wherever this
is cost-effective.

In recent years, the Norwegian Armed Forces
have entered into several major commercial
agreements with strategically important actors to
secure support to the Norwegian Armed Forces’
operations in peacetime, crisis and war. Such
strategic agreements have the advantage that
the Norwegian Armed Forces and civilian actors
already have ongoing and daily collaboration in
peacetime. The Norwegian Armed Forces and
the private supplier can enter into an agreement
that operates on commercial conditions during
peacetime, and that implements the requisitionand emergency preparedness legislation as the
basis for its obligation to supply during crises and
war. The type of agreement strategy to be chosen
will be based on a concrete overall assessment,
and to what extent the agreement should contain
contingency clauses or mechanisms for seamless
transition to requisition.


-----

The Norwegian Armed Forces may requisition the
necessary goods, services and infrastructure with
statutory authority in the Requisition Act. However,
in many cases small inventories result in requisition
being an unsuitable method for the acquisition
of a number of consumables. Requisition is more
suitable for materials, services, and infrastructure.
In areas where the supply of goods and services
is essential to the Norwegian Armed Forces’
ability to fight, consideration should be given as
to whether a higher level of supply security may
be achieved by the use of advance requisition.
Similarly, advance requisition must be considered
as a necessary tool in order for all the Norwegian
Armed Forces’ needs for civilian support to be met
within the applicable economic framework.

**4.3 Current framework conditions for civilian**
**support to the Norwegian Armed Forces**

The Norwegian Armed Forces have increasingly
been assigned duties in Norway and abroad for
which emergency preparedness legislation is not
applicable. In such situations, civilian support to
the Norwegian Armed Forces must be based on
commercial arrangements and cooperation with
civilian authorities.


Commercial arrangements will also be applicable
for civilian support that cannot be procured, even
though it is authorized according to emergency
preparedness legislation. For example, this may
apply to stocks that no longer exist or resources
that, based on experience, become scarce in
emergency situations. In such cases, it may
be appropriate to enter into agreements on
maintaining stocks.

In peacetime, the need for stocks is reduced.
Supply security is affected by factors such as
private sector ownership, globalization of markets,
and the fact that it has become usual to operate
with running deliveries to meet demand, rather
than maintaining large stocks.

In a crisis situation it will be expected that civilian
society should function as normally as possible,
and the available resources must therefore also
meet those needs. Consequently, the Norwegian
Armed Forces cannot assume that civilian society
will support military operations and military
activities in all situations. These situations have
a bearing on the organization of the Norwegian
Armed Forces’ logistics apparatus and result in
the Norwegian Armed Forces’ operational units
having to provide supplies in sufficient quantity


-----

to ensure initial staying power for all operational
units. To meet the Norwegian Armed Forces’ need
for civilian support, it is important that the defence
sector ensures that its own needs are known to the
relevant civilian actors.[42]

Logistics support to the Norwegian Armed Forces
is secured through the establishment of logistics
units, emergency stocks, contracts with civilian
suppliers and requisition. The choice of solution
will depend on the unit’s emergency preparedness
requirements and market access, among other
factors.[43]

A practical consequence of restructuring in recent
years is that the Norwegian Armed Forces’ need for
goods and services has been significantly reduced
in volume. However, most elements of the force
structure are continued to a great extent. This
implies that the scope of the supply need is at least
as great as before.

Procurement of materials, supplies, and services
to the Norwegian Armed Forces’ divisions in
peacetime, crisis and war should be based on
acquisition and production- and delivery contracts
with commercial actors, as far as possible.
Nevertheless, for certain critical supplies and
services it will be necessary to enter into more
robust agreements and arrangements, or advance
requisitions.

**Principles of civilian-military**
**logistics cooperation:[44]**

**1.** Logistics planning should view the nation

as a whole. Lack of resources in one
geographical area may be compensated for
by supplies from other areas.

**2.** Detailed planning should be reduced to a

minimum. The general principle is that the
total defence’s need for goods and services
in crisis and war should be considered
as covered by the normal operations of
business and industry.

**3.** The support systems for the supply of goods


42 Guidelines for the logistics operations in the defence sector of

January 18, 2016, p. 17.

43 Directive on build-up of forces (the SOS Directive) December 18,

2012, Pt. 6.2.

44 Principles of civilian logistical support to the Norwegian Armed

Forces issued by the Ministry of Justice and Public Security on
July 23, 1998.


and services to the Norwegian Armed Forces
must be built as much as possible on the
businesses’ and individual trade sector’s
existing organisation and infrastructure.

**4.** When the Norwegian Armed Forces enter

into a contract for supplies in crisis or war,
the same contract should be endeavoured to
be integrated into the conditions for supplies
in peacetime. This means that, wherever
possible, the Norwegian Armed Forces
should use the same company for supplyand production agreements during security
policy crises and war as during peacetime.

The needs for civilian support, beyond that agreed
in commercial agreements, should be determined
by the Norwegian Armed Forces in consultation
with the concerned sector ministries. This assumes
a close cooperation at all levels, and a common
understanding between the Norwegian Armed
Forces and the relevant sector ministry as to the
type and volume of goods and services that are to
be requested. In cases where special logistics plans
are to be prepared, the Norwegian Armed Forces
and appropriate sector ministries must agree on
and approve the relevant goods and services.

**4.4 Collaboration with business and industry**

The defence sector relies on collaboration with
others to resolve its tasks in a cost-effective manner.
Business and industry are key collaborative partners
that contribute with the necessary goods and
services, both in the form of one-off and continuous
supplies and more complex and integrated processes
in manufacturing and operations. The need for
collaboration and support from the business sector
will always be present both in peacetime as well as
during crises and armed conflict.

Supply-, maintenance- and repair services are to be
based to a greater extent on strategic agreements
and cooperation with business and industry.
Logistics services should be based to a greater
extent on supplies from civilian society. These are
intended to function both in peacetime as well as
during crises and armed conflict[45].

45 White Paper No. 151 S (2015-2016) Capable and Sustainable, p. 81.


-----

The Norwegian Armed Forces’ reaction- and
defence capabilities will be strengthened by the
use of civilian infrastructure, materials, equipment
and expertise. The Norwegian Armed Forces
have signed a contract with WilNor Governmental
Services AS for the use of Norbase’s civilian supply
bases along the entire coast, among others. These
bases can provide the necessary services to the
Norwegian Armed Forces’ divisions and allied
forces. In addition, an agreement has been entered
into with Grieg Strategic Services AS for support
to the Norwegian Armed Forces’ operations and
exercises at home and abroad and for host nation
support. Agreements in the areas of transport,
maintenance and harbour services have been
entered into, and other agreements could also be
entered into. Civilian logistics actors are extensively
used during overseas operations in the areas of
strategic transport and local support.

Emergency preparedness agreements do not
replace, but are a supplement to, military logistics.
Military and civilian resources need to interact well
and be mutually reinforcing. The National Logistics
Operations Centre, under the command of the
Norwegian Joint Headquarters (NJHQ), leads all
Norwegian Armed Forces’ logistics operations including those performed by civilians. The logistics
solutions need to function throughout the whole
spectrum of crisis, from peacetime to crisis, conflict
and war. The emergency preparedness agreements
must allow for this and ensure the Norwegian
Armed Forces flexible access to resources,
regardless of the emergency preparedness
legislation. The agreements must also secure the
Norwegian Armed Forces, and allow for access to,
the resources, even if the civilian company behind
the agreement changes ownership or is dissolved.

The Norwegian Ministry of Defence (MOD), The
Norwegian Defence Materiel Agency and the
Norwegian Armed Forces have a number of
demanding tasks related to the development,
investment and use of the Armed Forces’ materiel.
It is therefore important to establish cooperation
with environments that possess the expertise that
the Norwegian Armed Forces themselves do not
find practical to hold themselves. The Norwegian
Armed Forces’ materiel and capacities are
augmented with expertise, research and support
from a number of civilian actors.


An ever increasing number of new materiel
systems are supplied with performance-based
agreements for logistics throughout their lifetime.
In addition, third- and fourth-party actors could
manage logistics solutions on behalf of the
Norwegian Armed Forces. The establishment of
such agreements will move the interface between
the Norwegian Armed Forces and civilian suppliers.

In order for the Norwegian Armed Forces to be
able to deliver results with the expected quality,
the Norwegian Armed Forces are dependent
on interaction with research- and development
environments as well as with business and industry.

The collaboration between business and industry
and the defence sector should be based on the
Norwegian Armed Forces’ need for materiel and
services, whilst also being cost-effective. The
development of collaborative relationships must
be seen in the light of the need to ensure national
supply- and information security in key areas.
Collaboration with industry is therefore intended
to be targeted at specific technological areas.[46]

Operating solutions which, due to operational
reasons or according to international law, need
not be handled by the Norwegian Armed Forces
themselves, should undergo a thorough total
economic assessment to decide whether the
Norwegian Armed Forces alone or others can
provide the qualitatively best and most costeffective solution for the task.

**4.5 International rules of war**
**and the total defence**

The total defence concept is central to the defence
of Norway, and is based on society’s collective
resources being used in the defence of the
nation. The defence of Norway is built on both a
military defence and a broad civilian emergency
preparedness. As a small nation, Norway is not
capable of building up a military defence that on

46 Technological areas of cooperation: 1)Command-, control-,

information systems, 2) system integration, 3) autonomous
systems 4) missile technology, 5) subsea sensors, 6) ammunition,
aiming mechanisms, remote-controlled weapon stations and
military explosives, 7) material technology specially developed
and/or processed for military purposes and 8) lifetime support
for military land-, sea- and air systems. The White Paper No. 9
(2015-2016) National Defence Industry Strategy Point 7.2.


-----

its own possesses all the necessary resources in a
war. Therefore, in situations of crisis and conflict,
the Norwegian Armed Forces will be dependent
on services performed by civilian personnel, the
public sector at large, and business and industry.[47]
At the same time, the distinction principle in the
international rules of war require that there is a
distinction between civilians and combatants.

The distinction principle applies in armed conflicts
within the scope of the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and Additional Protocols I and II of 1977. The
distinction principle means that civilians should be
protected from the dangers of military operations, and
that attacks should only be directed at lawful military
targets according to the international rules of war.[48]

If a civilian person has a function that involves
direct participation in hostilities, he/she will
lose their right to protection according to the
International rules of war as long as he or she
performs the activity. Directly participating
civilians are not entitled to participate in hostilities,
because they do not have status as combatants.
The definition of combatants includes personnel
who are members of a State’s armed forces, i.e.
personnel wearing uniforms, belong to a command
structure and are subject to an internal disciplinary
system. Therefore, the use of civilian personnel in
armed conflict has implications under international
law, and demands clear delineations as to what
civilian personnel can be used for.[49] Thus, whenever
there is an intention to use civilians in armed
conflict, an assessment must be made ahead of
time as to whether their function will involve direct
participation in hostilities. If such is the case, this
function must be performed by a combatant.

In armed conflict, civilians are exposed to the risk
of being inflicted lawful consequential damage
from attacks on military targets according to
the international rules of war. This risk is a result
of the fact that the international rules of war
permit civilian consequential damage, on certain
conditions. Therefore, a conscious relationship
to the rules of the international rules of war is

47 The White Paper No. 10 (2016-2017) Risk in a safe and secure

society p.114.

48 Additional Protocol I of 1977 to Articles 51 and 52 of the Geneva

Conventions.

49 The White Paper No. 10 (2016-2017) Risk in a safe and secure

society p.114.


necessary in respect of civilian support to the
Norwegian Armed Forces’ according to the total
defence concept. Consequential damage to civilians
resulting from attacks by the opposing forces
must be taken into account in the organization of
support to the Norwegian Armed Forces.

The MOD’s subordinate agencies are to ensure that
planning and implementation of civilian support to
the Norwegian Armed Forces comply with Norway’s
obligations under international law.[50] Furthermore,
when developing new operational concepts,
the Norwegian Armed Forces must determine
whether there are restrictions to be taken into
consideration in respect of the international rules
of war.[51] This also includes limitations to the use of
civilians under the international rules of war. The
Norwegian Military Manual in International Rules
of War established by the Chief of Defence applies
to the defence sector.[52] The manual is based on
obligations relating to international rules of war as
they are interpreted by the Norwegian authorities.
This should form the basis for the planning and
execution of operations, and should be used in
teaching. The Norwegian Military Manual outlines
the rules for what constitutes direct participation
in hostilities. The Manual also outlines the rules for
which objects are lawful military targets, and the
rules on civilian consequential damage from attacks
on military objectives.

**4.6 Key legislation relating to emergency**
**preparedness and response**

**Key legislation:**

**•** [The Fuel Facilities Act of March 31, 1949]

**•** [The Emergency Preparedness Act of ]

December 15, 1950

**•** [The Requisition Act of June 29, 1951]

**•** [The Requisition of Vessels Act of December ]

19, 1952

**•** [The National Health Preparedness Act of ]


50 Implementation letter to the defence sector for the long-term

period 2017-2020 pt. 2.1.4.3.1.

51 Directive on the evaluation of weapons, methods and means of

warfare according to international rules of war established by the
Ministry of Defence on June 18, 2003, and the implementation
letter to the defence sector for the long-term period 2017-2020
pt. 2.1.4.3.2. The directive contributes to the implementation
of the obligations in the Additional Protocol to the Geneva
Conventions of 1977 Art. 36.

52 https://brage.bibsys.no/xmlui/bitstream/id/201436/manual

krigens folkerett.pdf


-----

**_4.6.1 The Fuel Facilities Act_**
Act of March 31, 1949 No. 3 on the construction
and securing of fuel facilities (The Fuel Facilities
Act), authorizes the King to order the owner or user
of fuel facilities of significant importance to the
country’s fuel supplies to take securing measures
against damage resulting from acts of war and
sabotage, as well as ordering the carrying out of
such extensions, new buildings, separation or
moving of installations that are deemed necessary
for reasons of defence. The rules are primarily
preparatory provisions that can be implemented in
peacetime.

**_4.6.2 Emergency Preparedness Act_**
Act of December 15, 1950 No. 7 on special
derogations during war, risk of war, and similar
conditions, is often called the Emergency
Preparedness Act. The Emergency Preparedness
Act is an enabling act which gives the King special
powers to make decisions in order to protect
the interests of the nation when the Storting is
prevented from exercising its duties.

In Chapters I and II, provisions are given for
special powers to the King. Chapter III regulates
the relationship between military and civilian
authorities in a combat zone, and means, inter alia,


June 23, 2000

**•** [ The Act on State Insurance of Goods ]

under Transport against War, Risk of War,
Extraordinary Crises in Norway or Abroad of
December 12, 2003

**•** [Act on Emergency Stockpiles of Petroleum ]

Products of August 18, 2006

**•** [The Civil Protection Act of June 25, 2010]

**•** [The Trade and Industry Preparedness Act of ]

December 16, 2011

**•** [The Defence Act of August 12, 2016]

The most authoritative emergency preparedness
acts are rendered below in chronological
order. These are acts that are mainly related
to emergency preparedness. However, there
are a number of other acts with emergency
preparedness related content, such as the Aviation
Act section 13-9, the Railways Act section 6b, The
Commercial Vehicles Act sections 36 and 37, Act
relating to Electronic Communications section 2-10,
Postal Services Act section 17, The Act relating to
Harbours and Navigable Channels section 43 and
the Energy Act sections 9-1 and 9-2 and more. The
Security Act is discussed in Chapter 6.


-----

that military authorities can take over the leadership
of the Police and other civilian authorities. Chapter
IV provides special rules on the handling of criminal
cases during war. Chapter V provides rules on the
forced relinquishment of personal property and
real estate to the State. Chapter VI contains various
provisions, including authority to the King to provide
further regulations and take other necessary
measures to implement the law.

**_4.6.3 The Requisition Act_**
Act of June 29, 1951 No. 19 on military requisitions
(The Requisition Act) grants military authorities
the power to “requisition whatever is necessary for
military forces and associated institutions” except
for property rights to real estate. The Act also gives
legal authority to require the change of use or
movement of enterprises, and allows the State to
take over the operations of enterprises and other
operations. The Act may be applied in wartime, or
when the Armed Forces, or a part of them, have
been ordered on a war footing for the purpose of
emergency preparedness, or when it is necessary
for the furtherance of emergency measures,
including larger exercises. The Act provides the
Norwegian Armed Forces with broad authority to
requisition goods and services from the civilian
sector that are necessary to the Norwegian Armed
Forces’ operations.

**_4.6.4 The Requisition of Vessels Act_**
Act of December 19, 1952 No. 2 on access to
the requisition of vessels etc. during war or
crisis situations (The Requisition of Vessels Act)
grants the King authority to requisition vessels,
including shipbuilding contracts and ships under
construction. This applies to ships registered in
Norway (Norwegian Ordinary Ship Register, NOR
or Norwegian International Ship Register, NIS)
owned by Norwegian citizens, persons resident
in Norway or persons/shipowners that operate
shipping companies from offices in Norway. As a
general principle, only right of use or similar may
be requisitioned, but requisition of ownership can
also take place if special reasons make it necessary.

**_4.6.5 The National Health Preparedness Act_**
Act of June 23, 2000 No. 56 on health and social
preparedness (The National Health Preparedness
Act) is intended to protect the life and health
of the population and to help ensure that the


necessary health care and social services can be
offered to the population in wartime and during
crises and disasters in peacetime. The Act contains
authorization provisions (Sections 3-1, 4-1, 5-1 and
5-2, cf. section 1-5) that provide the Ministry of Health
and Care Services with special powers in wartime and
by threat of war. The powers also apply during crises
and disasters in peacetime according to decisions
by Council of State. If it is necessary to ensure life
and health, the Ministry may reach a preliminary
decision on its application. Such a decision should be
confirmed in the Council of State as soon as possible.
The powers apply to requisition of real estate etc.,
civilian service duty and command, responsibility-,
task- and resource allocation. Whether or not, and
what type of action should be taken is determined
by the Ministry or whoever has been delegated such
authority by the Ministry.

In addition, there are preparedness provisions
in the Infection Prevention and Control Act, the
Radiation Protection Act, the Public Health Act, the
Food Act and in other health legislation.

**_4.6.6 Act on State Insurance of Goods_**
**_under Transport against War, Risk of War,_**
**_Extraordinary Crises in Norway or Abroad_**
Act of December 12, 2003 No. 115 on state
insurance of goods under transport against war
regulates the state’s access to offer insurance
for transport of goods etc. during war or the risk
of war and crisis. In normal situations, war-risk
insurance is entrusted to the private market.
According to the Act on State Insurance of Goods
under Transport in War, the King in Council has
the authority to determine whether the insurance
should be offered. The state arrangement can only
be activated in war and crisis etc. and if the private
insurance market is inadequate. The offer is mainly
intended to provide for insurance of goods and
freight in Norwegian interests. The insurance offer
may include all types of transport, including air
transport, maritime transport and land transport.
In addition, insurance may also be offered on other
interests. The Act provides some overall guidelines
on the appointment of a Board and its duties
relating to daily management and operation of the
insurance scheme if activated. The total framework
allocated to the insurance scheme in the national
budget for 2017 is NOK 2 billion.


-----

**_4.6.7 Act on Emergency Stockpiles_**
**_of Petroleum Products_**
Act of August 18, 2006 No. 61 on the emergency
stockpiles of petroleum products provides
Norwegian authorities with the legal authority
to oblige manufacturers and importers of
petroleum products to maintain emergency stocks
corresponding to 20 days of normal consumption
in Norway. The purpose of the storage is to enable
the stored volumes to be used to secure supplies to
the Norwegian market in the event that deliveries
are disrupted. In addition, these supplies can
be used as a contribution to a coordinated crisis
management plan within the framework of the
International Energy Agency (IEA). Supplementary
regulations to the Act were established by Royal
Decree of September 1, 2006.

**_4.6.8 The Civil Protection Act_**
Act of June 25, 2010 No. 45 on municipal
emergency preparedness obligation, civil
protection measures and the Civil Defence (the
Civil Protection Act) came into force on January 1,
2011 and replaces the Civil Defence Act of 1953.
The purpose of the Act is to protect life, health,
the environment and material values with the
use of non-military power throughout the entire
crisis spectrum. The Civil Defence’s task as a
governmental reinforcement resource for the
emergency- and preparedness and response
agencies is clarified, while also providing provisions
on measures and obligations of municipalities,
business and industry and individuals. As of
January 1, 2010, the municipalities were given a
statutory requirement to implement overall riskand vulnerability analyses, as well as a requirement
to create an overall emergency preparedness plan
for the municipality as a whole. These provisions
are continued in the new Civil Protection Act. The
municipal emergency preparedness obligation will
help ensure that municipalities are better equipped
to both prevent and deal with adverse events. The
County Governor is responsible for ensuring that
the municipalities fulfil their legal obligations. This
allows the County Governor to register and point
out discrepancies, as well as giving authority to
impose orders on the municipalities in the event of
failure to comply with legal requirements.


**_4.6.9 The Trade and Industry_**
**_Preparedness Act_**
Act of December 16, 2011 No. 65 on trade and
industry preparedness (The Trade and Industry
Preparedness Act) regulates the relationship
between public authorities and businesses in the
preparation and implementation of cooperative
procedures and special measures for crises with
significant consequences for the access to goods
and services in Norway in war, with risk of war and
war-like conditions, and in peacetime.

The purpose of the law is to remedy supply-related
consequences of crises by reinforcing the supply
of goods and services and providing the necessary
prioritization and redistribution of goods and
services through cooperation between public
authorities and businesses.

The law applies when it is necessary to take special
measures to meet the needs of the population, the
military defence or Allied military forces in Norway
or international obligations relating to goods and
services, due to the risk of demand pressure,
shortage of supply or logistics failure.

There is a special regulation pursuant to the
Trade and industry Preparedness Act relating to
building- and construction preparedness. This
regulation establishes a committee for buildingand construction emergency preparedness and
provides special provisions on the obligations of
the building- and construction industry.

**_4.6.10 The Defence Act_**
General conscription for Norwegian citizens is
embodied in Section 119 of the Constitution. Act
of August 12, 2016 No. 77 on national service and
service in the Armed Forces (The Defence Act)
governs the implementation of national service,
as well as the rights and obligations of employed
personnel. Section 6 of the Act establishes, as a
general rule, conscription for all Norwegian citizens
between the ages of 19 and 44 years. The Defence
Act also contains provisions on the extension of
military conscription in wartime or by the threat of
war. In such events, conscription age is extended to
55 years, and no limitations are set as to the duration
of national service. The Defence Act is an absolutely
central law in relation to emergency preparedness
and response. The law ensures training of personnel


-----

for the defence of Norway in peacetime and for
these personnel to be called up for military service
in situations when Norway is at war or there exists a
threat of war. With authority in Section 32 of the Act,
a regulation is established that regulates exemption
from military service for persons working in other
businesses and industries that fulfil vital societal
functions during crises and war.

**4.7 The key responsibilities of**
**the emergency preparedness**
**Ministries in the total defence**

The key emergency preparedness Ministries are
discussed below. In view of its responsibility for
the coordination of public security- and emergency
preparedness efforts in the civil sector, it would be
natural to discuss the MOJ first. The other relevant
Ministries are listed in alphabetical order. In
Chapter 3 a description is provided of the various
lead Ministries responsibilities for coordination and
interaction in 14 vital societal functions. The MOD
is discussed in Chapter 5.

**_4.7.1 The Ministry of Justice_**
**_and Public Security_**
The MOJ has responsibility for the coordination
of public security- and emergency preparedness
efforts in the civil sector. The coordination
responsibility is discussed more specifically in
Chapter 3. The Directorate for Civil Protection
supports the MOJ in assuming coordination
responsibility, cf. discussions of the Directorate for
Civil Protection in Chapter 3. The Ministry provides
overall guidelines for the Counties Governor’s
public security- and emergency preparedness
efforts. The Directorate for Civil Protection is
responsible for the management of the agency
and provides guidance to the County Governors
in their emergency preparedness responsibilities
and follow-up with the municipalities. The MOJ has
overall control of the Governor of Svalbard.

The Ministry has overall administrative responsibility
for the Norwegian Rescue Service, i.e. responsibility
for the coordination of the land-, sea and air rescue
services. The Joint Rescue Coordination Centres have
the overall operational coordination responsibility
for all types of rescue missions on land, at sea and in
aviation. See also Chapter 3.


The MOJ and the MOD have the overall crosssectoral responsibility for preventive safety in the
civil and military sectors respectively. According to
the Security Act, preventive safety is an operational
responsibility. Each Minister is responsible for
preventive security within its sector.

The MOJ is responsible for drawing up the
Government’s policy for ICT security in the
civil sector, including establishment of national
requirements and recommendations in the area of
ICT security for both public and private enterprises.
If necessary, the requirements will be established
in laws and regulations. The affected sectoral
ministry, authorities and business and industry
are to be involved in this work. The Norwegian
National Security Authority is the executive body
of the MOJ and the MOD in this area for the civil
and military sectors respectively, cf. discussion of
National Security Authority in Chapter 5.

The MOJ and the Norwegian Police Directorate
comprise the main police leadership. The MOJ
is responsible for the agency management of
the Police Directorate, the Director of Public
Prosecutions, the Judge Advocate General and
the Police Security Service. The Director of Public
Prosecutions and the Public Prosecutors have
the overall administrative responsibility for the
handling of criminal cases in the Police, and in this
context the Director of Public Prosecutions can
only be instructed by the King in Council.

The Police Security Service reports directly
to the MOJ and is responsible for preventing,
counteracting and investigating criminal acts
against the security of the Realm. The prioritized
challenges are related to anti-terror operations,
political extremism, counter-intelligence, and
measures against the production and proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. Other functions
of the service are to assist in the implementation
of preventive security measures in the State
administration, public and private businesses: as
well as to prepare threat assessments and provide
advice on initiatives of importance to Norwegian
interests, businesses and the security of the
individual. The Police Security Service cooperates
extensively with, inter alia, the Norwegian
Intelligence Service, cf. Chapter 5.


-----

The MOJ is designated as the permanent Lead
Ministry in civil national crises, unless otherwise
determined. The Ministry’s responsibility for
coordination, and for the majority of the civil
rescue- and emergency preparedness resources
in Norway, means that the MOJ will always have a
central role in most cross-sectoral national crises.

The Emergency Support Unit is organised as
part of the MOJ, and is intended to support
the Lead Ministry and the Emergency Council
in its coordination functions and to act as the
permanent secretariat for the Emergency Council.
The Emergency Support Unit has competence
in strategic crisis management as well as
infrastructure capabilities. See also Chapter 6.

The Norwegian Civilian Situation Centre in the MOJ
is organized as part of the Emergency Support Unit
and is the permanent contact point for information
to and from the MOJ during extraordinary events and
crises. The Civilian Situation Centre is operated 24/7
and is intended to contribute to the timely warning
and analysis of the operational picture, as the basis
for making necessary decisions during crises.

**_4.7.2 Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs_**
The Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs has overall
responsibility for the labour- and social welfare
areas, as well as for the working environment and
safety. Within the area of labour- and social welfare,
this involves responsibility for National Insurance
pensions and benefits, public service pensions,
occupational injury etc., including during crises or
disasters in peacetime and war. The Norwegian
Labour and Welfare Service, the Norwegian Public
Service Pension Fund and Norwegian Pension
Insurance for Seamen administer the schemes.
Efforts are being made to achieve a high level of
security in the ICT systems of these activities to
secure the payment of necessary benefits. One
condition of this work is that suppliers of goods
and services hold to their agreements, and that
agreements have been made with secondary
service providers and/or other measures are
initiated to reduce vulnerability.

In the area of working environment and security,
the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs/Petroleum
Safety Authority Norway have responsibility for
preventive work and emergency preparedness


in petroleum activities – offshore and at specific
onshore facilities. This responsibility includes
health-, safety and the environment including
major accident risk, as well as safeguards and
preparedness against deliberate actions. The
petroleum industry itself has direct responsibility
for risk identification, prevention and emergency
preparedness, while the Petroleum Safety Authority
ensures that the industry carries out these tasks in
a proper manner. In the event of incidents offshore,
the operator is responsible for taking necessary
action and for reporting to the Petroleum Safety
Authority, which has established a stand-by rota
system to notify other involved authorities and
ensure effective monitoring of their own area of
responsibility in crisis situations.

The Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs is also
responsible for the working environment and
safety in land-based operations, but here the
responsibility for major accidents is placed with the
Directorate for Civil Protection.

**_4.7.3 Ministry of Finance_**
The Ministry of Finance’s responsibility in an
emergency preparedness context is related
to the financial sector, among others. A major
challenge within the sector is to ensure that
payment processing is maintained and also
functions satisfactory during crises and war.
Extensive requirements to security and emergency
preparedness are established in the regulations for
payment services and payment systems, and these
are supervised by Norges Bank and the Financial
Supervisory Authority of Norway. The vulnerability
of the financial sector is increasingly linked to the
operation of ICT systems and continuous access to
telecommunications and power supplies. In recent
years work has been carried out to improve the
efficiency, and adapt the emergency preparedness,
in the financial sector to the vulnerabilities that
a modern payment system entails. As a result,
a special committee has been established, the
Emergency Preparedness Committee for Financial
Infrastructure. The primary task of the Committee
is to arrive at, and coordinate measures to prevent
and resolve crisis situations and other situations
that could result in major disruptions to the financial
infrastructure. The members of the Committee
represent the key players in the Norwegian financial
infrastructure, and the Financial Supervisory


-----

Authority of Norway acts as leader and secretariat
of the Committee.

The Customs Service has a role in national
emergency preparedness and public security, and
protects society from illegal import and export of
goods. The service actively cooperates with other
public authorities on control tasks and interests
related to border passing and cross-border threats.
The service’s functions include controls directed
at the illegal import of weapons, explosives, drugs
and pharmaceuticals. The service also uncovers
currency smuggling and money laundering, as well
as the illegal import/export of strategic products
and weapons of mass destruction. The service
has updated emergency preparedness plans and
contingency plans to deal with extraordinary events
related to border crossing.

**_4.7.4 Ministry of Health and Care Services_**
The Ministry of Health and Care Services has
overall responsibility for public security and
emergency preparedness in the health- and
care sector and is responsible for coordinating
its own sector with other Ministries. Several
sector departments and authoritative bodies are
organised under the Ministry and, together with
local and regional services, these have an executive
function in emergency preparedness within the
sector. A new National Health Preparedness Plan
was established on January 1, 2018.[53]

The Directorate of Health is the sector directorate
and authoritative body under the Ministry of
Health and Care Services. The functions of the
Directorate include providing guidelines, advice
and guidance to municipalities through the County
Governor. The Directorate of Health, by delegation
from the Ministry of Health and Care Services, is to
conduct the overall coordination of the health and
care sector’s efforts and take appropriate action
when a crisis situation threatens or has occurred.
If the Directorate of Health considers that there is
clearly a need to take action, and it is not possible
to establish contact with the Ministry in advance
in order to be granted powers of delegation,
the Directorate can nonetheless establish the
coordination function. Contact with the Ministry
should be established as soon as possible. The

53 National Health Preparedness Plan (HOD) established on January

1, 2018.


Directorate of Health coordinates supply security
for medicines in cooperation with the Norwegian
Medicines Agency, the Norwegian Institute of
Public Health, and the Regional health authorities.

The Norwegian Institute of Public Health is
responsible for the surveillance of communicable
diseases, receiving notifications and alerts,
advisory services, contact tracing and vaccine
preparedness. The Institute is responsible for
national vaccine preparedness, the National
Vaccination Register, the Norwegian Surveillance
System for Communicable Diseases and acts as the
national contact point for the International Health
Regulations (IHR) of the World Health Organization
(WHO) and the Early Warning Response System
of the EU (EWRS). The function of the Institute is
to provide assistance and guidance to municipal,
county and state institutions, health personnel
and the population on communicable diseases
and infection prevention and control. The Institute
also has competence in the field of environmental
contaminants and will assist municipalities, county
governors and other government institutions
in connection with exposure to hazardous
environmental factors.

The Norwegian Radiation Protection Authority
(NRPA) is the national specialist- and supervisory
authority for radiation protection, environmentaland nuclear safety. The responsibility for radiation
protection is shared between the Ministry of
Health and Care Services, the Ministry of Climate
and Environment and the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs (MFA). The Norwegian Radiation Protection
Authority is responsible for the administration
and supervision of the use of radiation sources in
medicine, industry and research. The Norwegian
Radiation Protection Authority has the specialist
and coordinating responsibility for nuclear
preparedness in Norway. The Norwegian Radiation
Protection Authority acts as the leader and
secretariat of the Nuclear Emergency Preparedness
Crisis Committee.

The Norwegian Board of Health Supervision
ensures that the health services comply with
regulatory emergency preparedness requirements,
whereas the Norwegian Medicines Agency is
responsible for the approval of medicines and
supervision of the pharmaceutical industry.


-----

The National Treatment Service for CBRN medicine
(chemical, biological agents, radiation and
explosives) has key expertise in radiation- and
radiological injuries and biological and chemical
injuries. The CBRN service is established at
Oslo University Hospital and has nationwide
functions for treatment. The CBRN Centre has an
advisory function in respect of the health service,
cooperating agencies and authorities in the area
of CBRN, that is available 24/7. The National
Centre for Advanced Burns Treatment has been
established at Haukeland University Hospital.

Regional Health Authorities and Health Enterprises
(hospitals) are responsible for specialist healthcare
services. According to the National Health
Preparedness Act, municipalities, regional health
authorities and health enterprises are obliged to
prepare contingency plans for the services for
which they are responsible. The planning obligation
applies in crises and disasters in both peacetime
and war. The regional health enterprises have a
special responsibility for ensuring that the health
service’s emergency preparedness efforts are
coordinated with other agencies, such as the
Police, the Fire Service, the Norwegian Armed
Forces and the Civil Defence. The municipalities are
responsible for primary health services.

The Ministry of Health and Care Services is the
overall responsible coordinating Ministry for
water supply. National drinking water targets
are followed up in a separate implementation
plan. New drinking water regulations with
stricter requirements to preventive security
and preparedness for an adequate supply of
drinking water at all times came into force on
January 1, 2017. From the same date, a network
for professional support to waterworks was
established to reinforce their ability to tackle
critical situations. The Norwegian Food Safety
Authority supervises that waterworks comply with
regulations.

**_4.7.5 The Ministry of Climate_**
**_and Environment_**
The Ministry of Climate and Environment is
responsible for emergency preparedness against
acute radioactive pollution in accordance with
the Pollution Control Act. This includes both
radioactive emissions and radioactive waste. The


Norwegian Environment Agency will assist the
Norwegian Radiation Protection Authority with
measurements in nuclear events. The Norwegian
Environment Agency and the Norwegian Polar
Institute have advisory roles in the Nuclear
Emergency Preparedness Committee.

In accordance with the Pollution Control Act, the
environmental authorities are responsible for
setting requirements to municipalities’ and private
enterprises’ emergency preparedness for acute
pollution events and for ensuring that they are
adhered to. The Norwegian Polar Institute sets
emergency preparedness requirements for acute
pollution, and life and health in the conduct of
activities in Antarctica. The Ministry of Climate
and Environment, and its subordinate agencies,
have an advisory role in providing information on
environmental values and assessing environmental
impacts during state actions against acute
pollution.The Norwegian Meteorological Institute
is a subordinate agency to the Ministry of Climate
and Environment. The Meteorological Institute is
the official meteorological service for civilian and
military purposes in Norway and is thus responsible
for the meteorological service to the Norwegian
Armed Forces. The meteorological service to
the Norwegian Armed Forces in peacetime is
mainly integrated into the general weather
forecasting service and flying weather service at
the Meteorological Institute’s headquarters and
regional centres, while the local weather service
at some of the Air Force bases primarily supports
the Norwegian Armed Forces. A position has been
created as Senior Adviser for Defence Affairs as
part of the Meteorology- and Climate Director’s
staff. The Institute offers extended meteorological
support in the event of crisis and war, as well
as during major military exercises. On several
occasions, the Meteorological Institute has also
contributed with support in connection with
Norway’s involvement in international operations,
including with deployed personnel.

Together with the Ministry of Cultural Affairs, The
Ministry of Climate and Environment is responsible
for emergency preparedness in respect of
cultural monuments of national importance. The
Directorate for Cultural Heritage prepares and
implements the securing of material cultural values
in cooperation with the Ministry of Cultural Affairs.


-----

**_4.7.6 The Ministry of Local_**
**_Government and Modernisation_**
The Ministry of Local Government and
Modernisation is responsible for emergency
preparedness related to pricing (price freeze)
as well as responsibility for the national
administration. As lead Ministry for the Ministries’
Safety and Service Organisation and the Directorate
of Public Construction and Property Management,
the Ministry has special responsibility concerning
the securing of government buildings (with the
exception of the MOD and the Prime Minister’s
Office (at its current address) and the Government’s
Representation Rooms.

The Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation
has a special responsibility to work for a stronger
and more comprehensive approach to information
security in the national government administration.
However, the sectoral ministries have overall
responsibility for ensuring the security of the their
sector’s ICT infrastructure, and for ensuring that
preventive information security is satisfactory.

The Norwegian Mapping Authority cooperates
closely with the Norwegian Armed Forces’
Military Geographic Service on map data and
navigation services for use both at sea and on land.
Applications are also covered in the Norwegian air
space over land- and sea areas. This collaboration is
regulated in agreements that are updated regularly.
The Norwegian Mapping Authority has no direct
operational role in a crisis situation, but provides
geographical information that supports activities in
many units that have an operational responsibility.

**_4.7.7 The Ministry of Cultural Affairs_**
The Ministry of Cultural Affairs is responsible
on behalf of the State for its ownership of the
Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation. The
Broadcasting Corporation’s responsibility in
respect of emergency preparedness and in
war is governed by the Regulation of October
6, 1989.[54] One of the Corporation’s duties is to
take measures to ensure that information from
the Government reaches the population during
emergencies and war.

54 FOR 1989-10-06 no. 4154 Regulations relating to the activities

of the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation during emergency
preparedness and war.


The Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation has
an emergency preparedness responsibility to
allow the authorities to reach the population with
information via the broadcasting network in the
event of national crises and disasters. The channel
P1 covers the entire population and is designated
as the emergency channel. The P1, together with
the Civil Defence public warning service, will ensure
that information quickly reaches the population.

**_4.7.8 The Ministry of Agriculture and Food_**
The Ministry of Agriculture and Food has a special
responsibility for emergency preparedness
for plant- and animal health (land animals). In
cooperation with the Ministry of Health and Care
Services, the Ministry of Agriculture and Food is
responsible for emergency preparedness in respect
of Zoonosis[55], and for safe food production in
collaboration with the Ministry of Health and Care
Services and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and
Fisheries. The Ministry of Agriculture and Food also
has partial responsibility for nuclear preparedness
and bioterrorism. The Ministry of Trade, Industry
and Fisheries has coordination responsibility for
food supply preparedness, whereas the Ministry
of Agriculture and Food has partial responsibility
within its sector. The Ministry of Agriculture and
Food is responsible for contributing to satisfactory
food supply preparedness for Norwegian citizens
by safeguarding the production base, facilitating
continuous production, and contributing to
the necessary supplementation to Norwegian
production through imports. The Ministry of
Agriculture and Food’s subordinate agencies - the
Norwegian Food Safety Authority, the Norwegian
Agricultural Agency, the Veterinary Institute,
and the Institute of Bioeconomy Research - will
have the most important functions in emergency
preparedness and crisis management.

For example, the Food Safety Authority has
emergency preparedness for outbreaks of serious
infectious diseases in plants, animals and fish,
as well as for findings of infectious matter and
foreign matter in animal feed, food and drinking
water. To deal with all such events, the Food Safety
Authority can request the assistance of the Police,
the Customs Authorities, the Coast Guard and

55 Zoonoses are infectious diseases that can be communicated

between animals and humans. The diseases are caused by
various types of infectious material such as viruses, bacteria,
fungi, parasites and prions.


-----

municipalities (cf. the Food Act section 23). The
five regions of the Food Safety Authority have also
close contact with the Civil Defence and the Council
for Building Preparedness that will assist with
serious events in respect of animal health where
there may be considerable logistical challenges.
Furthermore, the Veterinary Institute has premises
for the analysis of infectious matter relevant for
use in bioterrorism.

**_4.7.9 The Ministry of Trade,_**
**_Industry and Fisheries_**
The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries’
sectoral emergency preparedness responsibility
is related to ensuring that business and industry
is capable of supplying the goods and services
that society needs also in crisis situations.
Responsibility does not include businesses and
industries for which that other ministries are
responsible. The Ministry of Trade, Industry
and Fisheries has emergency preparedness
arrangements particularly related to food supply,
building- and construction, shipping and State
insurance of goods under transport against war.
From January 1, 2017, the ministry took over
responsibility for fuel supply from the Ministry
of Petroleum and Energy. The Ministry of Trade,
Industry and Fisheries is responsible for the value
chain starting from the refinery industry and up
to the retail sale of fuel. Industry- and transport


emergency preparedness aims to secure supplies
to the population throughout the country, and also
includes the needs of the Norwegian Armed Forces
and the Civil Defence. The ministry’s responsibility
for civil protection and emergency preparedness
encompasses a wide range of goods and services
such as food, building- and construction services
and shipping capacity. The business- and industry
emergency preparedness of today is pre-planned
to a very limited extent, and is built on cooperation
with the relevant businesses and industries.

Stocks of industrial raw materials, both for the
foodstuff industry and other production, have
practically been phased out. However, the Ministry
of Trade, Industry and Fisheries still has smaller
stocks of emergency rations.

In addition to formalized cooperation
arrangements in the areas of food supply, buildingand construction preparedness, shipping readiness
and insurance for transport of goods against war,
the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries also
has cooperation agreements with the information
offices for agricultural products, the Seafood
Council and the ForMat Project, among others.

**_4.7.10 The Ministry of Petroleum and Energy_**
The Ministry of Petroleum and Energy is responsible
for emergency preparedness related to power


-----

supply and the management of water resources.
Moreover, the Ministry has sectoral responsibility
for the oil and gas activity on the continental shelf,
pipeline transport and processing facilities on land
directly related to the production of oil and gas.

The Ministry of Petroleum and Energy is the main
ministry responsible for power supply[56] within
the energy- and water resource sector, and has
emergency preparedness tasks related to floods,
landslides, dam breaches and other accidents
in the country’s water systems. The operational
responsibility for power supply, including power
supply readiness has been delegated to the
Water Resources and Energy Directorate, which
is a readiness authority according to Chapter 9 of
the Energy Act. The Water Resources and Energy
Directorate leads the Power Supply Preparedness
Organization, which is made up of the Water
Resources and Energy Directorate and agencies
that own or operate facilities that are of significant
importance for the operation, repair or security
of production, conversion, transmission, sales or
distribution of electric power or district heating.[57]

The municipalities are primarily responsible for
the prevention of flood- and landslide damage. At
the same time, it is necessary that the State also
contributes to this work in order to obtain good
results. The Water Resources and Energy Directorate
assists municipalities in preventing damage from
floods and landslides, and in dealing with events.[58]

The regulation on preventive security and
emergency preparedness in the energy supply
(Emergency Preparedness Regulation) came into
force on January 1, 2013. The regulation applies to
the prevention, handling and limitation of impacts
of extraordinary events that may affect the energy
system.

The Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs has the
overall responsibility for the working environment
and security, whereas the Ministry of Transport
and Communications is responsible for oil pollution
preparedness in the petroleum industry. In turn,

56 White Paper No. 1 S (2017-2018) The Ministry of Justice and

Public Security, table 1.6.

57 Regulations of January 1, 2013 on preventive security and

emergency preparedness in the energy supply, chapter 3.

58 The White Paper No. 10 (2016-2017–2017) Risk in a safe and

_secure society._


the Ministry of Petroleum and Energy is responsible
for designing a resource management system
(framework) that will ensure the best possible
management of oil- and gas resources on the
Norwegian continental shelf. Within the resource
management system, oil companies and Gassco AS
are responsible for supply security for gas. The oil
companies’ ability to secure supplies is related to
both individual fields on the continental shelf, the
companies’ total field portfolio and their ability to
secure themselves downstream with commercial
arrangements, gas stocks and more.

**_4.7.11 The Ministry of Transport_**
**_and Communications_**
The Ministry of Transport and Communications
has sectoral responsibility for security and
preparedness within aviation, port operations,
roads, railways, electronic communications (Ekom)
and postal services, as well as preventive maritime
security and preparedness against acute pollution.
Furthermore, the ministry has responsibility for
the regulations related to security against terror in
ports and port terminals “International Ship and
Port Facility Security Code” (ISPS), as established
in IMO (International Maritime Organization) and
EU regulations, as well as the responsibility for
the regulations associated with security against
terror in aviation, which are also established in EU
regulations.

The Ministry of Transport and Communications’
subordinate agencies and affiliated companies
have an independent responsibility for security
and emergency preparedness within their own
sector and organization. The Civil Aviation
Authority of Norway ensures that relevant security
and emergency preparedness plans are being
adhered to by actors within aviation, and has a
coordinating role in security events, including as
head of the Security Council for Aviation. Avinor
AS is responsible for providing aircraft security
services and for maintaining an appropriate level
of security at government airports. Bane NOR SF is
the infrastructure administrator in accordance with
railway legislation and has primary responsibility
for providing functioning railway infrastructure
to the train companies, and is responsible for
ensuring that it is safe and accessible for traffic.
Bane NOR SF is responsible for the coordination of
security work within the sector and has operational


-----

**_4.7.12 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs_**
The MFA has a main responsibility for maintaining
Norway’s foreign- and security policy interests
and will have the overriding responsibility for
coordinating the handling of crises affecting
Norway’s foreign- and security policy interests.
In the event of security policy crises, the MFA will,
among other things, be responsible for diplomatic
measures and issues relating to international law,
dialogue with allies and other states, follow-up and
handling in NATO, the United Nations and other
multilateral organisations, and in close consultation
with other affected ministries.

The MFA will normally be the lead Ministry in
emergency situations abroad where Norwegian
citizens are affected. The MFA’s responsibility for
dealing with crises abroad involving Norwegian
citizens is based on the Foreign Service Act and
the Foreign Service Instructions[59], and is embodied
in the White Paper to the Storting no. 37 (20042005) and White Paper to the Storting no. 12
(2010-2011)[60]. The host country’s authorities are
responsible for the safety of everyone staying
on their territory and consequently for dealing
with crises. Norwegian government assistance
will thus be a supplement to the local authorities’
own efforts, and assumes the consent of the host
country.

The MFA has established a special crisis-and
emergency preparedness organisation to assist
Norwegian citizens abroad in crisis situations. All
foreign service missions regularly prepare risk
analyses and have their own crisis- and emergency
preparedness plans that are updated annually or
more frequently. The MFA’s crisis staff has its own
Emergency Response Unit, which can assist foreign
missions in dealing with extraordinary events. Policeand health personnel are permanent members of
the Emergency Response Unit, while professional
military personnel will be involved as needed.
Depending on the scope and nature of the crisis,
other ministries and agencies will support the MFA’s
handling of the crisis. The MFA’s crisis management
organisation is well trained on interacting with
national resources, principally in the areas of health,
the Police and the Norwegian Armed Forces. It

59 Act of May 3, 2002 no. 13 on the Foreign Service and Foreign

Service Instructions of December 13, 2003.

60 The White Paper to the Storting no. 12 (2010-2011) on Assistance

_to Norwegians abroad._


responsibility for the coordination of emergency
preparedness and crisis management. The Railway
Authority ensures that relevant security- and
emergency preparedness regulations are adhered
to. The Public Roads Administration has a general
responsibility for security and contingency
planning in the roads sector. The Norwegian
Communications Authority is responsible for
following up security and contingency planning
in the electronic communications network- and
services, including the Internet. The Norwegian
Communications Authority provides advisory
services and oversees that laws, regulations and
licensing terms are adhered to. The Norwegian
Communications Authority also leads the Electronic
Communications Security Forum with the
participation of security authorities and the main
providers of electronic communication networks.
Furthermore, the Norwegian Communications
Authority also operates EkomCERT which is a
response function that deals with events in the
electronic communications network- and services.

The Coastal Administration has the operational
responsibility for preventive maritime security,
port security, and governmental preparedness
against acute pollution. In accordance with
delegated provisions of the Pollution Control Act
and the Svalbard Environmental Protection Act,
the Coastal Administration prevents and identifies
acute pollution at sea and on land, as well as
ensuring that the responsible municipality or
polluter implements necessary measures when
acute pollution occurs. If the responsible party
does not implement adequate measures, the
Coastal Administration will itself take action on
behalf of the responsible party, if this is deemed
necessary according to the scope of the pollution.

The Coastal Administration operates five vessel
traffic centres that regulate and monitor shipping
traffic in defined geographical areas along the
Norwegian coast. The vessel traffic centres are
to oversee vessels with hazardous cargo and
to initiate immediate measures in the event of
deviations or events in Norwegian seas. The
Coastal Administration is also responsible for
national emergency towing preparedness in
Norway.


-----

may be appropriate for the Norwegian Armed
Forces to assist with military capabilities, such as air
transportation.

NATO and EU are our most important partners
in international cooperation on civil protection,
emergency preparedness and crisis management.
NATO’s civil preparedness efforts are focused
on coordinating and improving the efficiency of
national civilian resources (see further discussion


of this work in Chapter 7). Norway participates with
the EU in various types of civilian cooperation and
has been an active contributor to the EU’s civilian
and military crisis-management operations for
several years. Our participation in EU operations
is regulated in a framework agreement from 2004.
Cooperation on security and contingency planning is
also high on the agenda in the Nordic cooperation,
the Barents cooperation and the Arctic cooperation,
among others (cf. Chapter 7).


-----

5. THE ROLE OF THE DEFENCE SECTOR IN THE TOTAL DEFENCE


**5.1 Security- and defence policy objectives and**
**the defence sector’s role in the total defence**

**_5.1.1 Security- and defence policy objectives_**
The primary purpose of Norwegian security- and
defence policy, is to secure Norwegian sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political freedom of action.
The mainstays of Norwegian security policy are
the NATO alliance and the transatlantic security
partnership. Norwegian contributions is aimed at
assisting in the prevention of armed conflict and
ensuring that peace and stability are safeguarded
within a global, multilateral legal system based on
the principles embodied in the UN pact.

The Norwegian Armed Forces are a fundamental
and decisive security policy instrument in securing
Norwegian sovereignty and Norwegian rights,
and in preserving Norwegian freedom of action.


The Norwegian Armed Forces, together with
allies, will contribute to deterrence so thatany
gain from threatening or challenging Norwegian
security cannot compare with the costs it entails.
The Norwegian Armed Forces will contribute to
ensuring that military threats against Norway do
not occur.

The Norwegian Armed Forces, together with
allies, will secure the collective defence of Norway
and its allies against threats, plots and attacks.
Through participation in international operations
and capacity building in certain countries, the
Norwegian Armed Forces will prevent war and
contribute to security and stability.

The Norwegian Armed Forces will contribute to civil
protection by support to, and cooperation with,
civil authorities in connection with terrorist attacks Special Forces rappelling


-----

and other major incidents, accidents and natural
disasters.[61]

**_5.1.2 Security- and defence policy priorities_**
Norwegian security and defence policy must
increasingly relate to the fact that changes to
our security policy environment can occur very
rapidly. Challenges to European and transatlantic
security must be responded to with cooperation,
determination and predictability. Security policy
developments have implications for our operative
ambitions, the commitment to the Norwegian
Armed Forces and international cooperation.
Norway must be capable of taking greater
responsibility for its own security.

In the long-term plan for the defence sector, the
priorities of further development of the Norwegian
Armed Forces are presented as follows (ibid, p. 18):

**•** [Strengthening the defence of Norway]

**•** [Strengthening NATO’s collective defence]

**•** [Contributing to international efforts]

**•** [Develop the total defence]

**_5.1.3 Tasks of the Norwegian Armed Forces_**
The tasks of the Norwegian Armed Forces are
defined from the Storting and the Government
overall mission for the Norwegian Armed Forces.
The Armed Forces structure and operational
capabilities are to be developed in order to carry
out tasks within this framework. The tasks are
summarized as follows (ibid, p. 22):
**1.** Ensure credible deterrence based on NATO’s
collective defence

**2.** Defend Norway and its allies against threats,
plots and attacks, within the framework of
NATO’s collective defence

**3.** Avert and deal with episodes and security
policy crises using national resources,
including facilitating allied involvement

**4.** Ensure a national decision-making basis
through surveillance and intelligence

**5.** Assert Norwegian sovereignty and sovereign
rights

**6.** Assert exercise of authority in limited areas

**7.** Participate in multinational crisis management,
including peacekeeping operations

**8.** Contribute to international cooperation in the
security- and defence policy area


**9.** Contribute to the safeguarding of civil
protection and other key societal functions

Duties 1 – 7 are defining for the Armed Forces. This
means that the Norwegian Armed Forces must
be equipped, manned and led specifically to solve
these tasks. Since the Armed Forces support to
civil society is task no. 9 it is basically not a defining
task. However, it is also stated in the long-term
plan for the defence sector that support to civil
society to a greater extent will be guiding for the
organisation and defining of certain capabilities in
the Armed Forces (ibid, p. 22).

In order to carry out their tasks, certain divisions
of the Armed Forces have a short reaction time,
whereas others have longer reaction time and
their forces need to be built up to full operational
capability. The total operational capability,
including ability to react, is adapted to the current
security policy situation and economic frameworks.

Following is a brief overview of the different
elements of the defence sector, with focus on their
role in the total defence.

**5.2 The Ministry of Defence**

The Ministry of Defence (MOD) is responsible for
the formulation and implementation of Norwegian
security and defence policy. The Minister of
Defence leads the MOD and is constitutionally
responsible for the activities of the defence sector.
The MOD is responsible for the strategic leadership
and control of the Norwegian Armed Forces and
the other agencies within the sector.

MOD’s strategic responsibilities include planning
and leading the Armed Forces long-term
development, managing and following up the
Ministry’s subordinate agencies, supporting
the Minister’s daily activities, planning for- and
managing the main aspects of the Armed
Forces operations in peacetime, crisis and
armed conflict, as well as maintaining capacity
for strategic crisis management where military
force could be applicable. The MOD controls
strategic crisis management through the
Analysis- and Coordination Group. In addition,
MOD contributes to cross-ministerial cooperation


61 White Paper No. 151 S (2015-2016) Capable and Sustainable, p.

17.


-----

on total defence- and emergency preparedness
issues, and follows up contingency planning in the
defence sector. Furthermore, MOD is responsible
for international cooperation on defence- and
security policy.

The Ministry represents the political-strategic level
of the defence sector’s operational activities and
crisis management. This level provides political
guidance for the Armed Forces operational
activities. MOD assesses the security policy
development, including coordinating with other
Ministries and allied countries. MOD also deals
with security policy issues within the framework of
international organisations such as NATO and the
UN. As needed, MOD determines and implements
necessary measures within the defence sector.

MOD develops and issues the Emergency
Preparedness System for the Defence Sector. This
is part of the National Emergency Preparedness
System discussed in more detail in Chapter 3.

**5.3 Defence sector agencies**

**_5.3.1 The Norwegian Armed Forces_**
The Armed Forces are MOD’s largest subordinate
agency with the Chief of Defence as head of the
agency and leader of operations. The Chief of
Defence is the country’s most senior military official
and is the Government and Minister of Defence’s
adviser in military affairs. The Chief of Defence has
total command of Norwegian military forces.

**_The Norwegian Defence Staff_**
The Defence Staff is part of the Chief of Defence’s
support apparatus. The Head of Defence Staff
supports the Chief of Defence in the role of head
of department and acts as the Chief of Defence’s
deputy when he/she is prevented from carrying
out his/her official duties. The head of Defence
Staff is delegated authority by the Chief of
Defence to lead the Armed Forces’ operations. The
departments and secretariat within the Defence
Staff form part of the agency management.

In its support function to the Chief of Defence,
the Defence Staff represents the military-strategic
level of the Armed Forces’ operational activities
and crisis management. Within this framework,


the Defence Staff deals with episodes and minor
crises on a daily basis. In situations requiring
reinforced efforts, the Defence Staff crisis
organisation is established, designated as the
Strategic Plan Group. The Strategic Plan Group is a
situation-oriented leadership- and staff unit that
can attend to the Defence Staff military strategic
role, responsibility, authority and tasks on a
continuous basis.

The Defence Staff is to attend to the Chief of
Defence’s responsibility for control of the daily
operations of the Armed Forces. The Defence
Staff tasks include effectuating cross-prioritization
and management by objectives and results. It is
responsible for checking that assigned funds are
effectively utilized, including ensuring that the
Armed Forces have the best possible operational
capability in relation to designated tasks and
assigned resources.


-----

**_The Norwegian Joint Headquarters_**
The operational lines of control run from the Chief
of Defence, via the Defence Staff, to the Chief of
the Norwegian Joint Headquarters (NJHQ)[62]. NJHQ
represents the operative level of the Armed Forces
operational activities and crisis management. The
Chief of NJHQ is responsible for planning and leading
the Armed Forces operations in peacetime, crisis
and armed conflict, and is assigned operational
command of the force structure to carry out
operations. All operational activities are controlled
from NJHQ, based on political and military strategic
guidance. The headquarters is also responsible
for the allocated Norwegian force contributions to
operations abroad. NJHQ plans and conducts most
of the major military joint exercises in Norway and
facilitates allied training, according to guidelines
from the Chief of Defence.

62 This does not apply to intelligence operations, where the lines

of control go from the Chief of Defence to the Head of the
Intelligence Service.


On a daily basis, NJHQ continuously monitors
the situation within Norwegian areas of interest
on land, sea and air, and obtains a timely basis
for national decision-making. NJHQ leads the
daily assertion of sovereignty through territorial
surveillance and military presence along
Norwegian land-, air- and maritime borders. Air
sovereignty is handled on behalf of NATO, and
nationally, through the control- and warning
system with combat aircraft on high readiness.

NJHQ handles the daily management of the Armed
Forces tasks related to legal authority in certain
areas. Today, the Armed Forces legal authority
is effected mainly by resource control and other
controls at sea and border surveillance along the
Norwegian-Russian border. This is done primarily by
the Coast Guard and Border Guard.


-----

NJHQ plans and coordinates the Armed Forces
support to the Police and other civilian authorities
and agencies. NJHQ has at all times an overview
of the military assets that may be requested to
assist the Police or other civilian authorities. In
accordance with instructions,[63] NJHQ is responsible
for dealing with requests for assistance to the
Police. For further description of procedures for
request for assistance, see point 5.5.

**_The Intelligence Service_**
The Intelligence Service is the country’s national,
cross-sectorial civilian and military foreign
intelligence service. The Chief of the Intelligence
Service has coordination- and advisory authority
on behalf of the Chief of Defence for all civilian
and military intelligence operations in the Armed
Forces. The Chief of the Armed Forces Military
Geographic Service and the Chief of the Armed
Forces Intelligence College are subordinate to the
Chief of the Intelligence Service.

The main task of the Intelligence Service is to
obtain information on conditions outside of
Norwegian borders. The Intelligence Service
collects, processes and analyses information such
as other countries’ social development, military
forces and intentions that may potentially pose
a risk to national security, in order to provide a
necessary basis for decision-making r national
authorities in matters related to foreign-, securityand defence policy.

Several of the tasks the Intelligence Service
performs are important contributions to civilian
authorities, such as the collection of information
on international terrorism, international
environmental problems and information on the
manufacture and dissemination of weapons of
mass destruction.

The Intelligence Service possesses its own collecting
capacity. If needed, the Service can also make use
of the established cooperation with the services
of other countries. Given the competence of the
Service in respect of processing and evaluating large
volumes of information, it could make a substantial
contribution to a common, national situational

63 The Royal Decree of June 16, 2017 on the Instruction for

the Norwegian Armed Forces’ assistance to the Police (The
Assistance Instruction).


understanding of incidents and crises abroad. Such
a common understanding is particularly important
in the early phases of crisis management.

The Intelligence Service cooperates extensively
with the Norwegian Police Security Service[64].This
cooperation, and a smooth and rapid exchange of
information between the Intelligence Service and
the Police Security Service in the area of counterterrorism is essential in order for the services to be
able to employ their total resources effectively and
to carry out their social responsibilities.[65]

The Joint Counter-Terrorism Centre is manned with
personnel from both the Police Security Service
and the Intelligence Service. The mandate of the
Joint Count-Terrorism Centre is to strengthen the
Service’s capacity to share information as the basis
for problem solving, to produce analyses that
provide a relevant basis for decision-making and to
ensure rapid and relevant information exchange in
counter-terrorism operations.

**_The Norwegian Armed Forces_**
**_Security Department_**
The Norwegian Armed Forces Security Department
has overall responsibility for the exercise of the
preventive security service in the Armed Forces.
The function of the Security Department is to
ensure that the Armed Forces activities are
organised, carried out and revised in accordance
with the Security Act[66].

The Armed Forces Security Department maintains
an oversight of the security risk picture affecting the
Armed Forces and Norwegian military activity both
at home and abroad. The Armed Forces Security
Department is also the Chief of Defence’s and
subordinate leaders’ adviser in the area of preventive
security. The Department will represent the Chief of
Defence, in cooperation with the Norwegian Police
Security Service and the National Security Authority
in matters related to preventive security. The Armed
Forces Security Department also represents the Chief
of Defence in national and international cooperating
agencies in the area of security service.

64 Royal Decree of October 13, 2006 on instructions for the

cooperation between the Intelligence Service and the Norwegian
Police Security Service.

65 See for example, The White Paper No. 10 (2016-2017) Risk in a

safe and secure society p.93.

66 Law on Preventive Security Service of July 1, 2001.


-----

The Armed Forces Security Department is the
central clearance authority for personnel in the
Norwegian Armed Forces, and exercises military
counter-intelligence. The Department reports to
the Chief of the Norwegian defence staff.

**_Tactical commanders and operational capacities_**
The commanders of the Army, Navy, Air Force,
Home Guard, Special Forces and other operational
units in the Armed Forces are responsible for the
production of operational capacities within their
respective areas. The production of operational
capacities includes the development of materiel,
tactics, organisation and personnel as well as
education and training. This applies to both
operational capacity and readiness, nationally and
internationally. Military commanders also have
responsibility for operational leadership of their
own forces at the tactical level.

**The Army’s tasks:**

**•** [Most conflicts require territorial control with ]

the presence of soldiers on the ground, and it is
here that the Army has the most important role.

**•** [The Army is a guarantor for Norway being ]

able to maintain its international obligations
in respect of NATO and the United Nations in
international operations. The Army is also the
main supplier of soldiers and divisions to the
norwegian deployment in Afghanistan.

**•** [In peacetime, the Army is responsible for ]

having at least one force in national readiness
at any given time, i.e. the force can come into
action at very short notice. Other regular,
daily tasks are to control border areas with
Russia and to guard the Royal Family.


a number of important tasks relating
to customs supervision, environmental
supervision, rescue missions and port control.
The Coast Guard has legal authority with legal
basis in the Norwegian Coast Guard Act.

**The Air Force’s tasks:**

**•** [Continuous state of readiness for air ]

surveillance, exercise of authority and
assertion of sovereignty.

**•** [To operate the rescue helicopters in addition to ]

tasks related to resource- and environmental
surveillance missions, and search and rescue
operations

**•** [To support all of the Norwegian Armed Forces ]

with helicopters, transport aircraft and combat
aircraft.

**•** [Contribute internationally with aircraft, ]

helicopters and personnel in operations led by
NATO and the UN.


**The Home Guard tasks:**

**•** [The Home Guard acts as a rapid mobilization ]

force for the Norwegian Armed Forces and
with its local connections it is an important
link to civilian society and a number of
emergency preparedness agencies.

**•** [The Home Guard has local territorial ]

responsibility on behalf of the Chief of NJHQ.
Based on their local territorial responsibility,
the district commanders of the Home Guard
handle the daily coordination and interaction
with civilian actors in the country’s counties
and municipalities. The Home Guard has a
presence throughout the country and has very
good local knowledge, making the Home Guard
an important resource in norwegian securityand emergency preparedness efforts.

**•** [The main tasks are guarding and securing ]

important military and civilian objects,
national crisis management, assistance to the
Police in accordance with instructions and
other support to civil society

**The Norwegian Special Forces**
The Special Operations Command consist of the
Special Operations Commando and the Naval
Special Operations Commando and are assembled
in a joint division led by the Special Forces staff
which coordinates operations. The Special
Operations Command has rapid reaction ability


**The Navy’s tasks:**
The Navy is comprised of the Fleet and the Coast
Guard

**•** [The primary function of the Fleet is to be able ]

at all times to secure the military defence
of Norwegian maritime areas if necessary.
This responsibility also involves maintaining
Norwegian freedom of action against military
and other pressures and ensuring free access
to Norwegian territorial waters and ports.

**•** [The Coast Guard’s main tasks are to monitor ]

the territorial waters, assert Norwegian
sovereignty and put in effect Norwegian
authority. The Coast Guard carries out


-----

and undertakes both national and international
missions. The commandos are capable of gathering
information and offensive operations on hostile
territory. In peacetime, the commandos are
prepared to support the Police in combating
terrorist acts on offshore installations, vessels in
Norwegian waters and onshore installations.”

The Special Operations Command is in a state
of readiness at all times to provide assistance
to the Police, including hostage rescue and
counter-terrorism. In addition, the commando has
capacity to carry out hostage rescue and rescue of
personnel overseas. The commando has capacities
within the whole range of special force tasks.

**_The Armed Forces Cyber Defence_**
The Armed Forces Cyber Defence main task is
to operate and develop the Armed Forces’ ICT
infrastructure and to support the Armed Forces’


operations both nationally and internationally.
Freedom of action in the cyber domain is essential
for the exercise of command and control in the
conduct of military operations. Similarly, this
access is essential for the operational logistics and
administrative support functions of the Armed Forces’
overall operations. One particularly important task
is to secure and protect the Armed Forces’ computer
systems, networks, and high-tech platforms from
cyber attacks. Cyber Defence operations in the digital
space are of a defensive nature.

The Cyber Defence function is to manage the
Armed Forces total information infrastructure and
to lead the development towards a network-based
defence, also in a civil-military context. Networkbased defence involves the use of information
technology to link capacities and actors together in
a network, both across the branches of the military
service and at different levels of the organization.


-----

The intention is, inter alia, to provide the most
up-to-date and complete decision-making basis.
National network solutions must be grounded
within the framework of the total defence to
ensure the best possible utilization of available
resources.

The Armed Forces, if requested, can provide
assistance to civilian authorities at major cyber
incidents in accordance with applicable principles
and regulations for the Armed Forces’ assistance to
the Police and other civilian authorities. This may,
for example involve technical advice, support from
units with special competence, assistance with
communication network recovery and support with
more general expertise such as security, protection
and transport to assist in dealing with cyberattacks and any resulting consequential damages.
Assistance related to civilian operators’ handling of
major data attacks must be coordinated with the
National Security Authority.

**_The Norwegian Defence Logistics Organisation_**
The Norwegian Defence Logistics Organisation
is the sector authority for logistics in the Armed
Forces and the Chief of the Logistics Organisation
is the Chief of Defence’s closest logistics adviser.
Logistics are critical to the Norwegian Armed
Forces’ operational capability in the context of
building practical military strength, the build-up
of forces and carrying out of operations. The
Logistics Organisation is responsible for the
supply of logistics to the Armed Forces’ divisions in
peacetime, security policy crisis and armed conflict,
including:

**•** [Logistics concepts for the Armed Forces ]

divisions, and entering into readiness
agreements with civilian suppliers of logistics
services on behalf of the Armed Forces.

**•** [Planning, coordination and leadership of joint ]

operational logistics and the Armed Forces
Joint Medical Services, as well as coordination
of host nation support.

**•** [Operational procurement of goods and ]

services by carrying out purchasing, managing
contracts and framework agreements with
Norwegian and foreign suppliers.

**•** [General responsibility for supplies to the ]

Armed Forces divisions.

**•** [Heavy maintenance of materiel.]

**•** [Transport of personnel and materiel]


The Logistics Organisation is responsible for
concluding agreements with civilian authorities and
contractors to address the Armed Forces logistics
needs related to readiness, build-up of forces and
operations. For reasons of readiness, the Chief
of the Logistics Organisation will use as much as
possible the same civilian suppliers in peacetime,
including in exercises, as in crisis and armed conflict.

**_The Norwegian Armed Forces_**
**_Joint Medical Services_**
The Armed Forces Joint Medical Services is the
Armed Forces’ competent authority for all medicaland veterinary services. The Chief of Joint Medical
Services will ensure that the Armed Forces have
a thorough, operational and sustainable medical
service available at all times to support the Armed
Forces operations in all aspects of the conflict
spectrum before, during and after operations.

The Joint Medical Services is responsible for the
build-up of operational strength of medical service
capabilities for joint operational use, including
strategic air evacuation. The Joint Medical Services
provides specialised medical services within
disciplines such as traumatology, aeronautical
medicine, diving medicine, military psychiatry and
stress management, general medicine and medical
testing for selection of military personnel, dental
health including support to the Criminal Police
Centre in identification, epidemiology, microbiology
and competence in biological warfare agents. The
Joint Medical Services operational provision of joint
resources must be seen in the context of the branch
of the military services integrated medical services.

The Veterinary Inspector of the Armed Forces is
responsible for the sector, and for the Joint Medical
Services division for veterinary operations and
services. The Veterinary Inspector acts as technical
adviser and is responsible for the development of
capacity in the field of food hygiene, animal health,
animal welfare and biological import protection.
In addition, the Veterinary Inspector supports the
Armed Forces operations in the field of medical
force protection.

The Joint Medical Services is responsible for
contributing to the development of the military
medical field of expertise both in a NATO context
and in the context of total defence. In this


-----

connection, the Joint Medical Services cooperates
with the health- and veterinary authorities. The
Chief of the Joint Medical Services is deputy chair of
the Health Emergency Council, see Chapter 6.

**_The Norwegian Armed Forces HR_**
**_and Conscription Centre_**
The Armed Forces HR and Conscription Centre is
responsible for conscription to the Armed Forces.
The Chief of the HR and Conscription Centre is
the Chief of Defence’s closest adviser in matters
related to conscription and is responsible on his
behalf for joint conscription administration. HR and
Conscription Centre is to ensure optimal manning
of all units in the Armed Forces organisation
in both peacetime and war by effective use of
the conscription force. On behalf of the Chief of
Defence, the Chief of HR and Conscription Centre
has executive responsibility for administration
of the scheme for exemption from compulsory
service in the Armed Forces during security policy
crises and armed conflict (the exemption scheme)
to cover other areas of the total defence’s need for
personnel.

The HR and Conscription Centre is the recruitment
unit for all military personnel and carries out the
drafting of allocated personnel in force build-up.

**_5.3.2 The Norwegian Defence Estates Agency_**
The Defence Estates Agency is a subordinate
agency to MOD. The Estates Agency function
as administrator is to safeguard the owners’
interests and responsibilities associated with
the management of the property of the defence
sector, building and construction, gunnery ranges
and training fields) as well as for the removal and
disposal of hazardous waste. The MOD is the
owner of estates on behalf of the State. The estates
agency is the defence sector estates technical
adviser on behalf of the owner and users. The
Armed Forces are its largest and most important
partner in the defence sector, but the estates
agency also has customers in other public sectors.

The Estates Agency has an independent readiness
responsibility associated with supporting the
Armed Forces’ operational activities in peacetime,
during security policy crises and armed conflict.
This includes responsibility for participation in
the planning, preparation and implementation


of contingency measures for estates, and critical
infrastructure related to the Armed Forces
operations, as well as coordination with civilian
agencies by contributing to reserve solutions for
the supply of electricity, water and the like. The
Agency has a corresponding responsibility and
tasks in the establishment of Norwegian forces
in international operations. The estates agency is
to ensure that the Armed Forces’ operations have
access to the right solutions for the protection of
infrastructure both in Norway and abroad.

The National Competence Centre for Securing
of Buildings is organized as a unit in the estates
agency, and is established to meet the state’s
overall need for services in the protection and
securing of property, buildings and installations.
The Centre is dependent on governmental
cooperation and joint utilization of resources. The
Centre is a commission-funded advisory centre and
complements National Security Authority’s role as
adviser and guide in security of vital and important
objects.

**_5.3.3 The Norwegian Defence_**
**_Research Establishment_**
The Defence Research Establishment is a
civilian research institution, organized as an
administrative agency with special powers, and
directly subordinate to the MOD. The purpose
of the research establishment is to carry out
applied research and development to meet the
needs of the defence sector. To the extent that
it is consistent with its purpose, the research
establishment is to contribute to civil protection,
industrial and technological developments in
Norway, including taking on assignments for
civilian authorities, industry and business.
Particular emphasis is placed on its contribution to
the development of better cooperation between
civilian and military resources in crises and armed
conflict. The research establishment also carries
out assignments for the justice sector and other
civilian authorities and is an active participant in
several international research projects through
NATO, the European Defence Agency and the EU
Framework programmes for research in protection
and civil protection.

ICT security is becoming increasingly important
for the production of most services from critical


-----

societal infrastructures. Since 1997, the research
establishment has been carrying out research on
the dependence on ICT systems within the main
societal functions, and how information security
in these ICT systems will help increase robustness
and a reduced risk to society.

The research establishment operates the defence
sector’s environmental database which is central
to the sector’s eco-management. The research
establishment provides advice to the sector
in environmental issues and has its own R & D
activity on the sector’s environmental impact and
mitigating measures. The research carried out in
this area is to a great extent transferable to civil
society.

The research establishment deals with threat
awareness, vulnerability analyses, protection- and
readiness measures against conventional weapons
and chemical (C) and biological (B) agents and
weapons, radiological (R) agents, nuclear weapons
(N), against non-military explosives (E) and other
hazardous substances in the event of emission
through intentional actions or unintentional
incidents. The work in the field of CBRN agents/
weapons is based on the threat assessment of
such agents/weapons which includes how the
substances are spread in the environment, the
consequences they entail, the impact they have
on the environment and the individual, and
the methods that can be used to clean up CBRcontaminated areas and personnel. Furthermore,
measures are deduced that can be implemented to
prevent use and minimise damage from all of these
weapons and hazardous substances. The research
establishment acts as adviser to the Nuclear
Emergency Preparedness Crisis Committee, and
in addition contributes to scientific and technical
knowledge in support of national authorities
export control and preventive work.

The research establishment has the only national
integrated laboratory for receiving, handling
and analysing samples with possible content
of CBRE-agents alone or in combination. The
research establishment has signed an agreement
with the Ministry of Justice and Public Security,
the Ministry of Health and Care Services and the
Ministry of Defence for its function as “Emergency
Preparedness Laboratory for CBRE samples”. The


agreement regulates the research establishment
function as an emergency preparedness laboratory
for samples with unknown content, a potential
combination of unknown chemical, biological and
radiological substances, and/or explosives in the
same sample and particularly hazardous chemical
substances. The agreement allows for the research
establishment capabilities being made available to
civilian- and readiness agencies.

The research establishment has been conducting
research on civilian readiness and the vulnerability
of society since 1994 in the research programme
“Protection of Society”. The program has a longterm goal to contribute to a thoroughly prepared
concept for the protection of the population
and society in general, as well as to support
the continuing prioritization of readiness- and
protection measures. The eighth project in the
program is intended to contribute to better civilmilitary collaboration within the framework of the
total defence, with particular emphasis on civilian
support to the Norwegian Armed Forces.

**_5.3.4 The Norwegian National_**
**_Security Authority_**
The National Security Authority is a civilian
directorate subordinate to MOD. National Security
Authority reports to MOD for assignments
on behalf of the defence sector and to JD for
assignments in the civilian sector. National Security
Authority is mandated to exercise overall and
cross-sectoral responsibility on behalf of the MOD
and the Minister of Justice and Public Security for
preventive security service in accordance with
the Security Act[67]. The Chief of National Security
Authority is the closest adviser to the Minister
of Defence and the Minister of Justice and Public
Security on questions related to preventive action
against security-threatening activities that can
affect national and societal values.

National Security Authority is to support the
Ministry of Justice and Public Security MOJ in the
Ministry’s coordination role and act as prime
mover for civil protection in the civilian sector. In a
situation where a ministry other than MOD or MOJ
is given responsibility for crisis management, the

67 Crown Prince Regent’s Resolution of July 4, 2003 – Distribution of

responsibility between the Preventive
Security Service and the Norwegian National Security Authority.


-----

Chief of National Security Authority also provides
expert reports on the situation to this Ministry,
with subsidiary reports to the MOD and MOJ.

National Security Authority is the cross-sectoral
authority for the preventive security service
in Norway. The Directorate is responsible for
coordinating preventive security measures and
controls the security situation of entities covered
by the Security Act. This includes state- and local
government administration and private enterprises
that provide classified procurements to the public
sector.

National Security Authority is the competent
authority for the development of preventive
security measures. National Security Authority is
a supervisory authority and has legal authority
to ensure compliance with the Security Act
with regulations and the Defence Secrets Act.
National Security Authority works closely with
the Intelligence Service and the Norwegian
Police Security Service within several fields
of expertise. Furthermore, National Security
Authority participates in national and international
committees and working groups, and has
security cooperation with relevant countries and
international organisations.

MOD has administrative responsibility for the
Security Act with complementary regulations.
In March 2018, the Storting adopted a new law
on National Security (the Security Act) which will
replace today’s Security Act (planned for January
2019). The purpose of the regulation is for it to
help safeguard norwegian sovereignty, territorial
integrity and democratic form of government and
other national security interests. It is intended
to prevent, uncover, and counteract securitythreatening activities, and will ensure that security
measures are implemented in accordance with
basic legal principles and values in a democratic
society. The new law has a wider scope of impact
and is more focused on civil protection in general
in contrast to the current act’s focus on national
security (“Security of the Realm”). This will mean
that more enterprises than today will be subject
to the law. Some of these will be private. The
regulations govern all measures to secure protected
information, information systems, objects or
infrastructure that are crucial to basic national


functions. See also the discussion of security of vital
and important objects in Chapter 4.

National Security Authority is a national warning-,
information-sharing and coordination agency for
cyber-attacks against critical societal infrastructure
and information. The National Security Authority
NorCERT (Norwegian Computer Emergency
Response Team) operates the Digital Infrastructure
Warning System (VDI), which is a national sensor
network with the objective of detecting attempted
cyber-attacks against critical societal functions.

The function of National Security Authority is to
maintain a comprehensive overview of the ICT
risk picture. Within its scope of responsibility,
National Security Authority acts as the national
contact point for warning of cyber-attacks to and
from relevant nations, NATO and other relevant
international organisations. National Security
Authority represents Norway in NATO’s Security
Committee and Capability Panel 4 on Information
Assurance and Cyber Security.

National Security Authority leads the Joint Cyber
Coordination Centre, which also comprises the
Norwegian Intelligence Service, the Norwegian
Police Security Service and National Criminal
Investigation Service. The Joint Cyber Coordination
Centre is a permanent and co-located specialist
environment, consisting of permanent
representatives from each agency[68]. The Centre
is not an independent body and does not have
independent decision-making authority.

The Joint Cyber Coordination Centre scope of
action covers major incidents in cyber space. The
Centre’s functions are in the fields of analysis,
information exchange, crisis- and contingency
plans, enhancement of competence, product
development in all three branches, coordination
of handling of incidents, and coordination of
collaboration with joint partners. Coordination
takes place within the framework of the EOS
Services and the National Criminal Investigation
Service areas of responsibility and therefore does
not apply to all handling of ICT security incidents.
Nor is the Centre an agency from which enterprises
can request assistance with ICT incidents.

68 Mandate for FCKS in "Guidelines for Cyber Cooperation" from

2017.


-----

## 5


**_5.3.5 The Norwegian Defence_**
**_Materiel Agency_**
The Defence Materiel Agency is responsible,
on behalf of the Government/MOD, for the
procurement, management and disposal
of materiel for the Armed Forces and other
operations in the defence sector. The Materiel
Agency is responsible for the administration of
the Armed Forces materiel throughout its lifetime
in order to maintain performance, technical
availability and security in accordance with
legislation, regulations and other requirements.
The Materiel Agency is the competent technical
authority for all materiel in the defence sector
and is responsible for the maintenance of
technical availability and for meeting operational


requirements throughout the lifetime of the
materiel.

The responsibility for planning and executing
investment projects was transferred from the Armed
Forces to the Materiel Agency on its establishment.
In addition, several tasks related to international
materiel cooperation were delegated from MOD.

In addition to planning, procurement and
administration of materiel, the Materiel Agency also
has a considerable responsibility to support the
Armed Forces build-up of forces and readiness, as
well as to carry out readiness activities within its
own agency.


-----

**5.4 The Norwegian Armed Forces**
**support to civilian society**

In its handling of the long-term plan for the
defence sector, the Storting has agreed that the
Armed Forces should primarily prioritize their main
military tasks, but that the Armed Forces available
resources should be able to assist in civilian crisis
management, dependent on the actual situation
and the needs of the civilian authorities.[69] The
Armed Forces contribute to civilian society in a very
broad spectrum of situations. Some contributions
are of a routine nature, while others are of an
ad hoc nature. There is a long tradition for the
Armed Forces to provide assistance to civilian crisis
management. The Armed Forces primary mission
is to defend Norway from external attacks and
assert norwegian sovereignty and sovereign rights.
However, today’s complex threat picture and global
development tendencies also lead to an increased
need for good civilian-military cooperation to
ensure civil protection.

The Armed Forces structure is dimensioned to
accomplish the primary tasks, i.e. tasks 1 – 7 cf.
Chapter 5.1.3. Nevertheless, the support to civilian
society should be determining to a greater extent
for the constitution and dimensioning of the
Armed Forces capabilities in certain areas. This is
relevant when planning dedicated missions, standby orders, localization, training requirements,
exercises and training, as well as the ability to
interact with agencies outside of the defence
sector (ibid p.22).

The Armed Forces primary tasks and ability to
resolve them must form the basis of the assistance
tasks. It is a principle that the Armed Forces
support should lie within the scope of the available
capabilities at any time. As a general rule, no
new military capabilities or structures should be
procured for supporting civil society (ibid, pp. 46
and 49).

Although the structure and operational capabilities
are primarily developed to address military
tasks, certain capabilities are also relevant to,
and therefore oriented towards, assistance to
civilian authorities. The special forces and their

69 White Paper No. 151 S (2015-2016) Capable and Sustainable, p.

26.


helicopter services have dedicated missions and
readiness, which means that the Police’s need for
assistance is to a certain extent determining for the
organization, equipping, manning and training of
these capabilities. This also applies to some degree
to the Home Guard. Also other selected units stand
on crisis- and readiness alert. This requires suitable
operational capability and response time in order
to rapidly resolve specific tasks related to crisis
management and assistance to civilian authorities
(ibid, p. 48).

If requested, the Armed Forces can assist the Police
and other civilian authorities with civil protection
when civilian resources are inadequate, e.g. in the
event of natural disasters, accidents and criminal
acts such as terrorism. The Police and other civilian
authorities are responsible for dealing with such
incidents, and therefore the Armed Forces only
have a supporting role. The Armed Forces are alone
responsible for the military defence of the nation.
Military operational capabilities must not be tied
up to civilian readiness in a way that it reduces
their ability to address their military duties, unless
otherwise decided (ibid, pp. 47 and 48).

**5.5 The Norwegian Armed Forces**
**support to the Police**

If requested, the Armed Forces may provide
support to the Police. Support from the Armed
Forces is regulated by special instruction[70]. The
instruction establishes conditions for the Armed
Forces assistance to the Police, and provides
the Armed Forces and the Police with guidelines
for procedures, collaboration and requests for
assistance.

The instruction ensures that decisions on
assistance from the Armed Forces to the Police
can be taken as quickly as possible in crisis. All
decisions regarding request for, and granting of,
assistance are taken by government agencies,
usually by NJHQ and in the relevant police district
or by the National Police Directorate. The Chief of
Police in the relevant district considers the need for
support from the Armed Forces. The responsible
Chief of Police assesses which capabilities it is most

70 The Royal Decree of June 16, 2017 on the Instruction for the

Norwegian Armed Forces’ assistance to the Police.


-----

appropriate to employ in any given situation. The
Ministries exercise reactive control.

Society need for rapid response will be guiding for
both the Police and the Armed Forces in the face
of incidents, plots and accidents that threaten the
life and health of the population or critical societal
interests. The Police are responsible for resolving
their tasks using their own resources. In situations
where their own resources are considered to be
inadequate or are not available, the Police should
as soon as possible consider requesting assistance
from the Armed Forces according to the rules
established in this instruction. At the request of the
Police, the Armed Forces should provide assistance
as far as possible, without it being at the expense
of pressing military tasks that are more important
than those to which the request applies. The
Armed Forces may set operational conditions for
the support.

Personnel in the Police and the Armed Forces are
obliged to arrange for, and contribute to, assistance
being provided as quickly and efficiently as the
situation requires.

**_5.5.1 Relationship to Section_**
**_101 of the Constitution_**
Section 101, third paragraph, of the Constitution
establishes restrictions to the use of military power
against citizens of the State. If military force is to
be used, it must have authority in law or it must be
applied against types of rebellion that cannot be
stopped by other means. This provision basically
affects all direct use of military personnel in the
exercise of power, even if they are unarmed.
In this context, the order of command is of no
importance. In accordance with the wording and
intentions of the Constitution, the primary aim
of the provision is to limit the executive branch’s
access to the use of military force outside of the
Storting’s control. The Armed Forces assistance
to the Police is embedded in law through the
provision in the Police Act (section 27a) and the
Constitution’s requirement to legal authority for
the Armed Forces use of force against citizens with
assistance of the Police, are thus safeguarded.

**_5.5.2 Procedures for request for assistance_**
A request for assistance may be presented in
writing by the Chief of Police, the National Police


Directorate or the Police Security Service to NJHQ,
which informs of its decision to the requesting
agency. In specific cases, duplicates of the request
and decision are to be sent immediately to the
Ministry of Justice and Public Security (MOJ) and
MOD, which exercise general executive prerogative.
In critical situations, a request for assistance may
be presented and decided verbally, and confirmed
in writing.

Early warning of a possible need for such
assistance is essential in order to start the
necessary preparations and reduce the response
time. Therefore, the Armed Forces and the Police
have a mutual obligation to establish immediate
dialogue as soon as there arises a situation that
may necessitate assistance from the Armed Forces.

**_5.5.3 The Role of the Norwegian_**
**_Police and the Norwegian Armed_**
**_Forces in Terror Readiness_**
The terrorist attacks of July 22, 2011, and the
political follow-up on national emergency
preparedness, have clarified the responsibilities
and roles of the Armed Forces and Police in the
national terrorism readiness and the need for the
Armed Forces to be prepared to assist the Police
and other civilian authorities.

The Police have the responsibility for preventing
and fighting crime, including terrorism, through
national justice policy measures and international
police cooperation[71]. This means that the Police
have primary responsibility for preventing, averting
and combating terrorist acts in peacetime, crisis
and armed conflict.

In turn, the Armed Forces have the primary
responsibility for asserting norwegian sovereignty
and sovereign rights, and for defending the country
from external attacks (national security).

There may be gliding transitions between terrorism
as a form of crime, and terrorist attacks that are
of such a nature as to cause them to be regarded
as armed attacks on the nation in accordance with
the UN pact. The Police are primarily responsible
for preventing and fighting terrorism. The Armed
Forces are responsible for dealing with an armed

71 The Police Act of August 4,1995 section 2.


-----

**_5.5.4 The Norwegian Armed Forces_**
**_support to the Police in terrorist attacks_**
Although responsibility for the prevention and fight
against crime lies with the Police, the Armed Forces
have an important supporting role in accordance
with the prerequisites and principles outlined in
the assistance instruction.

Some of the Armed Forces capabilities are
particularly relevant and are specifically trained and
equipped to assist the Police in a terrorist situation.


attack on Norway. The Government determines
whether a terrorist attack is to be considered
an armed attack. The Armed Forces also have
an independent responsibility for dealing with
situations whereby a civilian aircraft, through its
pattern of operation, raises suspicion that it may
be used as a weapon in a terrorist attack. Such
situations are time-critical, and only the Armed
Forces possess the capabilities to deal with these
threats.


-----

The Norwegian Special Operations Command
and the Armed Forces helicopter services have
dedicated missions and readiness, which means
that the Police need for assistance is to a certain
extent determining for the organization, equipping,
manning and training of these capabilities. This
also applies to some extent for submarines, Coast
Guard and the Home Guard.

The Special Operations Command was established
in 1982 with a special mission to be prepared to
assist the Police in the event of counter-terrorism
operations at sea. If requested, the division can also
assist the Police with terrorist incidents on land. At
Rygge, two Bell 412 helicopters remain on permanent
emergency standby with rapid reaction times, and
these can provide both general- and emergency
assistance to the Police. At Bardufoss, there are two
helicopters on standby, which, if requested, can
provide general assistance to the Police.

**5.6 The Norwegian Armed Forces**
**support in security of vital and important**
**objects with security forces**

In the instruction on securing and protecting
objects[72], provisions are established for
responsibility and cooperation between the
Police and the Armed Forces for security of vital
and important objects using security forces. The
Police are to act to protect objects from situations
that threaten the general security of society, iaw.
the Police Act. The Police’s responsibility for the
protection of objects against attacks of a criminal
nature, which is limited in respect of the Armed
Forces responsibility to protect objects from
attacks of a military nature, does not change in
principle during crisis and armed conflict.

The Armed Forces can assist the Police with
security of vital and important objects according
to the provisions of the assistance instruction.
Any need that the Police may have for preplanned assistance from the Norwegian Armed
Forces in security of vital and important objects,
and the objects to which this applies, should
be communicated to the Norwegian Armed

72 The Royal Decree of August 24, 2012 on the instruction for the

securing and protecting of objects by the use of security forces
from the Norwegian Armed Forces and the Police in peacetime,
crises and war.


Forces. The Police and the Armed Forces should
collaborate in planning the securing of these
objects. The Police decide which objects to predesignate and for which plans should be made.
The Police decide whether to implement securing
and whether the Armed Forces should be asked for
assistance.

The Home Guard is a key resource in supporting
the Police’s guarding and securing of important
objects. This is because the Home Guard operates
nationwide, and because the forces also have
special expertise in security of vital and important
objects, since this is also one of their primary
military tasks during armed conflict. Home Guard
assistance to the Police’s security of vital and
important objects will primarily be of a preventive
nature, and will mainly be relevant in connection
with situations where extensive security of vital
and important objects is implemented and/or
where the need for protection could extend over
a longer period of time so that Police resources
are inadequate. The Defence Act[73]is the legal basis
for calling up Home Guard, both in peacetime and
when there is a threat of war. The civilian service
duty of Home Guard soldiers in peacetime is
embodied in section 17 of the Defence Act.

Another important resource for security of vital
and important objects, and particularly in the
national capital, is His Majesty the King’s Guard. The
Guard should be able to provide rapid assistance
to the Police with security assignments within the
framework of the assistance instructions.

**5.7 The Norwegian Armed Forces’**
**support to other public authorities**

The Armed Forces can assist other public
authorities in addition to the Police.[74] The same
principles apply for such assistance as for the
Armed Forces assistance to the Police. It will not
be relevant to provide assistance involving the
execution of power to other public authorities than
the Police. There is work in progress developing a
specific regulation aimed at regulating assistance
to public authorities other than the Police.

73 The Act on compulsory military service and service in the

Norwegian Armed Forces, etc. of August 12, 2016.

74 The White Paper No. 10 (2016-2017) Risk in a safe and secure

society p.111.


-----

Next to the Police, the County Governor is an
important player in the local and regional civilianmilitary cooperation (ibid, p. 161). The County
Governor is given coordinating responsibility
during major incidents, including floods and
other natural disasters[75]. This responsibility for
readiness applies to incidents in peacetime, crisis
and war. The County Governor is responsible
for coordinating the regional crisis management
during major incidents and for coordinating
assistance from the Armed Forces to civilian
society and vice versa. It is the County Governor’s
responsibility to coordinate the civilian sector of
the Total Defence and to ensure that the collective
resources are utilized in the most appropriate
manner. The County Emergency Council has been
established to support the County Governor’s
readiness responsibility. See also Chapter 6.

**5.8 Other Norwegian Armed**
**Forces support to civil society**

Provisions on civil-military cooperation have legal
authority in the following laws, among others:

**•** [The Defence Act]

**•** [The Customs Act]

**•** [The Intelligence Services Act]

**•** [The Security Act]

**•** [The Coast Guard Act]

Civil-military cooperation encompasses all forms of
cooperation between the Norwegian Armed Forces
and civil society.

Following is an explanation of the support the
Armed Forces provide to civil society within a
broader civil-military framework. Some aspects
of this support are of a routine nature and are
included as defined tasks for the Armed Forces.

**_5.8.1 Access to support_**
In general, the Armed Forces are not imposed an
obligation to support civil society. It is usual for the
Armed Forces to be given access to support civil
society in specific areas. A notable exception is the
Armed Forces participation in the rescue service,


which is based on the collaboration principle[76].
The Customs Act[77] section 20 is an exception, in
that it is determined that the military authorities
are obliged to provide the customs service with
necessary assistance and protection in the
execution of customs tasks. Moreover, the Coast
Guard Act has certain obligating provisions.

**_5.8.2 Support regulated by agreement_**
Support to civil society may be regulated by
agreement in some areas. Such regulation by
agreement must naturally lie within the framework
of relevant regulations. In some cases, regulation
by agreement will be required in particular if
there is a significant risk that, without such an
agreement, the Armed Forces may incur liability for
damages by such support.

The Armed Forces’ overall documentation of
regulations, instructions and directives is collected
in a database of documents that also have to do
with the total defence. Typical document types
are agreements, Royal Decrees, instructions,
plans, mandates and more. Currently, the total
defence segment of the database contains almost
300 documents, and is available on a National
RESTRICTED network.

By compiling all total defence documents
electronically, this will ensure that anyone with an
official need obtains speedy and easy access to
the necessary documents in crisis, in peacetime or
in war. Ministries and underlying agencies assist
in keeping the database updated and relevant by
submitting new documents for publication, and
removing expired documents.

The database is administrated bythe Armed Forces
Joint Services/Regulatory Unit.

**_5.8.3 The Defence Act_**
The Defence Act deals with the national service of
conscripts and civilian service duty. Conscripts who
are called in for ordinary service in peacetime, i.e.
compulsory national service and refresher training,
may be required to provide support to civil society if

76 In this context, the collaboration principle of the rescue service is

understood to imply that all government agencies with resources
suitable for search and rescue are obliged to participate in the
rescue service. The term, as used here, should not be confused
with the overall national security and readiness principles:
"Responsibility, proximity, equality and cooperation".

77 Act on customs and carriage of goods of December 21, 2007.


75 Royal Decree of June 19, 2015 on Instructions for the County

Governor’s and the Governor of Svalbard's work on civil
protection, readiness and crisis management (the County
Governor's Civil Protection Instructions).


-----

**_5.8.6 The Security Act_**
A key purpose of the Security Act is to allow
for effective counteraction of threats to the
independence and security of the Realm and
other vital national security interests. The law
applies to all governmental, regional and municipal
agencies, and to suppliers of goods or services
in connection with classified procurements. The
Ministries will also be able to make decisions
stating that the law will also apply to other nonpublic agencies. A Ministry will be able to make
decisions, within its remit, that the law in whole
or in part will apply to agencies that process
classified information, have control of information,
information systems, objects or infrastructure that
have decisive importance for fundamental national
functions, and operate activities that have decisive
significance for basic national functions.

National security interests are defined as national
sovereignty, territorial integrity and democratic
form of government as well as security policy
interests related to operations at the highest
level of government, security and freedom
of action, defence, security and readiness,
relationship with other states and international
organisations, economic stability and freedom of
action, fundamental societal functions and the
fundamental security of the population.

Fundamental national functions means services,
production, and other forms of activity of such
importance that an entire or partial loss of the
function will have implications for the state’s ability
to protect national security interests.

Preventive security work means planning,
facilitating, implementing and controlling
preventive measures against activities that
threaten security and the consequences of such
activity.

Security-threatening activities are defined as
deliberate acts that, directly or indirectly, may
harm national security interests.

The Ministries are responsible for preventive
security work within their areas of responsibility
and for identifying and maintaining an oversight
of fundamental national functions, identifying
and maintaining an oversight of operations that


this is deemed necessary, and is not implemented in
a planned scope that is in conflict with the primary
purpose of the compulsory national service.

In addition, conscripts can be called in for so-called
extraordinary service. This involves special exercises
to strengthen the Armed Forces, extraordinary
security and service required to maintain law and
order, and civilian work when important societal
interests make it necessary, as well as emergency
services when the Armed Forces or any part of
them are ordered to be placed on a war footing for
readiness purposes, cf. The Defence Act section
17. For example, what is included in the concept of
“important societal interests” must be determined
in each case. The authority’s perception of the
situation will normally have decisive significance.

**_5.8.4 The Customs Act_**
In the Customs Act[78] section 12-3, it is stated that
_“the Police and military authorities will provide the_
_customs authorities with the necessary assistance_
_and protection in the execution of the customs_
_service”. The Coast GuardCoast Guard and the_
Customs Service have entered into a collaboration
agreement, which further regulates Coast Guard
Coast Guard as the observing, controlling and
action-taking unit for the Customs Service at sea[79].

**_5.8.5 The Intelligence Service Act_**
According to the Intelligence Service Act[80], the
intelligence service is to assist in registering
and counteracting external threats to the
independence and security of the Realm and other
important national interests.

In accordance with the law, the Intelligence Service
has the responsibility to gather, process and analyse
information pertaining to Norwegian interests
in relation to foreign countries, organizations
or individuals, and on this basis develop threat
analyses and intelligence assessments to the
extent they can help secure important national
interests. The relationship with civilian delegating
authorities and users of the service is regulated in
the Instructions for the Intelligence Service[81].

78 Act on customs and carriage of goods of December 21, 2007.
79 The collaboration agreement between the Coast Guard and the

Customs Service of June 6, 2005.

80 The Intelligence Service Act of March 20, 1998.
81 Instructions of August 31, 2003 no. 1012 on the Intelligence

Service


-----

have a significant impact on fundamental national
functions, making decisions that the Security
Act should apply in whole or in part to specific
operations within its own sector, and reporting
their oversight to the National Security Authority

Security of vital and important objects regulations
came into force on January 1, 2011[82]. The regulation
expands on the Security Act’s regulations on
Security of vital and important objects, and
provides further rules on how responsibility for
the protection of securable objects (buildings,
installations and other objects that must be
protected from security- threatening activities for
reasons of security of the Realm or of Allies, or
other vital national security interests) is taken care
of to reinforce these against security-threatening
activities. The regulation sets out in further detail
how the designation and classification of objects,
and the planning of security measures, should be
done. It is up to the individual sector Ministry to
designate and determine the classification level of
securable objects, but then normally according to
proposals from the agency that controls the object.

Although measures already exist, the regulation will
help to harmonize the designation and classification
of objects across the sectors of society. The
National Security Authority, as the overall
regulatory body according to the Security Act,
will thus obtain a real opportunity for advice and
guidance in the area. The object owner is obliged to
protect the securable object in accordance with its
stipulated classification, including allowing for the
security forces to prepare, rehearse and carry out
measures on and at the object in order to protect it.
The regulation has the same purpose and scope as
the Security Act.

See also Chapter 4 on object securing.

**_5.8.7 The Coast Guard Act_**
Coast GuardCoast Guard tasks listed in the
Coast Guard Act[83]. It states that Coast Guardis
responsible for asserting Norwegian sovereignty
in Norwegian territorial waters and sovereign
rights in seas under Norwegian jurisdiction. This
entails surveillance, inspection and control in the

82 FOR 2010-10-22 no. 1362: Regulations on object securing,

established by Royal Decree October 22, 2010.

83 Act of June 13, 1997 no. 42 on the Coast Guard.


Norwegian economic zone, the fishery protection
zone around Svalbard, in the fishery zone of Jan
Mayen and on the Norwegian continental shelf.
In addition, Coast GuardCoast Guard performs
tasks related to assistance to the fishing fleet,
port control, assistance to customs surveillance,
environmental surveillance and readiness to
combat oil pollution. Coast Guard also has limited
police authority pursuant to the Coast Guard Act
to carry out the tasks the Coast Guard has been
given in accordance with the law. In these cases,
the Coast Guard is neither led by the Police, nor
is deemed to assist the Police in the sense of the
assistance instruction.

Coast Guard also has a statutory duty to
participate in, and conduct, search- and rescue
operations at sea, as well as to report on and
render harmless drifting objects. The Coast
Guard Act further gives authority to Coast Guard
to provide assistance to the Police and other
government agencies in need of vessels in the
performance of their operations.

**_5.8.8 The Border Guard_**
The Police- and customs authorities are primarily
responsible for the border control. However,
border surveillance along the 196 kilometre-long
Norwegian-Russian border in Finnmark (i.e. outside
of the permanent Storskog border crossing), has
been taken care of by the Border Guard since1959.
In this area, the Border Guard is assigned limited
police authority. In addition, Border Guard carries
out a military duty in terms of asserting Norwegian
territorial sovereignty along the border. Border
Guard assistance to the Norwegian Border
Commissioner and the Police is regulated in the
instructions on border surveillance.[84]

**_5.8.9 The Norwegian Armed Forces_**
**_support in connection with air transport_**
**_and medical aircraft evacuation_**
By means of an “agreement between the
Directorate of Health and the Armed Forces
operational headquarters concerning mutual
assistance”, dated December 7, 2011, civilian health
authorities can make use of the Norwegian Armed
Forces air transport capabilities. This could be

84 Royal Decree of August 5, 2005 on the instruction for

cooperation on surveillance of the land border between Norway
and Russia.


-----

transportation of critically ill people, transport of
body organs and ambulance readiness. Such use
of the Armed Forces resources should not compete
with civilian resources, and the support to the
Air Ambulance Service is implemented only if the
Armed Forces have available capacity for this type
of mission.

The Armed Forces have an agreement with
Scandinavian Airlines for medical evacuation
by air of Norwegian patients from abroad in
specially-equipped aircraft. The agreement applies
to repatriation of injured Norwegian citizens and
can be used both by the Armed Forces and civilian
health services. According to the agreement, the
airline makes aircraft available and the Armed
Forces provide medical personnel and materiel. It
would be most relevant to make aircraft available
in extraordinary situations with a larger number of
injured persons, and not in cases where it would
be natural to use the ordinary systems for air
transport of patients.

**_5.8.10 The Norwegian Armed Forces_**
**_role in the coastal readiness_**
The Ministry of Transport and Communications
is responsible for the national readiness against
acute pollution, with the Norwegian Coastal


Authority as executive agency. The Armed Forces
are an important contributor to readiness against
acute pollution.

The cooperation between the Coastal Authority
and the Armed Forces ensures rapid presence
at the injury site and the implementation
of necessary action. Based on a readiness
cooperation between the Armed Forces and the
Coastal Authority the Armed Forces have the
authority to exercise action leadership in situations
requiring immediate action implementation. This
means that the Armed Forces are able to act until
the Norwegian Coastal Authority, as the main
responsible agency, is ready to take over and lead
the action. Thus this cooperation is no substitute
for, but comes in addition to, other agencies’
readiness organizations.

The collaboration between the Armed Forces
and the Coastal Administration is regulated in a
separate cooperation agreement.[85]

The Coastal Administration is working on
establishing a common superstructure for agencies
and authorities that have a responsibility or role
in actions against acute pollution. Its purpose is to
ensure holistic planning and follow-up.

85 The main Cooperation Agreement between the Norwegian

Armed Forces and the Norwegian Coastal Administration of May
10, 2007.


-----

6. CENTRAL CRISIS MANAGEMENT AND COOPERATING

AGENCIES WITHIN THE TOTAL DEFENCE

**“An effective defence of our country will [...] not be possible without a**
**well-organized and as efficient as possible top management.” [86]**


**_6.1.1 The Storting_**
The Storting establishes important frameworks for
the military and civil readiness, such as readiness
legislation and the annual budgets.

The Extended Foreign- and Defence Committee is
tasked with discussing with the Government key
foreign policy-, security policy-, defence policy and
readiness issues. The Committee consists of the
ordinary members of the Foreign- and Defence
committee, the President of the Storting and the
leaders of the party groups. The leader calls the
Committee together whenever deemed necessary
or when the Prime Minister, Foreign Minister or a
third of the Committee’s members request it. The


**6.1 Central crisis management- and [86]**
**cooperating agencies within the total defence**

**The central crisis management and**
**coordination agencies are:**

**•** [The Storting]

**•** [The Government]

**•** [The Government Security Committee]

**•** [Office of the Prime Minister]

**•** [The Ministries]

**•** [The Emergency Council]

**•** [The Lead Ministry]

**•** [The Emergency Support Unit]

86 The Defence Commission of 1946, part 3, p. 5.


-----

same applies when the Minister of Defence requests
on important readiness issues, or when the Minister
of Justice and Public Security requests a discussion
of questions related to readiness against terrorism.
The negotiations in the Committee are secret unless
otherwise expressly stated.[87]

**_6.1.2 The Government_**
The Government has the supreme responsibility
for the emergency preparedness in Norway,
including the overall political responsibility for
both the control and management of preventive
readiness efforts and individual crises that arise.
The Government deals with a number of readiness
cases, both through the budget process and
the discussion of other issues in Government
conferences and in the Government’s security
committee. According to our parliamentary system,
each Cabinet Minister has the constitutional
responsibility for his or her sector, within the laws
and appropriations given by the Storting. This
means that the individual Cabinet Minister also
retains his or her constitutional responsibility in a
crisis situation.

**_6.1.3 The Government’s Security Committee_**
If the Prime Minister so wishes, a question may
be dealt with in the Government’s Security
Committee, rather than in plenum by the
Government. This will primarily be applicable
when the question is of defence- or security policy
importance, and the information is of such a
confidential nature that it cannot be discussed by
the Government in plenum. The composition of
the Committee may vary slightly from government
to government, but the Prime Minister, the Foreign
Minister, the Justice Minister, the Defence Minister
and the Finance Minister are normally permanent
members of the Security Committee.[88]

**_6.1.4 Office of the Prime Minister_**
The Prime Minister leads and coordinates the
work of the Government. These are tasks that the
Prime Minister will also have in a crisis situation.
The Prime Minister will also play a central role in
respect of external communication, contact with
other countries’ heads of government, international
organizations, the parliamentary leaders in the

87 The Storting's Rules of Procedure of November 12, 2013, section 16.
88 Report to the Storting No. 29 (2011-2012) onCivil Protection,

Chapter 6.1.


Storting, the Royal Family etc. The Prime Minister’s
involvement in each crisis will depend on the nature
and scope of the crisis etc. In crises that fall within
the scope of emergency legislation, the Prime
Minister is delegated special powers in situations
where it is unavoidably necessary to make decisions
to safeguard the interests of society.

The Office of the Prime Minister must plan for the
Prime Minister and the Government to be able
to perform their duties also in crisis situations
and to enable the office to carry out its duties as
the Secretariat for government conferences, the
Government’s Security Committee and for the
King in Council. The office must be able to provide
administrative support, secretariat functions and
contribute with advice.

**_6.1.5 The Ministries_**
Each Government Minister also retains his or her
constitutional responsibility in a crisis situation. In
the event of crises, Ministries must obtain situation
reports from their own operational activities and
be able to identify and make decisions on necessary actions within their own area of responsibility
to deal with the particular situation, including
elaborating the basis for decisions and providing
overriding policy clarifications where necessary.
The ministries are to ensure that operational
agencies have the necessary powers, and assess
the need for international assistance in their own
sector. Furthermore, the ministries must be able to
deal with communication with the media and the
public. This work must be coordinated with other
ministries and especially with the ministry that is
designated as the Lead Ministry.

**_6.1.6 The administrative apparatus for_**
**_coordination of national crisis management_**
The administrative apparatus for national
crisis management is an extension of the main
principle of readiness in Norway (the principle of
responsibility). The ministry that is responsible
for a sector on a daily basis is also responsible
for contingency planning and actions in a crisis
situation. This structure applies in principle to all
types of crisis situations, from crises in peacetime,
such as natural disasters and pandemics, to
security policy crises and war. The administrative
coordination apparatus in connection with
national crisis management is based on three


-----

main elements: The Emergency Council, the Lead
Ministry and the Emergency Support Unit.

**_The Emergency Council_**
The Emergency Council is the highest
administrative coordination body at the ministerial
level, and it is established to reinforce the central
coordination.[89] The Council has five permanent
members: the Secretary to the Government at
the Prime Minister’s Office, the Secretary General
at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) and the
Permanent Undersecretaries of the Ministry of
Justice and Public Security (MOJ), the Ministry
of Health and Care Services and the Ministry of
Defence (MOD). If necessary, the Council may
be extended to include all the other ministries
and representatives of subordinate agencies and
environments with special competence.

The main function of the Emergency Council is to
contribute to national crisis management by:

**•** [Securing strategic assessments.]

**•** [Considering questions related to the Lead ]

Ministry.

**•** [Ensuring the coordination of actions ]

implemented by different sectors.

**•** [Ensuring the coordination of information to ]

the public, the media and others.

**•** [Ensuring that questions that require political ]

clarification are quickly presented to the
political leadership of the ministries or the
Government, including the clarification of
powers and budget.


Ministry in the event of civil national crises,
unless otherwise determined.[90] The Ministry’s
responsibility for coordination, and for the majority
of the civilian rescue- and readiness resources in
Norway, means that the MOJ will always have a
central role in most cross-sectoral national crises.
In a number of situations, and in the case of events
that primarily affect one particular sector, it would
be natural for the relevant ministry to have the
lead ministry role, rather than the MOJ. In the
event of a security policy crisis and armed conflict,
the MOD and the MFA, by virtue of their sector
responsibility, will have a special responsibility
for dealing with defence-, security- and foreign
policy issues. The Emergency Council is granted
authority from the Government to decide which
ministry should be the Lead Ministry in a particular
crisis, and the Council will decide whether the MOJ
or another ministry should be the Lead Ministry.
In the event of doubt or disagreement in the
Emergency Council, the choice of Lead Ministry is
decided by the Prime Minister in consultation with
the affected Ministers

The designation of a Lead Ministry does not entail
changes to constitutional responsibilities, and all
Ministries retain the responsibility and decisionmaking authority for their respective sectors.

In a crisis situation, the Lead Ministry will carry out
the following:

**•** [Develop overall situation reports, based ]

on information from other ministries,
subordinate agencies and the media situation,
amongst others.

**•** [Identify and evaluate the need for measures ]

at the strategic level.

**•** [Provide for the necessary coordination ]

of measures within their own area of
responsibility, and with other ministries and
agencies.

**•** [Arrange for coordinated information to be ]

provided to the media and the population in
general.


Any of the ministries can take the initiative to
convene meetings of the Emergency Council.
The Lead Ministry leads the Council’s meetings.
The Council is led by the MOJ unless otherwise
determined. The Emergency Support Unit is the
permanent secretariat for the Council. A system
has been established for regular, periodic meetings
of the Council for the purpose of discussion,
clarification of the main readiness and crisis
management challenges, and for the review of
relevant events and exercises.

**_The Lead Ministry_**
The MOJ is designated the permanent Lead

89 Royal Decree of September 1, 2017 on Instructions for the

Ministries’ work on civil protection (The Civil Protection
Instruction), Chapter VII.


**_The Emergency Support Unit_**
The Emergency Support Unit is organised as
part of the MOJ, and is intended to support
the Lead Ministry and the Emergency Council

90 Ibid, Chapter VIII.


-----

in their coordination functions and to act as
the permanent secretariat for the Emergency
Council. The Emergency Support Unit has
competence in strategic crisis management as
well as infrastructure capabilities. This includes
support for analyses, the preparation of overall
situation reports and the establishment of shared
situational awareness. Mobile technical solutions
form part of the infrastructure.

The Norwegian Civilian Situation Centre is
organized as part of Emergency Support Unit and
is the permanent point of contact for information
to and from the MOJ during extraordinary events
and crises.

**6.2 Cooperation- and readiness**
**agencies within the total defence**

There are a number of cooperation- and
readiness agencies within the total defence. The
main agencies are discussed below, arranged
in alphabetical order under each Ministry. The
following summary includes cooperation- and
readiness agencies that do not work together on a
daily basis, but are called in as needed.

**_6.2.1 The Ministry of Finance_**
**_The Financial Infrastructure_**
**_Readiness Committee_**
The Financial Infrastructure Readiness Committee
was established by a decision of Norge’s Bank’s
Executive Board on October 11, 2000. The
Committee is composed of representatives
of government agencies and key actors in
the financial sector. The Norwegian Financial
Supervisory Authority acts as the leader and
secretariat of the Committtee.[91]

The Financial Infrastructure Readiness Committee
coordinates measures to prevent and resolve crisis
situations and other situations that may result in
major disruptions to the financial infrastructure. In
an emergency situation, the Committee will notify
and inform concerned parties and authorities of
the problems that have arisen, the consequences
of the problems, and the actions taken to address
the problems. Furthermore, the Committee will

91 Mandate for the Financial Infrastructure Readiness Committee


conduct the necessary coordination of readiness
issues within the financial sector, including
coordinating the preparation and implementation
of warning plans and readiness measures in the
event of security policy crises and war. The forum
has operational functions, but not decision-making
authority.

**_6.2.2 The Ministry of Defence_**
**_The National Total Defence Forum_**
The National Total Defence Forum was created by
Royal Decree on September 23, 2005. The Forum
is a cooperating body made up of the leaders of
the most important agencies and directorates
within the total defence. The MOD, the MOJ and
the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries are
permanent observers. The Forum is intended
to be a meeting place for mutual orientation,
coordination and overall coordination of relevant
total defence-related problems and issues related
to civil-military cooperation and civil protection.
The leadership of the Forum alternates every
second year between the Chief of Defence and
the Directorate for Civil Protection.[92] The National
Total Defence Forum has neither decision-making
authority nor operational functions.

**_The Coast Guard Council_**
The Coast Guard Council is a cooperation and
contact body that is intended to deal with and
advise on issues relating to the Coast Guard’s
operations pursuant to the Coast Guard Act. The
Council also acts as a forum for mutual contact and
information.

The Coast Guard Council is an advisory body to the
MOD and is intended to advise on issues affecting
the Coast Guard’s operations, including input to
long-term plans and annual budgets, with the aim
of contributing to good use of resources within the
applicable framework.

The Coast Guard Council is composed of
representatives from the MOD, the MFA, the MOJ,
the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries, the
Ministry of Climate and Environment, the Ministry
of Transport and Communications, the Directorate
of Fisheries, the Directorate of Customs and Excise,
the Police Directorate, the Coastal Administration,

92 Royal Decree of September 23, 2005 on the establishment of the

National Total Defence Forum, with subsequent amendments.


-----

Rogaland Regional Public Prosecution Office,
the Petroleum Safety Authority, the Nature
Inspectorate, the Joint Rescue Coordination Centre,
the Norwegian Joint Headquarters and the Chief of
the Coastal Administration. Also representatives
of Norwegian business and industry and other
organizations whose interests are affected may
be invited to the Coast Guard Council. The MOD
acts as the leader and secretariat of the Coast
Guard Council.[93] The Coast Guard Council has
neither decision-making authority nor operational
functions.

**_6.2.3 The Ministry of Health_**
**_and Care Services_**
**_Nuclear Preparedness Crisis Committee_**
The Nuclear Preparedness Crisis Committee and its
advisers has been established to provide expertise
in the handling of nuclear events, and to provide
rapid implementation of measures to protect life,
health, the environment and other important
societal interests. Nuclear events include both
accidents and events resulting from intentional
acts in peacetime, in security policy crises or armed
conflict.

The nuclear preparedness is organised in the
Nuclear Preparedness Crisis Committee, the
Nuclear Preparedness Crisis Committee’s advisers,
the Nuclear Preparedness Crisis Committee’s
secretariat (the Norwegian Radiation Protection
Authority), together with the County Governors
and the Governor of Svalbard.[94] The Nuclear
Preparedness Crisis Committee is made up of the
following national authorities: The Norwegian
Radiation Protection Authority, the Directorate for
Civil Protection, the Norwegian Armed Forces, the
Police Directorate, the Directorate of Health, the
Food Safety Authority, the Coastal Administration,
and the MFA.

The Radiation Protection Authority is the leader
and secretariat of the Committee. The secretariat
notifies the Committee’s, members, advisers and,

93 FOR 1999-11-05 no. 1146, Instructions on the Coast Guard

Council's composition, duties and activities. Established by Royal
Decree November 5, 1999.

94 Regulation 1023 of August 23, 2013 Mandate and composition of

the Nuclear Preparedness Crisis Committee with advisers, as well
as the mandate to the County Governor and Regulation 1024 of
August 23, 2013 Delegation of the King's authority according to
the Radiation Protection Act section 16, second paragraph, to the
Nuclear Preparedness Crisis Committee.


where appropriate, information officers from other
agencies, as well as county governors, ministries
and other relevant authorities or organisations.
The Committee has been established to achieve
a coordinated, effective and rapid handling of
the acute phase of nuclear events, to advise
ministries and other authorities in the latter
phase of an event, and to provide professionally
satisfactory support to the ongoing preparedness
work. The main objective is to protect life, health,
the environment and other important societal
interests.

In the acute phase of an event, the Nuclear
Preparedness Crisis Committee is responsible for
coordinated information to national government
and partners at home and abroad, the county
governors, the media and the public in general.
The Committee can implement appropriate action
during the acute phase of a nuclear accident.
Whenever the situation and time allows, the
Committee should first contact the responsible
sector ministries. Measures that affect military
situations and operations must always be clarified
with the MOD. The measures are implemented
by the member agency in the Crisis Committee
authorized to do so. The Radiation Protection
Authority is the authority and the sector agency
for radiation protection, and is the national and
international point of contact in nuclear events. In
the case of minor events with radioactive sources,
the Radiation Protection Authority handles the
situation. Locally, the Police coordinates the
emergency services’ operational handling of the
situation at the site of the event. The National
Radiation Protection Authority has the expertise
and equipment to be able to assist in dealing with
such situations.

The Counties Governor is the Committee’s regional
link and leads the County’s Nuclear Preparedness
Committee. During a nuclear event, the Counties
Governor will arrange coordination and contribute
to the implementation of coordinated measures
regionally and locally. This applies to both
protection measures and the dissemination of
information to the press and the public.


-----

**_The Cross-sectorial Group for_**
**_Coordination of Nuclear Preparedness_**
The Ministry of Health and Care Services leads the
Cross-sectoral Group for Coordination of Nuclear
Preparedness, which is made up of representatives
from central ministries. In accordance with the
principle of responsibility, the ministries are
responsible for ensuring that the emergency
preparedness of its own sector is satisfactory
and is coordinated with other sectors. In the case
of any nuclear events, the individual ministries
and competent authorities are responsible for
measures where authority has not been given to
the Crisis Committee. The cooperation of relevant
ministries in the ongoing preparedness work is
organised through the cross-sectoral group for
coordination of nuclear preparedness.

**_The Health Emergency Council_**
The purpose of the Health Emergency Council
is to enable the civilian and military sectors to
resolve important health tasks related to civilmilitary planning and cooperation during crises
in peacetime and war, and to ensure efficient
utilization of the resources in the field of health
preparedness in close cooperation between the
Norwegian Armed Forces and the health service.

The Health Preparedness Council is led by
the Director of the Health Directorate. Other
participants are the Chief of the Norwegian Armed
Forces Joint Medical Services (deputy leader) the
directors of the National Institute of Public Health
and the Norwegian Radiation Protection Authority,
the chiefs of the Norwegian Armed Forces’ Logistics
Organisation, the NJHQ and a representative of the
Directorate for Civil Protection.[95] Other agencies
may be called in when needed. The Council is
advisory and has no operational function.

**_The Pandemic- and Epidemic Committee_**
The Pandemic and Epidemic Committee is an
advisory body for the Health Directorate and
the Institute of Public Health and gives advice on
measures before, during and after any outbreak of
pandemic influenza. The Health Directorate leads
the Committee while the Institute of Public Health
has the secretariat. The Committee is an advisory
body with no operational function.

95 Royal Decree of November 19, 2004 on the Health Emergency

Council, changes to mandate and composition.


**_6.2.4 The Ministry of Justice_**
**_and Public Security_**
**_The Ministerial Advisory Board_**
**_for Public Security_**
The Ministerial Advisory Board for Public Security is
a forum for information- and experience exchange
between the ministries in their work related to
civil protection. The Advisory Board comprises
representatives of all ministries and the the Office
of the Prime Minister and is to discuss overall
guidelines and frameworks for the work of civil
protection, as well as any need for clarification
of responsibilities. The Advisory Board has no
operational duties in a crisis.

**_The Counter-Terrorism Contact Group_**
The Contact Group is led by The Police Security
Service and comprises representatives from both
government agencies and private enterprises.
It is intended to help strengthen the mutual
information exchange and contact between the
participants by informing on and discussing the
consequences to Norwegian interests of changes
to the national and international threat picture,
informing on and exchanging views on relevant
measures to prevent terrorism, as well as informing
on and discussing changes to the threat picture in a
longer perspective.

The Police Security Service will report to the MOJ
on the activities of the contact group in accordance
with the instructions for the service. The counterterrorism contact group is a preventative forum
for information exchange and has neither decisionmaking authority nor operational functions.

**_The Cooperation Area for Chemical-_**
**_and Explosive Preparedness_**
The Cooperation Area for Chemical- and Explosive
Preparedness is comprised of a governmental
group at the directorate level, an advisory
group and a secretariat. The Directorate for Civil
Protection leads both the Governmental Group
and the Advisory Group, and takes care of the
secretariat function.

The main purpose of the Cooperative Area is to
support the coordination role of the MOJ in the
area of chemicals and explosives. By this means,


-----

the Cooperative Area will contribute to a crosssectoral, holistic and coordinated effort in the
area of chemical- and explosive preparedness at
the directorate levels, and provide good technical
advice at the local, regional and central levels with
undesirable events, accidents and intentional
actions throughout the entire crisis spectrum.

The Cooperative Area will also contribute to a
coordinated risk- and threat understanding,
clarify roles, identify deficiencies and weaknesses,
establish best practices for communication,
exercises, propose actions, exchange experiences
and learning and arrange regional cross-sectoral
readiness preparations.

**_The Natural Disaster Forum_**
The Natural Disaster Forum has replaced the
former cooperation area for nature. The network
is an arena for efforts to strengthen cooperation
between different agencies in respect of natural
hazards, and will have the status as Norway’s
national platform for the implementation of the
Sendai framework.[96]

The Natural Disaster Forum is intended to facilitate
cooperation between different national, regional
and local agencies to reduce our vulnerability to
undesirable natural events. A steering group has
been established comprising the Directorate for
Civil Protection, the Norwegian Water Resources
and Energy Directorate, the Norwegian Public
Roads Administration, Bane NOR SF, the Ministry
of Agriculture and Food, the Association of Local
and Regional Authorities, the Environment Agency,
and a representative of the county preparedness
managers.

**_The Coordination Group for the_**
**_Major Accident Regulations_**
The Directorate for Civil Protection is responsible
for coordinating the authorities’ compliance with
regulations of June 3, 2016 on measures to prevent
and limit the consequences of major accidents
in operations where hazardous chemicals are
involved (the major accident regulations).[97] The
Directorate performs the coordination role through
its administration of a special coordination group. In

96 The Global Framework for Disaster Prevention (2015-2030)

enacted at the UN World Conference for Disaster Prevention in
Sendai, Japan in March 2015.

97 Established by Royal Decree June 3, 2016.


addition to the Directorate for Civil Protection, the
group consists of representatives from the Labour
Inspection Authority, the Environment Agency, the
Industrial Safety Organisation and the Petroleum
Safety Authority Norway.

The Coordination Group ensures that all
participating authorities deal with and evaluate
incident reports in accordance with applicable
legislation and major accident regulations.
Feedback to companies and businesses is prepared
by a consolidated coordination group. The group
has neither decision-making authority nor
operational functions.

**_The County Civilian Readiness and_**
**_Emergency Planning Councils_**
A Civilian Readiness and Emergency Planning
Council is established in each county to discuss
preparedness issues and otherwise act as a forum
for mutual orientation on emergency readiness
and planning work within the various sectors, cf.
Instructions for the Counties Governor and the
Governor of Svalbard’s work on civil protection,
emergency preparedness and crisis management.[98]

The Civilian Readiness and Emergency Planning
Council is headed by the Counties Governor and
will be made up of representatives of regional
actors responsible for critical infrastructure and
critical societal functions, leaders of the Police and
other emergency agencies, the Norwegian Armed
Forces, the Civil Defence, voluntary organisations,
the county administration and government
agencies that have significant emergency
preparedness duties in the county.

The Counties Governor may also include business
owners or other actors in the council. In practice,
the Norwegian Armed Forces are represented by
the chief of the relevant Home Guard district or
a representative designated by the chief of the
Home Guard district. The Council has a function
related to emergency preparedness planning and
supports the County Governor’s coordination
function during crises. The Civilian Readiness and
Emergency Planning Council has an operational
function in that it will contribute to coordination

98 Royal Decree of June 19, 2015 - Instructions for the County

Governor’s and the Governor of Svalbard's work on civil
protection, emergency preparedness and crisis management.


-----

**_6.2.6 The Ministry of Trade,_**
**_Industry and Fisheries_**
**_The Council for Building and_**
**_Construction Preparedness_**
The Council for Building and Construction
Preparedness is an advisory body to the Ministry
of Trade, Industry and Fisheries. The Council is
part of the Ministry’s emergency preparedness
organisation.

The Council is appointed by the Ministry of
Trade, Industry and Fisheries and consists of
representatives of the nationwide building
contractors and industry associations. The
Council’s duties are described in the regulation of
June 28, 2013 no. 807 on building and construction
preparedness. The Council is to assist the Ministry
with advice when needed, assess critical situations
and identify the resources needed. The nationwide
companies that are represented in the Council are
also to assist the Ministry by placing resources
at their disposal. The Council has operational
functions in an emergency.

**_The Food Preparedness Council_**
The Food Preparedness Council was originally
formally established in 2003 as an advisory and
operational body for the Ministry of Trade, Industry
and Fisheries for contingency planning and
emergency situations.

The Food Preparedness Council consists of
representatives of NorgesGruppen ASA, Rema
Distribusjon Norge AS, Coop Norge Handel AS, Tine
SA and Servicegrossistene. Leadership of the group
alternates between the members.

The Council is to provide the Ministry of Trade,
Fisheries and Industry with advice on the supplyand logistics situation in the grocery industry, as
well as to deal with, and present, proposals for
appropriate action. In emergencies, the Council
will assist public authorities with supplies to
the Norwegian Armed Forces and the civilian
population. The Council has operational functions
in an emergency.

**_The NORTRASHIP Management_**
The NORTRASHIP Management (Norwegian
Shipping and Trade Mission) is a cooperative- and
readiness body established by the Ministry


during undesirable events, but the Council does
not have decision-making authority beyond the
decision-making authority of individual members
within their area of responsibility.

The Svalbard Civilian Readiness and Emergency
Planning Council is led by the Counties Governor and
consists of representatives from all the emergency
services, major institutions and companies on
Svalbard, and Longyearbyen Red Cross.

**_Network for National ICT Security_**
The Network for National ICT Security is a
meeting venue that is intended to ensure that
strategic issues relating to national ICT security
and international cooperation in this field, are
discussed and coordinated between ministries.
The Network is to be a venue for the MOJ’s
coordination responsibilities in the civil sector,
for the MOD on civil-military issues relating to ICT
security and for the MFA in its coordinating role for
Norwegian positions in international Cyber policies.
The Network does not make binding decisions
on behalf of the participating ministries. The
MOJ leads the Network and holds the secretariat
function by virtue of its coordination responsibility
in the area of ICT security in the civilian sector.

**_6.2.5 The Ministry of Local_**
**_Government and Modernisation_**
**_Emergency Preparedness_**
**_Digital Forum in Norway_**
Civil protection and emergency preparedness
are some of the most important areas of use
of geographical information. The Emergency
Preparedness Forum is intended to contribute
to raising the national, regional and local
preparedness by facilitating for more and better
use of geographical information in the prevention,
planning, analysis, handling and reporting of
events. The information is to be used both in
everyday life and during events in crises. The
Forum will contribute to the safe and rapid access
to geographical information for the emergency
preparedness agencies and facilitate a common
geodata foundation. This includes base map data,
theme data, resource registers, and any new needs
that the emergency preparedness agencies might
have. The Forum meets at least twice a year and
has a number of civilian participants as well as
participation from the Norwegian Armed Forces.


-----

**_Insurance Forum Related to the Statutory_**
**_Readiness Scheme for State Insurance of_**
**_Goods under Transport_**
The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries has
established an Insurance Forum Related to the
Statutory Readiness Scheme for State Insurance
of Goods under Transport. The Forum is primarily
a network group that has an advisory role.
The Forum is part of the Ministry’s total crisis
organisation and is intended to act as a source of
information and be a link between the authorities,
the insurance environment and the users of the
State Insurance of Goods under Transport.

The Forum is comprised of representatives of
Finance Norway/The Nordic Association of Marine
Insurers, The Norwegian Shipowners’ Mutual War
Risks Insurance Association, The Confederation of
Norwegian Enterprises, The Enterprise Federation
of Norway and insurance companies. The Ministry
of Trade, Industry and Fisheries has the role of
observer in the forum. The Norwegian Guarantee
Institute for Export Credits acts as the secretariat for
the scheme and for the forum. In emergencies, the
Forum is to keep the Ministry informed at all times of
risk assessments.[101] The Forum has neither decisionmaking authority nor operational functions. These
are handled by an appointed board.

**_The Council for Fuel Preparedness_**
After the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries
took over responsibility for fuel supply, the Ministry
continued the Forum for Fuel Supply which
consists of representatives of the two refinery
owners (Statoil and Esso Norge) and the three
largest petrol station chains (Uno-X, Circle K and
ST1). In addition, the Forum has been extended
with the addition of BP Airfuel Norway since the
company has a critical role in the supply of aviation
fuel and Bunker Oil as they supply fuel to a major
part of the coastal fleet.

The Council is to act as an advisory body for the
Ministry in contingency planning and a forum for
information exchange on matters of importance
to the fuel supply in the country or parts of the
country. It is intended to formalize cooperation
with the fuel industry in a separate regulation.

101 The mandate for the “Insurance Forum” linked to the statutory

preparedness scheme for State Insurance of Goods under
Transport, established by NHD on June 25, 2004.


of Trade, Industry and Fisheries in December
2002. The Management is intended to promote
cooperation between the authorities and the
shipping industry in order to obtain the best
utilization of civilian resources in shipping.

The NORTRASHIP Management consists of
representatives of shipowners, the Norwegian
Shipowners’ Mutual War Risks Insurance
Association, the MOD, the Nordic Shipowner’s
Association and the employees’ organisations. The
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries MoDhas
the secretariat function for the NORTRASHIP
Management, in cooperation with the Norwegian
Shipowners’ Association. The Management meets
twice a year or as often as the situation requires.[99]

In a normal situation, the NORTRASHIP
Management has a mainly advisory function,
but in the event of a major crisis or war, it
will lead the Ministry of Trade, Industry and
Fisheries’ preparedness organisation for shipping
(Norwegian Transport Preparedness for Shipping).
The Management has operational functions in
emergency preparedness and in the event of war,
and, among other things, will prepare and possibly
implement the operation of requisitioned ships on
authority from the Ministry.

**_The Maritime Safety Committee_**
**_for International Shipping_**
In 2007, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and
Fisheries established the Maritime Safety
Committee for International Shipping as a forum
for the discussion of security-related issues for
Norwegian vessels in international shipping.[100] The
Forum is led by the Ministry, with participation
from relevant authorities, the shipping industry
and seamen. The Safety Committee is an informal
committee, but it can be called together in a crisis.
In recent years, the threat posed by pirate attacks
has been central to the committee’s work. The
Forum has neither decision-making authority nor
operational functions.

99 Instructions for NORTRASHIP Management, established by NHD

in November 2013.

100 cf. Report to the Storting no. 22 (2007-2008) Civil Protection, p.50.


-----

**_6.2.7 The Ministry of Petroleum and Energy_**
**_The Power Supply Preparedness Organisation_**
The Water Resources and Energy Directorate is
responsible for contingency planning and is to
lead the country’s power supply during emergency
preparedness and in war. For this purpose, a
nationwide organisation has been established the
Power Supply Preparedness Organization which
is made up of the Water Resources and Energy
Directorate and agencies that own or operate
facilities that are of significant importance for
the operation, repair or security of production,
conversion, transmission, sales or distribution of
electric power or district heating.

The Power Supply Preparedness Organization
will be able to carry out tasks in peacetime in the
event of damage to power plants as a result of
natural conditions, technical failures, terrorist- or
sabotage actions and in connection with rationing
according to the Energy Act. When the Power
Supply Preparedness Organization takes over
responsibility for the country’s power supply in
the event of war preparedness, all power supply
companies are obliged to abide by directives
from the senior authority in the Organization,
without this resulting in changes to the company’s
ownership or responsibility.[102]

The Power Supply Central Management consists of
the readiness authority (the Water Resources and
Energy Directorate) and the system administrator
(Statnett). The Director of the Water Resources and
Energy Directorate, or another authorized director,
leads the Power Supply Preparedness Organization.
It is established in the contingency plans of the
Water Resources and Energy Directorate that
the Norwegian Armed Forces could designate
liaison from the NJHQ to the Power Supply Central
Management and, correspondingly, that the Water
Resources and Energy Directorate should be able to
designate liaison to NJHQ.

102 Regulation of January 1, 2013 on preventive security and

contingency planning in power supply, chapter 3 and NVE’s
home pages on the Internet https:/www. nve.no/damsikkerhetog-energiforsyningsberedskap/energiforsyningsberedskap/
organisering-av-energiforsyningsberedskap/kraftforsyningensberedskapsorganisasjon-kbo/.


**_6.2.8 The Ministry of Transport_**
**_and Communications_**
**_The Civil Transport Readiness Advisory Forum_**
The Civil Transport Readiness Advisory Forum
is part of the national transport readiness
structure that was established on the introduction
of the civil transport readiness regulation of
June 14, 2005[103]. The Forum is an arena for
cooperation and contingency planning between
the transport authorities and the industry in
the road-, rail-, maritime and aviation sectors.
In the event of major civilian or military crises,
the Forum is to assist the Ministry of Transport
and Communications with traffic management in
the transport sector and by providing transport
support to other authorities[104]. The Forum is led by
the Ministry of Transport and Communications and
consists of representatives from the subordinate
transport agencies- and companies, national
transport associations, the County Council and the
MOD. Other ministries and actors may be invited
to participate as observers in the Forum’s meetings
subject to the theme and needs.

In accordance with the regulation for civil transport
readiness, the County Council has a special
responsibility for organizing the regional transport
readiness in the event of major crises in peacetime
or readiness and war. This means registering the
county’s transport readiness needs, keeping an
overview of the main transport operators in the
county and preparing emergency- and contingency
plans for the handling of unwanted regional
transport crises in cooperation with the relevant
authorities.

**_The Security Council for Aviation_**
The Security Council for Aviation was created
by Royal Decree on July 4, 1991 as an advisory
body for affected authorities for the purpose
of preventing attacks directed at civil aviation.
The Council is to be updated on the risk picture
and advise on the security of civil aviation, so
that attacks can be prevented. The Council
will contribute by influencing regulations by
means of proposals for amendments to security
requirements and regulations. Furthermore, the
Council will exchange information between the

103 FOR 2005-06-14 no. 548: Regulations for civil transport readiness
104 Mandate for the civil transport readiness advisory forum of

September 1, 2017


-----

individual actors, as well as help the relevant
aviation operators to know each other’s roles. The
Council can set up expert groups that can assist in
areas of expertise which the Council itself does not
possess.

The Council is led by the Civil Aviation Authority
(CAA) and is made up of members of the Ministry
of Transport and Communications, the MFA, the
MOJ, the MOD, the National Police Directorate, the
Police Security Service and the National Security
Authority. The Council meets at least four times a
year. In the event of situations with severe changes
to the threat picture, the Council can be summoned
at short notice to provide advice to affected
authorities.[105] The Council has neither decisionmaking authority nor operational functions.

**_The Coordination Group for_**
**_Airspace Restrictions_**
The Coordination Group for Airspace Restrictions
is a cross-agency working group under the Flexible
Use of Airspace Advisory Expert Group (FUA RE)
whose task is to bring about the fast, efficient and
coordinated establishment of airspace restrictions
as a result of Police needs. In particular, this will
apply to events where, in the Police’s opinion, there
is a need for airspace restrictions. In the event of
accidents and acute situations, the Police applies
section 7 of the Police Act for the establishment of
airspace restrictions. The Group is led by the Civil
Aviation Authority of Norway, and is also made up
of representatives from Avinor’s headquarters,
the Norwegian Armed Forces Aerial Operations
Supervisory Authority, the National Police
Directorate, Oslo Police District, the NJHQ and
Avinor’s Control Centre at Røyken.

The Coordination Group for Airspace Restrictions
is to provide advice and recommendations to
the decision-making authority in the Police or
the Civil Aviation Authority of Norway on the
establishment of airspace restrictions, including
the extent, design, duration, conditions and
consequences. FUA RE summons the Coordination
Group for Airspace Restrictions to an annual
meeting. At the request of the Police, FUA RE can
summon the Coordination Group for Airspace

105 The Mandate attached to SD’s letter to FD and others of August

11, 2004 on the appointment of members to the Security Council
for Aviation.


Restrictions to meetings, in addition to the annual
meeting, in order to secure the need for airspace
restrictions. The Coordination Group has neither
decision-making authority nor operational
functions.

**_The Security Forum for Electronic_**
**_Communication_**
In 2014, the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and
Communications and the National Communication
Authority established the Security Forum for
Electronic Communication, the “Ekom Security
Forum”. The Forum consists of the National
Communications Authority, representatives
of selected providers[106], the National Security
Authority, the Police Security Service and the
Intelligence Service. Meetings of the Forum are
conducted at fixed intervals and as needed. The
Forum is to be a common arena for the confidential
exchange of information. The Forum provides
both providers and the Norwegian Secret Services
with good and relevant threat information for
the preventive security work. The Ekom Security
Forum has neither decision-making authority nor
operational functions.

**_6.2.9 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs_**
**_The Steering Group and the Operational_**
**_Group of the Proliferation Security Initiative_**
The Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) is an
international partnership for the prevention of
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Norway participates in the cooperation.

At the national level, a Steering Group has been
established at the ministerial level to ensure a
coordinated input to discussions and assistance
in exercises, clarification in relation to national
and international legislation, as well as any efforts
to prevent attempted proliferation. The Contact
Group is headed by the MFA. Particularly involved
ministries are the MOD, the MOJ, the Ministry of
Transport and Communications, the Ministry of
Trade, Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry
of Finance. The Operative Group is summoned
to assist with the interception of any attempted
proliferation. The forum does not have decisionmaking authority, but has operational functions in

106 As of 10.07.2017, Telenor, Telia, Ice, Broadnett, the Norwegian

Cyber Defence Force and the Norwegian Public Safety Network
are appointed as members of the forum. The composition is
changed as necessary.


-----

proliferation issues affecting Norway. This group is
also summoned if needed under the leadership of
the MFA.[107]

**_The Advisory Committee for Nuclear Safety_**
The Committee was created to support the implementation of the Government’s Action Plan for
Nuclear Safety. The first action plan was introduced
in 1995, and the mandate has been extended
several times. The objective of the action plan is to
reduce the risk of serious accidents and radioactive
contamination, as well as to prevent radioactive
and fissionable material from going astray. The
geographical impact area is primarily northwest
Russia. The MFA leads the work and is responsible
for designing strategies and establishing priorities

107 The White Paper No. no. 5 (2017-2018) p. 24, and Report to the

Storting no. 39 (2003-2004) on Civil protection and civil-military
_cooperation, p.42 as well as the PSI Manual (2015), chapter 3._


within the framework of the action plan. In order
to ensure a broad foundation, all relevant issues
are discussed in an advisory committee. The
nuclear security cooperation with Russia is funded
by earmarked funds from the budget of the MFA,
which are used for the implementation of bilateraland multilateral projects in Russia.

The MOD, the Ministry of Health and Care Services,
the Ministry of Climate and Environment and
the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries, as
well as the Institute for Energy Technology, the
Radiation Protection Authority, and the Norwegian
Armed Forces Research Institute participate in the
committee. The forum has neither decision-making
authority nor operational functions.


-----

7. CIVIL-MILITARY COOPERATION IN AN INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT


**7.1 Civil-military cooperation in**
**the UN, NATO, EU and OSCE**

Norway has a long tradition of civil-military
cooperation nationally. Norway has also
participated to a considerable extent over many
years with military and civilian contributions to
international operations. In addition, Norway is a
contributor to international organisations including
through programme work and the development
of regulations, standards and guidelines.
The rationale for Norwegian participation in
international organisations and operations is both
as part of Norwegian aid policy, but it also has a
national readiness aspect. For example, by the
dispatch of Norwegian personnel and equipment,
we are able to train with national resources, and
expenses can be covered for equipment that can
also be used in Norway. Through participation in


some of the international organizations, we also
ensure that other states will come to Norway’s
aid should a crisis arise and we are not capable of
handling this alone.

Norwegian participation in various operations
outside Norway requires good dialogue, training
and cooperation between involved civilian
contributors, and between civilian and military
actors in the field of operations. The best possible
coordination, distribution and understanding
of roles both in the planning phase and during
the operation are critical. Where appropriate,
such cooperation can be ensured based on the
arrangements and mechanisms established to
secure civil-military cooperation nationally.[108]

108 The White Paper No. 10 Risk in a safe and secure society (2016
2017) p.111.


-----

**7.2 UN**

The United Nations (UN) is an international
intergovernmental organization established after
World War II. 51 countries signed the UN Pact, a
treaty describing how to work to ensure peace
between nations, equalize economic and social
differences in the world and ensure all people the
same rights.

The UN currently has 193 Member States, all of
which have one vote in the UN supreme body, the
General Assembly. Issues relating to peace and
security, including the use of force, are handled
by the Security Council. The Security Council
determines whether the UN should implement
peacekeeping operations, as well as their size
and mandate. The Security Council consists of
15 members, of which the United States, France,
China, Russia and the United Kingdom are
permanent members. The permanent members
have the right of veto and can thus block proposed
decisions. The other ten members of the Council
are so-called non-permanent members, which are
elected for two years at a time.

A number of sub-organizations and other
special bodies are covered by the UN umbrella.
These include the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR), the World Food Programme
(WFP) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC).

With active Norwegian support, the UN has
further developed more aspects of current
peace operations, based on an integration
of the political-, military-, humanitarian- and
developmental instruments.[109]

As an organisation, the UN is particularly suited
to the conduct of integrated peacekeeping
operations, since the UN system covers the
full range of necessary capabilities, including
development aid and humanitarian assistance as
well as military- and law enforcement resources.

109 The White Paper No. 33 (2011-2012) Norway and the United

_Nations: Common future, common solutions, p. 37._


International organisations define civil-military
cooperation slightly differently. It is therefore
useful to be aware of the applicable principles
and concepts within the civil-military cooperation
in organizations such as the United Nations,
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
the European Union (EU) and the Organisation
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
Thereafter follows a description of Norwegian civil
crisis- management resources that can be used for
crisis management outside Norway.

When participating in international peace- and
stabilisation operations, Norwegian personnel
(and other civil support) will be subordinate
to multinational command- and coordination
mechanisms. The command of the Norwegian
Armed Forces’ divisions will usually be transferred
to the international organization (UN, NATO or the
EU) who will lead the operation. Norwegian civil
support will usually be coordinated by the host
country, possibly with the support of relevant
international organisations, usually the UN. The
aim is to view Norwegian military and civilian
contributions in a broader context, so that they can
best complement each other and create synergy
with other nations’ contributions, and are also
coordinated with the needs of the host country. As
a rule, this means that it will be less relevant with
_direct cooperation between Norwegian civil- and_
military contributions, as coordination of the
various countries’ individual contributions takes
place between the international organisations
involved and the host country. In many of today’s
conflicts, humanitarian efforts take place side
by side with peace- and reconciliation efforts,
development aid, international policing and military
operations.

In an Article 5 situation (collective defence), in
principle all of NATO’s total crisis-management
resources could be applied. The mechanisms of
civil-military cooperation, which will have a natural
and important role in dealing with a situation in
which the NATO Pact’s Article 5 is applicable, are
not discussed specifically in the following. Military
assets and personnel for operations outside
Norway are put together as needed, and are
therefore not discussed further.


-----

The UN is experienced in cooperating closely over
time with host countries and the local population.

The UN currently conducts two main types of
operations to help prevent conflict and preserve
peace: political missions and peacekeeping
operations. The political missions are led by the
UN Political Department (DPA). UN peacekeeping
operations are led by the UN Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). Both types of
operations are supported with practical organization
by the Field Support Division (DFS). Normally,
a peacekeeping operation will consist of both a
military force and a policing component, in addition
to a civilian component. Political missions consist
mainly of civilian components, but they could have
military- and law enforcement personnel with liaison
functions.

DPKO’s principles and guidelines are embodied
in the United Nations Peacekeeping Operations
Principles and Guildelines (“Capstone Document”)
from 2008.[110]

110 The United Nations Peacekeeping Operations Principles and

Guidelines ("Capstone Document"), 2008, pp. 53-54.


**_«An integrated mission is one in which there is a_**
**_shared vision among all United Nations actors as_**
**_to the strategic objectives of the United Nations_**
**_presence at the country-level. This strategy_**
**_should reflect a shared understanding of the_**
**_operating environment and agreement on how_**
**_to maximize the effectiveness, efficiency, and_**
**_impact of the United Nations overall response»._**

In line with this concept, the UN Secretary-General
will send a Special Representative (SRSG) to
lead the mission and who is also responsible
for the coordination and targeting of the civil
reconstruction. One example of such an integrated
operation is the UN operation MONUSCO in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.[111] A note from
the Secretary-General on integrated operations
establishes the concept as a guiding principle for
future peacekeeping operations.[112]

The key guidelines for military support in

111 The United Nations Security Council resolution 1925 of May 28,

2010

112 The Secretary-General's Note of Guidance on Integrated

Missions, clarifying the Role, Responsibility and Authority of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General/Resident
Coordinator/ Humanitarian Coordination, signed on February 9,
2006.


-----

humanitarian crises are “Guidelines on the
Use of Foreign military and Defence Assets in
Disaster Relief” (Oslo Guidelines) for use in natural
disasters, “Guidelines on the Use of Military and
Civil Defence Assets to Support United Nations
Humanitarian Activities in Complex Emergencies
and “Use of Military or Armed Escorts for
Humanitarian Convoys – IASC Discussion Paper
and Non-Binding Guidelines.” These guidelines are
administered by OCHA. Common to the guidelines
is an establishment of humanitarian principles,
recognition of the UN’s overall coordinating role,
as well as the use of military contributions in
humanitarian crises primarily when there are no
corresponding civil resources available.

Central to these is the “United Nations
Humanitarian Civil-Military Coordination (UNCMCoord) Concept” which is intended to facilitate
effective cooperation between humanitarian,
governmental and military actors at all levels.

There is an important distinction between
development aid and humanitarian assistance.
Development aid is aimed at assisting recipient
countries’ social and economic development, while
humanitarian assistance is aimed at saving lives,
limiting human suffering, and maintaining and
protecting human integrity during and after crises
and disasters. Humanitarian assistance is built on
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality,
and independence, both in conflict and with
natural disasters.[113] Based on the humanitarian
principles, there must be a clear distinction
between the humanitarian- and military roles and
purposes in an area of conflict.

**7.3 NATO**

NATO is a defensive alliance built on the Atlantic
Pact of 1949. The core of the agreement is Article
5 of the Pact, which states that an armed attack
against one or more of the Pact’s members is
considered to be an attack on them all. NATO is to
secure fundamental values relating to democracy,
individual freedom and the rule of law. NATO’s
most important task is to ensure peace and
stability in the North Atlantic area. This takes place

113 White Paper No. 40 (2008-2009) Norwegian humanitarian policy,

box 3.1 Humanitarian Principles.


through a close military- and political cooperation
between the member nations. NATO is also
engaged in international peacekeeping operations.

Crisis management is one of NATO’s three core
tasks, the others being collective defence and
security through cooperation. In a NATO context,
a crisis-management operation is a military
operation not derived from Article 5, i.e. operations
not defined as collective defence against attack or
aggression against one or more of the members of
the alliance. Such crisis-management operations
may be peacekeeping and enforcement operations,
but also conflict prevention, reconciliation- and
peace-building operations, as well as humanitarian
operations (e.g. following natural disasters). Crisis
management involves the use of various methods
for dealing with the crisis. The way crises are
handled will depend on their nature, scope and
severity. Some crises could be prevented through
diplomacy or other means, while in other crises
there is a need for more robust measures such as
military intervention.

NATO’s strategic concept from 2010[114] states that
experience makes it clear that a holistic political-,
civil- and military approach is necessary to ensure
an effective crisis management.

Such a holistic approach, or comprehensive
approach, requires the players to cooperate
and coordinate their efforts. NATO increasingly
emphasises the strengthening of cooperation with
international and regional organisations such as
the United Nations, the European Union and the
African Union (AU), voluntary organisations, local
authorities and the alliance’s partner countries.

The term CIMIC (Civil-Military Co-operation) is
used in NATO in respect of the coordination and
cooperation between military forces and civilian
actors, including the population in the area of
operations, local authorities, international- and
national organisations and agencies and NGO’s
(Non-Governmental Organisations), for the
purpose of supporting the military mission.[115] In

114 Active engagement, Modern Defence-Strategic Concept for the

Defence and Security of the Members of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organisation adopted by the Heads of State and
Government in Lisbon, Nov. 19, 2010.

115 The term CIMIC is defined in the Norwegian Armed Forces Joint

Operational Doctrine page 141.


-----

NATO operations, it is necessary to distinguish
between civil support to military forces where
the purpose is limited to support to the military
operation (CIMIC)[116] and civil-military cooperation
at the strategic level in which the military operation
is a contribution along the lines of civilian
contributions (“Comprehensive Approach”). CIMIC
is intended to assist in the military objective of the
individual NATO-operation being reached, whereas
the purpose of “Comprehensive Approach” is to
ensure that NATO’s contribution to international
crisis management is coordinated with other
actors’ contributions so that the international
community’s combined efforts have the greatest
possible effect.

A change to the security policy picture has
contributed to the shift of NATO focus in respect of
Article 3[117], and increased emphasis on collective
defence. This has resulted in major changes within
NATO’s civil preparedness work and the Alliance’s
expectations to the nations. Strengthening of civil
resistance ability, the establishment of robust
societal structures and the maintenance of good
manageability are being required. This means that
the nations, individually and jointly, are to maintain
and develop their individual and collective ability
to resist armed attacks using continuous and
effective self-reliance and mutual assistance.

Military forces are dependent on the civil sector for,
among other things, transport, communications
and basic supplies such as food and water in
order to carry out their missions. Military efforts
to defend the Alliance’s territory and the civilian
population must therefore be supplemented
with robust civil preparedness. However, civilian
resources may be prone to external attacks
and internal turmoil in both peacetime and war.
Reducing national vulnerabilities in this area will
reduce the risk that a potential attack could be
carried out. In addition, the effect of any attack

116 Within the United Nations system, the term "Integrated Mission"

is used. In the United Nations, there is no distinction between
CIMIC and “Comprehensive Approach”, as both are covered
by the UN’s integrated operations in which both military-, law
enforcement and civilian resources are included.

117 According to Article 3 of the North Atlantic Treaty, all allies are

committed to building resistance, which is a combination of civil
preparedness and military capacity. The article has the following
wording: "In order more effectively to achieve the objectives of this
_Treaty, the Parties, separately and jointly, by means of continuous_
_and effective self-help and mutual aid, will maintain and develop_
_their individual and collective capacity to resist armed attack"._


could be reduced, which could deter any potential
adversary. A high level of resistance is therefore an
important component of the Alliance’s objective of
a credible deterrence.

Each NATO Member State must be sufficiently
robust and adaptable to be able to support the
whole range of crises for which the Alliance is
preparing. In this context, Article 3 complements
the collective defence clause of Article 5, which
states that an attack against an ally is an attack
against all.

According to NATO, good civil preparedness is the
foundation for a good collective defence. In this
context, NATO has shown that 90 percent of all
transportation for military forces is being carried
out by using the open and commercial market. For
example, over 50 percent of all satellite use for
military purposes is provided by the commercial
sector. Within the host nation’s support for NATO
operations, over 75 percent of all supplies are from
local civilian services or civilian infrastructure.

NATO member states have aimed at creating a
robust infrastructure and solid societal functions
that can withstand the full range of threats.
Therefore, the focus of NATO’s civil preparedness
efforts is directed at national planning. This is
intended to contribute to the nations’ efforts
for continuity in national governance systems,
continuity in key services to the population and
civilian support to military operations.

On this basis, at the NATO Summit in Warsaw
in July 2016, the member states committed
themselves to strengthen the national readiness
through the following seven basic expectations to
resilience in critical societal functions:[118]

**1.** Security for continuity of national government
and essential public services

**2.** Robust energy supplies

**3.** Ability to deal with uncontrolled movement of
people

**4.** Robust food- and water supplies

**5.** Ability to deal with mass injuries

**6.** Robust communications systems

**7.** Robust transportation systems

118 NATO Commitment to Enhance Resilience, NATO Summit

Declaration 8-9. July 2016.


-----

In addition, the Heads of State and Government
of member states are specifically committed
to strengthening both the national and NATO
protection against cyber threats through the cyber
declaration (Cyber Defence Pledge).[119]

Within NATO’s civil preparedness efforts and the
work with the seven expectations, a number of
activities are conducted under the leadership
of the Committee for Civil Preparedness (Civil
Emergency Planning Committee – CEPC). CEPC
reports to NATO’s permanent council (North
Atlantic Council, NAC). Under CEPC there are
four technical committees in which the relevant
Norwegian sector authorities are represented:

**•** [Civil Protection]

**•** [Transport (civil aviation, ocean shipping and ]

inland surface[120])

**•** [Public Health, Food and Water]

**•** Industrial Resources and Civil

Communications


societal functions to increase society’s resilience to
crises. The programme comprises various projects
that are aimed at increasing the resilience of critical
societal functions within the framework of NATO’s
seven baseline requirements, as well as projects
for civil support to the Norwegian Armed Forces
and the further development of the total defence.
The programme is planned to be completed by the
end of 2020.

CEPC has established its own crisis response
pool in order to contribute expert competence
to military operations or civilian authorities in
a country. The Euro-Atlantic Disaster Response
Coordination Centre (EADRCC) is intended to
ensure coordinated civil efforts by allies, as
well as from NATO’s partners, in the event of
natural disasters or other undesirable events.
The Coordination Centre is located in NATO’s
headquarters in Belgium. The Directorate for
Civil Protection is the national contact point for
EADRCC.

**7.4 EU**

The EU grew from the European Coal and Steel
Union from 1952. After the Maastricht Treaty
came into force in 1993, the EU has had a common
foreign- and security policy. In 1999, members
decided to enter into a joint military cooperation,
and since 2003 the EU has had a common security
strategy.

The EU has a wide range of tools available
for crisis management, including diplomatic,
political, economic, military, and developmental
instruments. The EU assists in international
peacekeeping operations throughout the world.
The EU has specifically contributed to policing
operations (such as EULEX[121]) and the build-up of a
judicial system.

In the European Security strategy of 2003, the need
is emphasized for bringing together the various
instruments and capacities of the EU, as well as
the importance of enhancing cooperation with
other countries and organizations.[122] This focus
has become even more prominent in recent years.

121 The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo.
122 European Security Strategy (2003), p. 13.


The technical committees are made up of both
national representatives and experts appointed
from the Member States. The Ministry of Justice
and Public Security (MOJ) is represented in the
CEPC meetings and, with support from the
Directorate for Civil Protection and the Norwegian
delegation to NATO, has responsibility for following
up the Norwegian activity. Other ministries and
directorates are represented in the technical
committees.

For many years, Norway has been working on
strengthening security in critical societal functions
and makes a great contribution in promoting this
work in NATO. In NATO, the Norwegian civil-military
cooperation and elements within the total defence
are described as a prime example.

To ensure a holistic approach to the further
development of the total defence and the work
on NATO’s seven baseline requirements, MOJ has
established a cross-sectoral programme for further
development of the total defence. The objective of
the program is twofold: New challenges, framework
conditions and assumptions have to be adapted, as
well as strengthening of the robustness of critical

119 The NATO Cyber Defence Pledge, declaration from the NATO

summit of July 8, 2016.

120 Inland surface means transport by rail, road, lakes and rivers.


-----

A holistic approach (“Comprehensive Approach”),
that is the coordination of all EU mechanisms with
EU involvement in crisis-hit regions, is a central
theme in the EU’s Common Security and Defence
Policy (CSDP), which is part of the European Union’s
common Foreign and Security Policy (FUSP). In
the EU revised crisis management concept from
2013, procedures have been included for ongoing
consultations between the different institutions
of the EU. This applies primarily between the
European External Action Service (EEAS), which
is the European Union’s “MFA”, and the relevant
Directorate General of the European Commission, in
the preparations for a crisis-management operation.

EU activities in crisis management and
peacekeeping operations currently take place
partly in cooperation with other organisations
such as NATO and the UN, and partly in the form
of autonomous EU operations. The greatest
development occurs within autonomous
operations in the South Caucasus, Africa and Asia.

The EU has also devised a “Comprehensive
Planning” concept, inspired among other things
by UN planning of “integrated missions”.[123] The
planning concept intends to involve all actors at
an early stage in order to ensure the best possible
civil-military cooperation through all phases of an
operation.

**_7.4.1 EU’s work in the area of civil protection_**
The EU is emerging as a key player for a close
practical and operational cooperation in civil
protection and preparedness. This involves joint
exercises, education, cooperation on preparedness
resources, facilitating information sharing
and updated situation pictures during major
undesirable events, support for air transportation
costs and mechanisms for requesting assistance
from other countries’ preparedness resources.
The European Union’s civil protection efforts are
founded on the Lisbon Treaty and operationalised
through the work of the EU Civil Protection
Mechanism (EU), in which Norway has participated
through the EEA Agreement since 2002. The
Directorate for Civil Protection is the Norwegian
contact point for the EU civil preparedness scheme.

123 Joint Communication to the European Parliament and the

Council. The EU's comprehensive approach to external conflicts
and crises (2013/30 dated December 11, 2013).


The objective of the EU civil preparedness scheme
is to facilitate widespread cooperation in Europe
in the area of civil protection and preparedness.
The EU civil preparedness scheme assumes that
the participating nations join forces in making their
resources available to disaster-inflicted countries,
both inside and outside of Europe. A key element
of the scheme is the development of a European
disaster preparedness capacity (ERCC) in the form
of a voluntary resource pool. These are national
capabilities that are made available in advance
to the European Commission, and registered in
a special list in the European Commission’s crisis
management tool CECIS. These capabilities can be
made available at short notice as a contribution to
the European Union’s civil preparedness scheme.
The voluntary resource pool is also covered by a
financial support scheme for adjustment costs.
If needed, Norway can take advantage of these
resources.

The scheme is managed at the European
Commission by the EU Directorate-General for
European Civil Protection and Humanitarian
Aid Operations (DG ECHO). The emphasis is on
close cooperation between DG ECHO and the
Directorate-General for Migration and Home
Affairs (DG Home), the EU Military Staff and the
European External Action Service (EEAS). The EU
civil readiness scheme also allows UN agencies,
as well as international organisations such as IFRC
(the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Associations) and OPCW (the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons), to solicit
assistance on an equal basis with individual states
in the event of major international crises.

The arrangement will further provide for increased
standardization and harmonization (“consistency”)
with EEAS for operations outside the EU. Special
emphasis is placed on systematic information
sharing with the EEAS on the measures the
arrangement implements on the civil side in
ongoing crisis management in an affected third
country.

The EU’s civil preparedness system is intended to
supplement and support national preparedness in
the event of natural- or man-made disasters, acts
of terrorism, technological accidents, radiation
accidents or environmental accidents, including


-----

accidental marine pollution, for which national
resources are inadequate.

On November 23, 2017, the European Commission
presented a proposal for the European Parliamentand Council’s decision on amendment to the Union
Civil Protection Mechanism, and a corresponding
communication on strengthening of the EU’s
disaster management capabilities.

In 2012, the EU finalized a set of guidelines for host
nation support (Host Nation Support[124]) aimed
at improving participating countries’ systems for
the receipt of international assistance in a crisis
situation. Host nation support is mainly aimed at
eliminating legal-, financial- and administrative
barriers related to border crossing for foreign
personnel or equipment to Norway, for example,
as well as arranging for the assistance to be quickly
and effectively absorbed into coordinated efforts
with national resources. Norway has developed
a national guide for host nation support[125] in
line with the EU guidelines. The guide is generic
and serves as a supplement to the Norwegian
sector authorities’ own contingency plans. It is
a step-by-step guide as to how an authority can
solicit, receive, support, and finalize international
assistance in a crisis situation. Norway also
participates in a Nordic cooperation on host nation
support.

**7.5 The Organization for Security**
**and Cooperation in Europe**

The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) is the largest regional security
organisation in the world, with 57 participating
nations from Europe, the Caucasus, Central Asia
and North America. OSCE works with conflict
prevention through early warning, conflictmanagement and assistance with post-conflict
reconstruction, among others.

OSCE has a broad approach to security that
encompasses military-policy instruments such
as arms control and confidence-and securitybuilding measures, preventive diplomacy, the

124 EU Host Nation Support Guidelines (Brussels, 1.6.2012, SWD

2012 169 Final).

125 Guide to host nation support in Norway, published byThe

Norwegian Directorate for Civil Protection N in 2014.


establishment of common standards for human
rights and democracy/elections, as well as
economic and environmental issues. OSCE is also a
field organisation with more than 2,800 employees
participating in 16 different operations in SouthEast Europe, Eastern Europe and Central Asia.
OSCE is especially recognised for its standards
and method related to the implementation
and observation of elections in participating
countries.[126]

**7.6 Bilateral- and multilateral cooperation**

In addition to the civil-military cooperation taking
place within the framework of international
organisations, Norway also has several bilateral
and multilateral agreements for civil-military
cooperation. Regular civil-military exercises are
also carried out within this cooperation. The
examples below are not exhaustive.

**_7.6.1 Nordic civilian-military cooperation_**
In 2009, the Nordic countries subscribed to a
declaration in respect of readiness cooperation,
the so-called “Haga Declaration”.[127] The main
objective of this cooperation is to strengthen
the ability of the Nordic countries to prevent
and reduce the impacts of major accidents,
natural- and man-made disasters, as well as of
other peacetime crises by means of joint projects
and areas of focus. In 2009, on commission from
the Nordic governments, Thorvald Stoltenberg
prepared a report containing 13 proposals as to
how Nordic cooperation in the area of security- and
defence policy could be strengthened. The Nordic
Foreign Ministers agreed to a joint Nordic solidarity
declaration in 2011. This is reproduced below.

The Haga II declaration was adopted at a meeting
of the Nordic Ministers responsible for civic
protection and emergency readiness in June
2013. The basis was the need to create a more
overarching political arrangement in the form of an
updated and more ambitious Haga declaration. The
revised declaration has the overriding objective
of a robust Nordic region by means of preventing,
dealing with and recovery from serious events.

126 OSCE’s website: http://www.osce.org/.
127 White Paper No. 10 Risk in a safe and secure society (2016-2017)

p.170.


-----

One of the objectives of the cooperation for civic
protection and emergency readiness is to achieve
a Nordic region without border barriers, in order
to avoid bureaucratic and practical hindrances to
cross-border cooperation.

**The Nordic solidarity declaration**
“The Ministers emphasized a strong community
of values between Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden. Efforts to promote
democracy, international law and respect
for human rights, gender equality and
sustainable development are integral to the
foreign policy of the Nordic countries. On the
basis of common interests and geographical
proximity, it is natural for the Nordic countries
to cooperate in meeting foreign- and security
policy challenges in a spirit of solidarity. In
this context, the Ministers discussed potential
risks such as natural and man-made disasters,
cyber- and terrorist attacks. Should one of
the Nordic countries be affected, the other
countries will, if requested, assist with relevant
means. The intensification of the Nordic
cooperation will be undertaken fully in line with
each country’s security- and defence policies
and complement the established Euro-Atlantic
cooperation.”

**_7.6.2 International operations_**
**_of the rescue service_**
The rescue service creates contact, confidence and
cooperation over national borders. Each year, the
Joint Rescue Coordination Centres are involved in
several hundred rescue operations in international
waters.

The organization plan for the rescue service is
established by Royal Decree of June 19, 2015. This
Royal Decree establishes the organisation and
routines for cooperation, leadership, coordination,
responsibilities and tasks. Its purpose is to provide
an integrated rescue service based on a national
collective voluntary effort and collaboration
between government agencies, voluntary
organisations and private actors.

In addition to this Royal Decree, the sea- and
air rescue service is regulated by international


covenants to which Norway is a party, including
the SAR Convention (International Convention on
Maritime Search and Rescue, 1979) and the ICAO
Convention (Convention on International Civil
Aviation 1944) with subsequent amendments.

The rescue service is an integrated service, which
means that it encompasses all types of rescue
operations related to land, sea and air rescue
services.

**_7.6.3 Rescue cooperation in the north_**
The geographical scope of responsibility of the
rescue service comprises, in addition to Norwegian
territory including Svalbard, the sea- and ocean areas
and airspace determined at any time by Norway in
consultation with neighbouring states on the basis
of international covenants whereby Norway has
committed itself to provide a rescue service.

In addition to the international commitments
Norway has undertaken through the SAR and ICAO
conventions, Norway is a party to several bi-and
multilateral rescue agreements. The following
agreements have been entered into in respect of
the northern regions:

**•** [The 2008 agreement between the ]

governments of the Euro-Arctic Barents
region on cooperation in the field of
prevention, emergency readiness and efforts
directed at crisis situations. The other parties
to the agreement are Sweden, Finland and
Russia. The crisis concept is broadly defined
and includes life, health, the environment and
material values. The agreement applies to the
northernmost areas of the territories of the
three Nordic countries and the northwestern
regions of Russia. The agreement is
implemented by means of a series of training
exercises entitled “Barents Rescue” which
have been held every second year. As of 2019,
Barents Rescue will be held every third year.
The responsibility for conducting the exercise
alternates between the four parties to the
agreement.

**•** [The 1995 agreement between Norway and ]

Russia on search and rescue in the Barents
Sea. Under the agreement, an annual series
of exercises is held under the programme
“Barents Exercise” and Norway and Russia
take turns in arranging the exercises.


-----

**•** [The 2011 agreement between Norway, ]

Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Russia,
Sweden and the United States on search
and rescue cooperation in connection with
aviation and shipping in the Arctic Zone. The
agreement is established under the auspices
of the Arctic Council. Through the agreement,
the Norwegian area of responsibility for
search and rescue was extended further east
towards the Russian area of responsibility and
north of Svalbard, as far as the North Pole.
The agreement is followed up internationally
by the Arctic Council Working Group EPPR
(Emergency, Prevention, Preparedness and
Response). The agreement came into force on
January 19, 2013 after it was ratified by each
of the eight signatory states.

**•** [The Nordic Rescue Service Agreement is ]

an agreement between Denmark, Finland,
Norway and Sweden on cross-border


cooperation in the event of accidents in order
to prevent or limit damage to people, property
or the environment. Each country undertakes
to provide necessary assistance in the event
of accidents or with imminent danger of
accidents, in accordance with their capabilities
and the provisions of the agreement.

**_7.6.4 Coordination_**
The Joint Rescue Coordination Centres lead and
coordinate all types of rescue operations (land-,
sea- and air rescue service). This is implemented
either directly from the Joint Rescue Coordination
Centre Northern Norway or the Joint Rescue
Coordination Centre Southern Norway, or is
delegated to subordinate local rescue centres.

The Joint Rescue Coordination Centres carry out
their operations from Bodø and Sola.


-----

**_7.6.5 Governmental resources for_**
**_civilian crisis management abroad_**
**_Norwegian Emergency Preparedness System_**
The Norwegian Emergency Preparedness System
(NOREPS) is a partnership between the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs (MFA), The Directorate for Civil
Protection, Norwegian humanitarian agencies
and Norwegian manufacturers of emergency aid
materials. NOREPS contributes with personnel
and stockpiles of emergency aid materials in
international humanitarian crises. NOREPS is
made up of Norwegian Capacity (NORCAP) (see
mention under the Norwegian Refugee Council)
and the Norwegian Support Team (NST) (see
mention under the Directorate for Civil Protection
’s operative international operations).[128]

**_The Norwegian Armed Forces_**
In many cases, the Norwegian Armed Forces will
be able to provide assistance to international
relief efforts. Any request for assistance from the
Norwegian Armed Forces is assessed individually
according to the situation. In principle, all of the
Norwegian Armed Forces’ capabilities could
assist in international relief efforts, while certain
capabilities stand out as being particularly
relevant. Air transportation, sea transportation,
engineers, field hospitals and medical services may
be relevant. The Norwegian Armed Forces’ support
in connection with air transport and medical
aircraft evacuation is discussed in more detail in
Chapter 5.

**_The Directorate for Civil Protection’s_**
**_international operative activities_**
The Directorate for Civil Protection has two main
concepts for international operative activities,
both developed in the Civil Defence within the
“International Humanitarian Partnership” (IHP).
IHP is an informal association of governmental
emergency preparedness organisations in
northern Europe.

The Directorate for Civil Protection’s international
support team “Norwegian Support Team” (NST),
consists of eight to ten people recruited from the
Civil Defence. In addition, it includes fire services,
health services and others, which can be deployed

128 Report to the Storting no. 40 (2008-2009) Norwegian humanitarian

_policy, box 3.3 Norwegian Emergency Preparedness System_
(NOREPS), as well as www.noreps.no.


within 24 to 48 hours with equipment for complete
tent camps, in which aid workers from the United
Nations and others can be accommodated during
fieldwork in the event of a humanitarian disaster.
NST is administered by the Directorate for Civil
Protection and offers support services in catering,
quartering, transportation, communications,
office- and health services. The intention is to
enable other aid workers to concentrate on their
direct assistance to disaster victims.

Norwegian UNDAC Support (NUS) is the Directorate
for Civil Protection’s other international operative
concept. NUS mainly provides specialised support
services to the UN Team for Disaster Assessment
and Coordination (UNDAC) in the area of
telecommunications and IT. NUS has participated in
humanitarian missions at a number of locations in
Africa, Central America and Asia.[129]

Furthermore, the Directorate for Civil Protection
has been delegated the Norwegian administration
of the UNDAC (United Nations Disaster Assessment
and Coordination) system, which is the UN rapid
response team in the event of disasters. During
major events, UNDAC assists the United Nations
and local authorities in the disaster-afflicted
country in determining the need for assistance
as well as in the coordination of incoming relief
efforts.

**_Civilian law enforcement in international_**
**_peacekeeping operations._**
Norwegian police personnel can participate
in operations led by UN, EU and OSCE, among
others. Participation from Norwegian police in
international peacekeeping and peace-building
operations is a significant contribution to
assistance in reconstruction and establishment
of modern and democratic forms of society in
conflict-stricken countries. Such participation is
an important part of the integrated approach to
international operations, and may be decisive in
resolving complex armed conflicts. At the same
time, the objective of integrated operations is met.
It has been decided that up to one percentage of
the Norwegian police force can be designated for
use in international operations.

129 White Paper No. 29 (2011-2012) Civil Protection, p.116.


-----

The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute (UNICRI) is a UN organisation
working in the field of prevention, security and the
maintenance of law and order. The organisation
works to prevent corruption, terrorism, organised
crime and trafficking. Norway contributes with
knowledge and expertise.[130]

**_The health sector’s operative_**
**_international operations_**
The Nordic Health Preparedness Agreement of
June 2002 is intended to facilitate cooperation
between the Nordic countries in preparing and
developing health preparedness to deal with crises
and disasters, including natural disasters and
events (accidents and acts of terrorism), including
radioactive radiation, biological- and chemical
agents. The agreement relates to cooperation
in preparation of contingency measures and
assistance in the event of a country being affected
by a crisis or disaster, and supplements the Nordic
Rescue Service agreement.

Routines and procedures for the establishment
and deployment of health teams with crises
abroad were established on July 4, 2008, as
part of the follow-up to the White Paper no. 37
(2004-2005) The tidal wave disaster in South Asia
_and national crisis management. The routines deal_
with civil-military cooperation as well as roles and
responsibilities for involved parties regarding the
preparation, establishment and deployment of
health teams to assist in crises abroad. If needed,
the routines can be used for the establishment and
deployment of a health team as reinforcement in
the event of crises in Norway. Routines have also
been prepared for cooperation between Nordic
countries in the event of crises in the Nordic
region. This routine supplements the routine for
cooperation in crises that occur outside of the
Nordic countries. The routine was applied during
the Ash Cloud crisis in 2011.

**_7.6.6 Emergency Medical Team_**
Following the handling of the Ebola outbreaks
in 2014-2015, the European Commission
asked Norway in August 2015 to contribute
with Emergency Medical teams (EMT) as part
of the capacity in the EU’s civil preparedness
arrangement. EMT is the EU’s contribution to WHO.

130 White Paper No. 22 (2007-2008) Civil Protection, p.74.


In February 2018, the Norwegian EMT team received
the necessary approval for contributions from the
UN and the EU, and is thus ready to deploy at short
notice. The team, totalling 20 people, is made up of
doctors, nurses, paramedics and logistics personnel.
A total of three teams will be trained.

Norway’s EMT is established for international
deployment and is also suitable for use in Norway,
on Svalbard, in the Nordic countries and on the
Northern Cap. The Norwegian EMT is the first team
in the world that is also equipped to operate in cold
and Arctic climates.

A team can handle up to 100 patients a day, ranging
from simpler injuries, to births and stabilization
of serious conditions. No later than 48 hours from
notification, the mobile field hospital should be
established and in operation, no matter which
country in the world needs help. The team is
self-sufficient for six weeks and only needs water
and fuel access. The Norwegian Directorate for Civil
Protection will manage the scheme and has the
operational leadership on behalf of JD.

**_7.6.7 Major voluntary organisations’_**
**_international operations_**
Non-governmental humanitarian organisations
play a central role in the international humanitarian
effort, and a large proportion of Norway’s
humanitarian assistance is channelled through such
organizations. The following are the five major nongovernmental humanitarian organizations in Norway
that have a significant international commitment.

**_The Red Cross_**
The Red Cross in Norway is an emergency
preparedness organisation which in peacetime
provides assistance to exposed and vulnerable
groups in society, both inside and outside of
Norway. The Red Cross is based on voluntary
membership and has activities within search,
rescue, emergency preparedness and care work,
amongst others. In war situations, the organisation
is to provide protection and assistance to people
who are victims of armed conflict. The Norwegian
Red Cross is part of the Red Cross- and Red
Crescent Movement. Most of the Norwegian Red
Cross’s overseas work is concentrated on aid relief,
in both war and conflict situations and during
natural disasters.


-----

In 1907 the Red Cross in Norway was authorized
by the Ministry of Defence as a voluntary relief
association to assist the Norwegian Defence
Medical Service in the event of war. On August 21,
2009 the Red Cross in Norway was also recognized
by the King in Council as a humanitarian support
agency to Norwegian authorities in peacetime.

**_Norwegian People’s Aid_**
Norwegian People’s Aid is an organisation run by
members and has approximately 12,500 members
organised in local associations throughout
Norway. First aid, mountain rescue and emergency
preparedness are a central part of their activities.
Other areas of activity are the operation of refugee
reception centres and anti-racism work.

Internationally, Norwegian People’s Aid is engaged
in more than 30 countries and focuses on longterm development cooperation through local
partners and local authorities. Norwegian People’s
Aid is one of the world’s foremost organizations for
humanitarian mine clearing.

**_The Norwegian Refugee Council_**
The Norwegian Refugee Council is the only
Norwegian humanitarian organization that


specialises in protection and assistance to
displaced persons. The main activities of the
organisation are food distribution, legal aid,
information and advice, education, shelter and
camp operations. The NRC has activities in more
than 20 countries, and works closely with the
United Nations and other relief organisations.

NORCAP is administered by NRC and is an
emergency response force of approximately
600 qualified individuals who can deploy at 72
hours’ notice to assist in humanitarian operations
anywhere in the world. The emergency response
force is made up of mechanics, teachers, doctors,
lawyers, business leaders, telecommunications
technicians, and other specialists.

**_Norwegian Church Aid_**
Norwegian Church Aid provides emergency relief
during disasters, runs long-term development work
and works to remove the root causes of poverty.
Norwegian Church Aid has built up Norway’s
foremost specialist environment in the areas of
water, sanitation and hygiene in disaster situations.
In the Norwegian emergency preparedness
system, NOREPS, a cooperation between the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, private enterprises and


-----

**_Save the Children Norway_**
Save the Children Norway is part of Save the
Children International which works in more than
120 countries and has a common global strategy.
Save the Children’s work is based on the UN
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Save the
Children fights for the rights of children, and so
that all children may have a dignified life. Save the
Children works both in Norway and internationally.


humanitarian organisations, Norwegian Church
Aid has the primary responsibility for securing
expertise and equipment for water, sanitation and
hygiene in acute situations throughout the world. It
also has its own emergency response group, made
up of engineers and healthcare professionals in
Norwegian companies, that can travel to disaster
areas at short notice.


-----

-----

8. APPENDICES

**8.1 Appendix 1**


**Critical societal** **Lead** **Executive agencies/** **Other**
**functions and areas** **responsible** **administrative levels** **Ministries with**

**Ministry** **responsibility**

**Electronic** SD National Communication Authority, Directorate for Civil MOJ, MOD
**communications** Protection, The Norwegian Armed Forces,
**networks- and** Ekom providers
**services**

**ICT security in the** MOD National Security Authority, Center for Information Security, SD, KMD,
**civil sector** Data Protection Authority, National Communication other

Authority, Directorate for Civil Protection, owners of critically Ministries
important ICT systems, digital records and archives, Agency
for Public Management and eGovernment

**Satellite** SD Space Centre, Coastal Administration, National MOJ, MOD,
**communication and** Communication Authority, Mapping Authority KMD, NFD
**navigation**

**Power supply** OED Water Resources and Energy Directorate, The Power Supply MOJ
Preparedness Organisation, Statnett SF, Statkraft, district
heating companies, power- and network companies,
Directorate for Civil Protection, Meteorological Institute

**Water- and** HOD Food Safety Authority, Directorate of Health, KLD
**sewerage** Board of Health Supervision, National Institute of Public

Health, Environment Agency, Radiation
Protection Authority, waterworks owners (public and private
waterworks), the Counties Governor,
municipalities

**Supply security** MOD Agriculture Agency, Directorate of Fisheries, LMD, SD,
Directorate for Civil Protection, Petroleum Safety Authority HOD, ASD,
Norway, the food industries, fuel industries, building- and MOJ, MOD,
construction industry, transport industry, Counties Governor, OED
municipalities, The Norwegian Armed Forces

**Transport** SD Roads Authority, Avinor, Bane NOR SF, Aviation Authority, MOD, KD,
Coastal Administration, Railway Authority Maritime MOJ, NFD
Directorate, Ports Authority,
The Shipowners’ Association, Meteorological
Institute, Directorate for Civil Protection, county
municipalities, municipalities, transport companies

**Financial stability** FIN Central Bank of Norway, Financial Supervisory Authority of
Norway, financial institutions,
Banks


-----

**Critical societal** **Lead** **Executive agencies/** **Other**
**functions and areas** **responsible** **administrative levels** **Ministries with**

**Ministry** **responsibility**

**Health and care** HOD Board of Health Supervision, National Institute of Public ASD, LMD,
**services** Health, The Directorate of e-Health, Radiation Protection MOD, MOJ,

Authority, Medicines Agency, Institute of Nutrition and NFD
Seafood Research, Food Safety Authority, Scientific
Committee for Food Safety, the Veterinary Institute,
Labour and Welfare Administration, Directorate of eHealth,
Directorate for Civil Protection, Civil Defence,
the regional health enterprises, health enterprises, Counties
Governor, municipalities, The Norwegian Armed Forces

**Law and order** MOJ Norwegian Police Directorate/the Police, Police Security FIN, MOD,
Service, Directorate for Civil Protection, Civil Affairs KMD, HOD
Authority, Director of Public Prosecutions, Directorate of
the Correctional Service, National Courts Administration,
Data Protection Authority, Directorate of Immigration, The
Directorate of Customs/Norwegian Customs Service, the
Norwegian Armed Forces

**Rescue Service** MOJ The Joint Rescue Coordination Centres, Norwegian Police MOD, HOD,
Directorate/the Police, Directorate for Civil Protection, Civil SD
Defence, Directorate of Health, regional health enterprises,
health enterprises,
The Norwegian Armed Forces, Industrial Safety Organisation/
industrial safety, Directorate for Civil Protection, Avinor,
rescue helicopter service,
air ambulance services, Counties Governor,
municipalities, voluntary organisations

**Management and** MOJ Police Directorate/the Police, Police Security Service, The SMK, MFA,
**crisis management** Norwegian Directorate for Civil Protection, National Security MOD, HOD,

Authority, Directorate of Health, Radiation Protection KUD, KMD,
Authority, the Norwegian Armed Forces, SD, KMD,
Norwegian Broadcasting Authority, Mapping Authority, other other
agencies, the Counties Governor, Ministries
municipalities

**Defence** MOD The Norwegian Armed Forces, National Security Authority, MOJ, SD, OED,
Defence Research Establishment, Defence Estates Agency, NFD,
Defence Materiel Agency HOD, MFA

**Nature and the** KLD Directorate of Fisheries, Coastal Administration, Norwegian NFD, SD, OED,
**environment** Environment Agency, Meteorological Institute, Water KD, ASD, LMD,

Resources and Energy Directorate, Geological Survey MOJ, HOD,
of Norway, Petroleum Safety Authority, Polar Institute, MOD
Radiation Protection Authority, Agriculture Agency, Institute
of Bioeconomy Research,
Institute of Nutrition and Seafood Research,
Institute of Marine Research, Food Safety Authority,
Veterinary Institute, Directorate for Civil Protection, The
Norwegian Armed Forces, Counties Governor, municipalities


Table: Division of responsibilities between the Ministries for cross-sectoral areas in civil protection work


-----

**Abbreviations in appendix 1:**
ASD: Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs

FIN: Ministry of Finance

HOD: Ministry of Health and Care Services

KD: Ministry of Education and Research

KMD: Ministry of Local Government and

Modernisation

**8.2 Appendix 2**

**Collaborating- and emergency preparedness**
**agencies within the total defence subordinate to**
**Ministries**

**The Ministry of Finance**

The Financial Infrastructure Readiness Committee

**The Ministry of Defence**

The National Total Defence Forum
The Coast Guard Council

**The Ministry of Health and Care Services**

The Nuclear Preparedness Crisis Committee
The Cross-sectorial Group for Coordination of

Nuclear Preparedness

The Health Emergency Council
The Pandemic- and Epidemic Committee

**The Ministry of Justice and Public Security**

The Ministries’ Coordination Council for Civil

Protection

The Counter-terrorism Contact Group
The Cooperation Area for Chemical- and Explosion

Preparedness

The Natural Disaster Forum
The Coordination Group for Major Accident

Regulations

The Civilian Readiness and Emergency Planning

Councils

Network for National ICT Security


KLD: Ministry of Climate and Environment

LMD: Ministry of Agriculture and Food

NFD: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries

OED: Ministry of Petroleum and Energy

SD: Ministry of Transport and Communications

SMK: Office of the Prime Minister

**The Ministry of Local Government and**
**Modernisation**

Emergency Preparedness Digital Forum in Norway

**Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries**

The Council for Building- and Construction

Preparedness

The Food Preparedness Council
The NORTRASHIP Management
The Maritime Safety Committee for International

Shipping

The Insurance Forum Related to the Statutory

Emergency Preparedness Scheme for State
Insurance of Goods under Transport.

The Council for Fuel Preparedness

**The Ministry of Petroleum and Energy**

The Power Supply Preparedness Organisation

**The Ministry of Transport and Communications**

The Civil Transport Readiness Advisory Forum
The Security Council for Aviation
The Coordination Group for Airspace Restrictions
The Security Forum for Electronic Communication

**The Ministry of Foreign Affairs**

The Steering Group and the Operational Group of

the Proliferation Security Initiative

The Advisory Committee for Nuclear Safety


-----

**8.3 Appendix 3**

**Support and collaboration abbreviations**

**AU:** The African Union

**BAS:** Protection of society

**CAA:** Civil Aviation Authority

**BFF:** Defence Sector Crisis Response System

**CBRNE:** Chemical (C), Biological (B), Radiological (R), Nuclear (N) and Explosive (E)

**CECIS:** Common Emergency Communication and Information System (EU)

**CEPC:** Civil Emergency Planning Committee

**CIMIC:** Civil Military Co-operation

**CSDP:** The Common Security and Defence Policy (EU)

**CYFOR:** The Norwegian Armed Forces Cyber Defence

**DFS:** Department of Field Support (UN)

**DG ECHO:** The Directorate-General for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid
Operations

**DG Home:** The Directorate-General for Migration and Home Affairs

**DPA:** Department of Political Affairs (UN)

**DPKO:** Department of Peacekeeping Operations

**EADRCC:** Euro-Atlantic Disaster Response Coordination Centre

**EDA:** European Defence Agency

**EEAS:** European External Action Service

**EERC:** Emergency Response Coordination Centre

**Ekom:** Electronic communication

**EMT:** Emergency Medical Team

**EOS:** Intelligence, surveillance and security (services)

**EPPR:** Arctic Council Working Group

**ETJ:** The Intelligence Service

**EU:** European Union

**EWRS:** Early Warning and Response System

**UN:** The United Nations

**FORF:** The Norwegian Voluntary Professional Rescue Organizations’ Forum

**FUA RE:** Flexible Use of Airspace Advisory Expert Group

**CFSP** Common Foreign and Security Policy (EU)

**ICAO:** International Civil Aviation Organization

**IEA:** International Energy Agency

**IFRC:** International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies

**IHP** International Humanitarian Partnership

**IHR:** International Health Regulations

**IMO:** International Maritime Organization

**ISPS:** International Ship and Port Facility Security Code

**KFG:** Crisis and hostage negotiator service


-----

**LRS:** Local rescue centres

**MFA:** Ministry of Foreign Affairs

**MJK:** Norwegian Naval Special Operations Command

**MOJ:** Ministry of Justice and Public Security

**MOD:** Ministry of Defence

**NAC:** North Atlantic Council

**NATO:** North Atlantic Treaty Organization

**NBS:** National emergency preparedness system

**NCRS:** NATO Crisis Response System

**NJHQ:** Norwegian Joint Headquarters

**NGO:** Non-Governmental Organization

**NIS:** Norwegian International Ship Register

**NKSB:** National Competency Centre for Securing of Buildings

**NOR:** Norwegian Ordinary Ship Register

**NORCAP:** Norwegian Capacity

**NorCERT:** Norwegian Computer Emergency Response Team

**NOREPS:** Norwegian Emergency Preparedness System

**NORTRASHIP:** The Norwegian Shipping and Trade Mission

**NRPA** National Radiation Protection Authority

**NST:** Norwegian Support Team

**NUS:** Norwegian UNDAC Support

**OCHA:** United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

**OHCHR:** United Nations Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner

**OPCV:** Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons

**OSSE:** Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe

**PSI:** Proliferation Security Initiative

**SØF:** Gunnery ranges and training fields

**UNDAC:** United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination

**UNDP:** United Nations Development Programme

**UNHCR:** United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

**UNICRI:** United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute

**UN-CMCoord:** United Nations Humanitarian Civil-Military Coordination

**UNODC:** United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime

**VDI:** Warning system for digital infrastructure

**WFP:** World Food Programme

**WHO:** World Health Organisation

**WTO:** World Trade Organisation


-----

Published by:
Norwegian Ministry of Defence and
Norwegian Ministry of Justice and Public Security

Public institutions may order additional copies from:
Norwegian Government Security and Service Organisation
E-mail: publikasjonsbestilling@dss.dep.no
Internet: www.publikasjoner.dep.no
Telephone: + 47 222 40 000

The publication is also available at
www.regjeringen.no

Publication number: S-1025 E
Design/layout: Magnolia Design AS/ Melkeveien Designkontor AS
Print: Norwegian Government Security and Service Organisation
10/2018 – Impression 400


-----

