_Certified translation from Polish_

# NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY
 OF THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND

**Warsaw 2007**


-----

Introduction ...................................................................................................................3
1. National Interests and Strategic Goals of the Republic of Poland in the Area of

Security......................................................................................................................4

1.1. National interests ...............................................................................................4
1.2. Strategic goals ...................................................................................................5

2. Conditions of national security of the Republic of Poland.........................................6

2.1. Opportunities for security....................................................................................7
2.2. Challenges to security and security risks...........................................................8

3. National Security: Sector Goals and Tasks...............................................................9

3.1. External security...............................................................................................10
3.2. Military security.................................................................................................14
3.3. Internal security................................................................................................14
3.4. Civil security .....................................................................................................15
3.5. Social security ..................................................................................................15
3.6. Economic security.............................................................................................16
3.7. Environmental security.....................................................................................18
3.8. Information and telecommunication security....................................................19

4. The Republic of Poland’s National Security System...............................................20

4.1. Strategic directions of transformation of the national security system.............20
4.2. Subsystem of national security management...................................................21
4.3. Executive subsystems......................................................................................22

Conclusion...................................................................................................................35


-----

## Introduction

1. In the first decade of the new millennium the Republic of Poland is a safe country.

Its security is the result of profound geopolitical transformations that swept across
Europe at the end of the 20[th] century. The Polish people were at the forefront of
these transformations. The “Solidarity” movement invoking Christian values,
which formed European civilization and the idea of sovereignty of nations and
independence of states, changed the face of Europe. Following the collapse of
the communist block, its artificial division into a free and a dominated part was
erased. Poland’s accession to the European Union in 2004 brought about a
positive change of the international situation affecting its security. Poland began
to co-define the process of European integration.

2. Poland made good use of this international situation, the best in many decades.

Along with other Central European states, Poland became member of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European Union and thus joined the Western
community of free nations. It was able to guarantee the inviolability of its borders
and its territorial integrity, while Poles regained the freedom to determine their
own future and seized the opportunity to develop their country in civilizational
terms and to become full participants of the European and global international
community.

3. In the lives of nations, like in the lives of individual people nothing should be taken

for granted. International order is not a frozen, rigid form. The development of the
international situation, although currently positive, brings new challenges. We
need to interpret them correctly and face them effectively. Their changing nature
and dynamics makes it incumbent upon states and nations to persevere in their
efforts. The fundamental task and main concern of every state and its citizens is
to safeguard their own security in conditions of sustainable development.

4. This document presents a new approach to the issue of national security. It

explains our national interests and expresses our strategic goals in line with the
highest tanking legal act, the Constitution of the Republic of Poland. It is an
expression of the country’s constitutional authorities’ concern for Poland’s and
Poles’ security and describes the respective national effort in its various forms.
This effort will ensure Poland’s security today and in the future and its position in
the international area commensurate to its aspirations.

5. The Republic of Poland’s National Security Strategy, correlated with allied

strategies – NATIO’ Strategic Concept and the European Security Strategy – is
the basis on which executive strategic directives are developed, in particular the
Republic of Poland’s Political and Strategic Defense Directive, strategies for
different areas of national security, strategic plans of defence response and crisis
management and long-term state security system transformation programs,
including non-military defence preparation programs and armed forces
development programs.


-----

## 1. National Interests and Strategic Goals of the Republic of Poland
 in the Area of Security

6. Poland is a sovereign and democratic state in Central Europe with significant

population, political, military and economic potential. It wishes to pursue its
national interests and the aspirations of its citizens for a safe and worthwhile life
in a peaceful and stable environment. It creates conditions so that its citizens can
prosper while observing the law and democratic values. At the same time it wants
to contribute to the preservation of common values and to the development of
cooperation mechanism within the European Union framework, in the Euroatlantic
area and on a global scale to guarantee lasting global security.

7. Today Poland operates in a complex and extensive international environment. As

a member state of politically, militarily and economically strong organizations: the
North Atlantic Alliance and the European Union - it has become an important
participant of international cooperation. Membership in NATO and the EU and its
alliance with the United States have ensured Poland a high level of security and
have become one of the fundamental guarantees of its internal development and
its international position.

8. The Republic of Poland, being a NATO and EU border state, occupies an

important place in the European security environment and its territory is
strategically significant.

9. Membership of the Republic of Poland in the EU has broadened the notion of the

national interest and caused it to evolve and also has given rise to the need to
consolidate the national and European identity of Poland and its citizens in a
united Europe. This goal will be pursued by means of measures aimed at making
citizens identify themselves more closely with the state and by developing
comprehensive and legitimate integration, based on respecting common
democratic and social values

## 1.1. National interests

10.Fundamental national interests do not change and are based on an overall

concept of state security, taking into account political, military, economic, social
and ecological aspects. National interests follow from Poland’s fundamental and
invariable values and their pursuit becomes an overriding concern of the state
and its inhabitants. According to the Constitution of the Republic of Poland,
national interests include: protecting independence, territorial inviolability,
freedom, security, respect for human and civil rights as well as preservation of
national heritage and protection of natural environment in conditions of
sustainable development.

11.National interests can be put in three groups: vital, important and other significant

ones. The Republic of Poland’s vital national interests involve guaranteeing the
survival of the state and its citizens. They include the need to preserve state
independence and sovereignty, its territorial integrity and the inviolability of its
borders; to ensure that its citizens are secure, that human rights and fundamental
freedoms are protected, and also that democratic political order is being


-----

consolidated. The absolute priority of Poland’s security policy is to pursue these
interests.

12.Poland’s important national interests are: to guarantee that our country develops

civilizationally and economically, that conditions are created for the growth of a
more prosperous society, for the development of science and technology and for
a proper protection of its national heritage and identity, and also of its natural
environment.

13.Other significant national interests of Poland involve efforts to ensure that the

state maintains a strong international position and is capable of effectively
promoting Polish interests abroad. Significant interests also include strengthening
the ability to operate and to be effective of the most important international
institutions in which Poland participates as well as the development of
international relations based on respect for law and effective multilateral
cooperation in line with the goals and principles laid down in the UN Charter.

14.The pursuit of national interests and the ensuing goals is accomplished through

measures the state undertakes at home and in its relations with the external
environment. Poland’s ability to operate effectively abroad is conditional upon the
quality of its internal political, economic and social order.

## 1.2. Strategic goals

15.Strategic goals follow from security interests and the development of the Republic

of Poland, a NATO and European Union member state, and also from the
growing interdependencies between states and economies and from increasingly
intensive contacts between individuals and societies.

16.The overriding strategic goal of the Republic of Poland is to provide beneficial

and safe conditions in which to pursue national interests by eliminating external
and internal threats, reducing risks, adequately assessing challenges undertaken
and skilfully taking advantage of the opportunities that arise. The following are
regarded as the main strategic goals:

-to ensure independence and territorial inviolability of the Republic of Poland and its
sovereignty in determining the internal affairs of the nation, its organization and
political system;

-to create conditions for civilizational and economic development, deciding about the
nation’s and state’s ability to operate;

-to ensure that its citizens can exercise their constitutional freedoms, human and civil
rights and to create safe conditions for its citizens to lead decent lives and for the
entire nation to develop materially and spiritually;

-to ensure that it is possible to actively develop relations in the international
environment and to take effective actions through defence of national interests and
the promotion of the image of a credible participant of international relations, as well
as the implementation of Poland’s commitments towards its allies which affect
Poland’ credibility;

-to ensure that Polish citizens abroad are safe, protected and provided with
assistance;


-----

-to promote Polish economy and to support Polish entrepreneurs and to build
Poland’s prestige in the international environment;

-to ensure that the citizens of the Republic of Poland have a sense of legal security;

-to protect the spiritual and material national heritage (natural resources, citizen’s
private property and collective national property) and to ensure that it can be safely
developed in all areas of national activity, including in particular the economic, social
and intellectual areas;

-to protect the natural environment and to protect against the consequences of
natural disasters and man-induced catastrophes;

-to ensure wide access to information, to raise the level of national education and to
create a strong R&D base connected to manufacturing capabilities in order to
improve the competitiveness of the economy.

17.As part of our security policy, these goals are translated into tasks and specific

measures, depending on the situation, and taking into account the needs and
possibilities of their implementation alone or with other partners.

## 2. Conditions of national security of the Republic of Poland

18.Poland’s security is affected primarily by processes and developments occurring

around it – in the region, in Europe and in the Euroatlantic community. The
dynamics of relations in the North Atlantic Alliance and the European Union
significantly affect security. Poland’s membership in the EU creates favourable
conditions for its economic development and civilizational progress, while also
contributing to increased home security.

19.Globally, the United States which guarantees international security plays a key

role. Its position has been weakened to some extent following difficulties
associated with the operation in Iraq and the war against terrorism. An
improvement in transatlantic relations and a rapprochement of the views of allies
on the most important international security issues, particularly the fight against
terrorism and putting a stop to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
are positive developments.

20.The Russian Federation, taking advantage of the rising energy prices, has been

attempting intensively to reinforce its position on a supraregional level. Russia’s
efforts to establish closer contacts with selected Western countries go hand in
hand with the imposition of selective restrictions and discrimination of some
NATO and EU members.

21.The worsening of security in the Near and Middle East as a result of the rising

influence of fundamentalist forces, threats of terrorist attacks, destabilization of
Iraq and Afghanistan and Iran’s nuclear ambitions are negative developments.
Islamic fundamentalism also exerts a negative influence on the situation in Asian
and African and in some European countries.

22.The importance of the economic dimension of security, especially energy security

has been growing. The use of energy resources as an instrument of political
pressure by some states and the growing rivalry for energy carriers contribute to
greater risks in this area. At the same time there is growing belief that the


-----

international community must act together to ensure energy security, to look for
alternative sources of energy and to stop negative changes of the global climate.

23.The military forces of many states have become more involved in combating

asymmetrical threats, in peacekeeping missions and in stabilization operations.
The sources of threat are non-state entities, often difficult to identify and also
unresolved regional and local conflicts, which are catalysts of tensions spanning
across wide areas. Sources of threat are also rouge states which are not able to
control their territories. Their sovereignty is only formal, which favours the
development of terrorism and organized crime. The African continent has been
ravaged by local wars and conflicts and the HIV/AIDS epidemics which is
responsible for mass migrations to the developed countries. The risk of
environmental disasters is growing, while access to drinking water is diminishing.

24.The development gap between different regions of the world is growing, which

contributes to increased tensions in international relations. These negative trends
are accompanied by a growing sense of co-responsibility for the world’s future
and the belief that joint actions are needed to fight threats and confront
challenges. However, international institutions possess limited possibilities to
adapt to the changing conditions and to confront challenges.

## 2.1. Opportunities for security

25.Poland is well established in the European and Euroatlantic structures. We are an

active and solidary member of NATO and of the nascent European defence
structures. It is in Poland’s interest to see the North Atlantic Alliance remain as an
instrument of collective defence of member states, while at the same time
adapting its civilian and military capabilities to counteract new threats. The
consolidation of the transatlantic community, the tightening of relations between
the United States and the European Union, especially their ability to cooperate
and complement each other in the area of security serve Poland’s interests.
Poland, a close ally of the United States, wants to see its involvement in Europe
grow as a force that guarantees security and stabilizes political and military
relations on the European continent.

26.European Union integration provides conditions for the development of relations

with partners based on common values and interests. By participating in the
shaping of the process of integration, Poland can influence its functional and
institutional dimensions. Positive political and economic conditions provided by
our membership in the EU are used to narrow the development gap between
Poland and the leading Western states. Poland’s EU membership has created
new possibilities of interacting on the international arena and has contributed to
the consolidation of Poland’s position in the world.

27.Dynamics of the processes of democratization and economic transformation in

Central, Eastern and Southern Europe and the will of many states in this region to
establish closer ties with the North Atlantic Alliance and the European Union
advance peace and stability on the European continent. Poland, by supporting
these processes, especially in relation to Ukraine, Moldova, the Western Balkans
and South Caucasus states is developing partnership cooperation with these


-----

states in order to strengthen their democratic aspirations. Democratization of
Belarus would have a positive reinforcing effect on Poland’s security.

## 2.2. Challenges to security and security risks

28.In the long-term perspective, Poland’s security depends, to a large extent, on our

state’s ability to face challenges that extend beyond the traditional understanding
of security risks. These challenges are the result of coupled political, economic,
social, demographic and environmental processes which often cross over state
borders. Poland’s ability to meet these challenges will be determined by how far
and in what way will the technological gap between Poland and developed
European states be narrowed.

29.In this context, population changes in Poland, especially the nature and scope of

Poland’s migration to other states in search of work and a better life and also the
falling natural growth and the ageing of the population raise concern. In the longterm this will lead to negative changes in the social structure which may cause the
old-age pension system to collapse. In addition, the widening differences in
affluence and standard of living of citizens and the gap between different regions
of Poland may cause tensions and lead to weaker social cohesion. The
diminishing level of substitutability of generations will force Poland and other EU
states to accept large numbers of immigrants in order to keep the current pace of
economic development. This will necessitate the development of effective policies
and measures to integrate the newly arrived immigrants into the societies of their
respective host countries, while fully respecting their cultural and religious
differences so as to prevent negative developments from occurring as was the
case in some West European countries The widening gap in the standard of
living between EU states and other regions of the world, as well as the instable
political situation and armed conflicts may trigger mass migration movements.
Illegal migration, especially its organized forms, may create a risk for Poland.

30.The need to complete the transformation of the Polish legal system, in particular,

accounting for the right of ownership and its consequences is regarded as an
internal challenge. The improvement of infrastructure, in particular the creation of
a modern transport and telecommunications network and a grid to transmit and
store energy carriers also remains a challenge. Administrative structures have to
be made more effective in order to take full advantage of the development
potential offered by membership in the European Union and in other international
institutions.

31.The dependence of Polish economy on supplies of energy resources – crude oil

and natural gas – from one source is the greatest external threat to our security.
To counteract this threat we have to guarantee alternative sources of energy and
diversify the supply of energy resources. Not only do we need to diversify
supplies, but also increase our country’s ability to react to negative market
changes, by cooperating more closely inside NATO and the EU.

32.A potential threat to Poland’s interests would be posed by the collapse of the

process of European integration as a result of states returning to making


-----

decisions solely through the prism of their national interests and the ambition to
treat the EU as a counterweight to the United States, as well as EU’s inability to
architect a common policy. The weakening of ties linking the transatlantic
community which would result in states situated on the opposite sides of the
Atlantic to drift apart would also create a threat.

33.If authoritarian rule on the Continent is strengthened and if confrontational

attitudes are intensified this would be regarded in Poland as a negative
development. Tensions in the Transnistria and South Caucasus which are still
waiting for lasting peaceful settlements carry a certain destabilizing potential.
Disputed issues in the Balkans are yet to be unresolved, although today there is
little danger of reeruption of open conflict is.

34.Organized international terrorism is a threat to Europe, including also to Poland.

Poland has to factor in the possibility that it can become the object of operations
directed against it in connection with its involvement in the anti-terrorist campaign.
One cannot exclude the possibility of acts of retaliation as a consequence of
NATO- or EU-led stabilization and peacekeeping operations. A special threat to
Polish entities involved in missions outside Poland are the armed operations
carried out by terrorist groups in the area falling under the responsibility of the
Polish Military Contingents.

35.The current level of integration of economic life and financial markets is

accountable for the possible negative effect of violent changes and crises
occurring not only in Poland’s closest vicinity, but also in other regions of the
world on the stability, competitiveness and development potential of the Polish
economy and also on the security of our state.

36.Organized international crime also poses a threat to Poland. It is a consequence

of Poland’s transit location and the nature and methods of operation of
international crime groups. Poland’s accession to the Schengen Agreement and
the lifting of border controls along sections of EU internal border may result in
reducing barriers to the flow of wanted persons, making counteracting terrorist
threat more difficult and making it easier to import to Poland waste polluting the
environment, narcotics from EU states where their possession is legal or the
illegal export of works of art from Poland. Acts committed in cyberspace against
data communication systems and networks of critical infrastructure may create
another threat. Material losses and a paralysis of significant spheres of public life
are the possible consequence of such acts.

37.Poland may also be at risk of environmental threats as a consequence of

inappropriate use of technical and technological progress and of upsetting the
equilibrium between men and nature. Such threats may also involve potential
break-downs of obsolete nuclear power plants, trading in fissile materials, storage
and transport of radioactive materials, chemical substances and organic waste,
and break-downs of pipelines transporting crude oil and fuels.

## 3. National Security: Sector Goals and Tasks

38.In order to achieve strategic goals we have to use a whole range of available

political, economic, military and diplomatic instruments and measures. The


-----

blurring of differences between internal and external aspects of national security
means that we have to adopt a comprehensive approach. In so doing we should
use to the greatest extent possible the opportunities provided by Poland’s
membership in NATO and the European Union as well as our partnership with the
United States. We should be consistent in implementing measures that reinforce
the security of the state and its citizens and improve the conditions in which the
population can develop. These include, in particular:

-to reinforce Poland’s political and economic sovereignty,

-to ensure a higher standard of living of the population and a better quality of life of its
citizens,

-to modernize the armed forces and to develop their capabilities of interacting with
allied armies,

-to consolidate Poland’s international position and image and to make it more
responsible for the development of the international situation.

39.The realization of the goals and tasks of the strategic concept of national security

will be accomplished using political, economic and military measures and other
ventures involving public administration, NGOs and citizens.

## 3.1. External security

40.It is the duty of the state to consistently strive to create the most favourable

international environment for the country and to consolidate its international
position, image and prestige. We should create and extend the ability to achieve
national strategic goals in the area of security in our immediate vicinity, in the
European, Euroatlantic and global space, and we should also create conditions
for the reinforcement of effective Community and Allied relations and
mechanisms. We should support transformation processes in Eastern and
Southern Europe. Globally, our main task is to develop friendly relations with our
partners and to counteract negative consequences of conflicts, development
disproportions and violations of the international legal order.

41. **The North Atlantic Alliance is for Poland the most important form of multilateral**

cooperation in a political and military dimension of security and a pillar of stability
on the European continent, as well as the main ground of transatlantic relations.
Increasing NATO’s capability to carry out its basic tasks – collective defence and
creation of grounds for consultations between allies in case of threat remains a
priority. Poland fully supports a comprehensive development of the Alliance’s
potential in crisis prevention and in stabilization operations. It also recognizes the
need to improve the Alliance’s capabilities to fight non-traditional threats,
including those caused by terrorism and other asymmetrical threats and the
dangers resulting from proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Poland is in
favour of NATO’s continued military transformation. It supports NATO’s selective
engagement in stabilization missions outside Europe, provided, however, that the
Alliance maintains a credible potential and is fully capable of collectively
defending its member states, and also accounts for the impact of NATO’s nonEuropean operations on the course, pace and costs of modernization and
transformation of Allied armed forces, including Poland’s.

42.Poland shall seek to increase NATO’s role as a forum of strategic transatlantic

dialogue. This will reinforce Allied bonds and add to NATO’s greater cohesion.


-----

Acknowledging the discussion among Allies about a new strategic concept,
Poland considers that this concept should reflect the changes taking place in
NATO missions. Poland will also actively participate in other operations to make
the Alliance more cohesive, including the harmonization of member states’
interests on the international arena and the narrowing of the technological gaps
between Allies. The purpose of partnership with Russia should increase that
country’s involvement in transatlantic cooperation, in assuming responsibility for
security and stability in the region and by the same token help to increase
NATO’s effectiveness. Poland will attach particular importance to developing
comprehensive cooperation between the Alliance and the European Union.
Poland, being part of the Allied defence system, will perform its commitments
honestly and will actively participate in NATO-led operations.

43.Poland supports the development of cooperation between the Alliance and

partnership countries, regarding it as an important element reinforcing the security
of the entire Euroatlantic region, one that also has a stabilizing effect on the
Mediterranean Sea and the Middle East regions. Poland advocates reinforcing
the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council and the Partnership for Peace as well as
further development of the Mediterranean Dialogue and the Istanbul Cooperation
Initiative. Maintaining the Alliance’s interest in the development of relations with
its partners from Eastern Europe and the South Caucasus region shall remain a
priority. Poland recognizes NATO’s cooperation with Russia as an area of special
importance and it shall be actively engaged in advancing it. Partnership with
Russia should result in that country’s greater involvement in Euroatlantic
cooperation, and thus add to greater security and stability in the region. Poland
shall engage in intensive efforts to expand comprehensive cooperation with
Ukraine and Georgia.

44.Membership in the European Union determines, to a significant extent, the

foundations of Poland’s security.  It radically increased the possibilities of
implementation of the Polish security policy and our ability to act internationally. It
has strengthened Poland’s position in the world and at the same time increased
its responsibility for international order. Thanks to such instruments as: the
Common Foreign and Security Policy, the European Security and Defense Policy,
the Single European Market, a common trade policy, the Cohesion Fund and
other mechanisms that support development, cooperation in the fields of Justice
and Home Affairs, Poland’s membership in the EU has a positive effect on the
security and development potential of the state in all aspects of political,
economic and social life. At the same time, Poland’s security is increasingly
becoming an integral part of EU’s security. Poland should advocate the
deepening of integration processes in the European Union, while maintaining
cohesiveness and solidarity of its members. Poland shall actively participate in
activities whose aim is to achieve these goals, including the development of new
forms of institutional integration and the treaty basis thereof. A task that Poland
regards as being particularly important is to agree upon solidary mechanisms of
energy security within the framework of the European Union the purpose of which
is to provide any and all necessary assistance in case of threat or violation of
energy security of any Member State.

45.Strengthening the European Union’s position in the world and increasing its

international involvement both on a regional and global scale lies in Poland’s


-----

security interest. Poland shall actively participate in the development of the
Common Foreign and Security Policy, seeking to tighten cooperation among
Member States, to bring their respective positions closer together and to
harmonize interests as well as to work out new instruments of common policy. We
shall focus our attention especially on measures the aim of which is to increase
EU’s active role in Eastern Europe by, among others, active participation in the
development of the European Neighbourhood Policy. Poland supports EU’s
involvement in alleviating tensions and conflict resolution, especially in the EU’s
closest neighbourhood, including in Moldova, states in South Caucasus and in the
Balkans. It shall actively participate in formulating and implementing EU’s
common policy towards other regions in the world, as well as in defining EU’s role
in the stabilization of the Middle East. Poland will gradually increase its
contribution to the European Union’s development aid, because it considers it an
important instrument helping to eliminate the sources of many contemporary
threats. Poland shall continue to advocate further enlargement of the EU,
considering it an effective way of building pan-European stability.

46.Poland advocates the development of the European Security and Defence Policy.

It shall make a significant contribution to the development of EU’s military and civil
capabilities in the field of crisis response. It shall gradually increase its
involvement in the creation of the European Rapid Reaction Force, also by
participating in the creation of task groups. It shall seek to implement other
projects laid down in the 2010 Headline Goal. Poland shall also make a significant
contribution in terms of men and materiel in the UE stabilization, peacekeeping,
humanitarian, rescue and training missions. Poland advocates closer cooperation
of defence industries, harmonization of procurements and joint military research
programmes, and also the gradual building of a European defence market.
Poland acknowledges that the European Defense Agency plays a major role in
these processes. Therefore, it strongly supports the development of a permanent
and institutionalized cooperation in the fields of security and defence between
NATO and the EU in order to ensure complementarity of measures undertaken by
these institutions and the most effective use of the available resources.

47.Poland seeks to develop EU’s cooperation in fields that are important to internal

security, including justice and home affairs, combating organized crime and
terrorism and counteracting other non-traditional dangers and challenges. Poland
being a border country soon to accede to the Schengen Area attaches great
importance to closer cooperation between EU Member States in the field of
immigration and asylum policy and the protection of borders while preserving the
competences of Member States. Poland’s membership in the EU also makes it
possible to increase the security of the Republic of Poland’s state border. EU’s
financial mechanisms and cooperation in Community agencies will provide
additional support for services protecting EU’ external borders.

48.Bilateral relations with the United States occupy a special place in the Polish

security policy. Poland acknowledges their strategic nature and shall seek to
develop them further in the spirit of solidarity and sustainable partnership. Poland
shall act to preserve American presence in the European continent, also in a nonmilitary dimension. The development of a comprehensive bilateral cooperation
with Poland’s main allay should contribute to the strengthening of transatlantic


-----

ties and positively affect the form and quality of NATO’s cooperation with the
European Union and the United States.

49.Poland has been developing intensive cooperation and friendly relations with all

its neighbours. The Federal Republic of Germany is an important partner for us in
European policy. The resolution of problems in mutual relations will be conducive
to dynamising our cooperation, both bilateral and multilateral. Poland shall seek to
develop relations with the Russian Federation on equal terms and based on
partnership, counting on its cooperation in solving difficult issues burdening our
relations. We shall preserve good relations with Lithuania and other Baltic States,
both in bilateral contacts and on the UE forum. The Czech Republic, Slovakia and
Hungary, our southern neighbours are our important partners Recognizing the
importance of Ukraine to the security of the European continent and the region,
Poland shall seek to further develop its strategic partnership with this country and
to deepen relations between Ukraine, as well as Moldova, with Euroatlantic
institutions. We are looking forward to Belarus’ democratic transformations and to
linking it with the community of the Western world.

50.Poland has also been developing bilateral and multilateral cooperation with other

Central and Eastern European countries, regarding it as an opportunity to
consolidate security in this part of the continent. Poland intends to tighten
cooperation in the framework of the Weimar Triangle and the Visegrad Group and
supports the development of other subregional institutions contributing to the
democratization of the region and to greater security and stability. Special
attention is attached to relations with states that are preparing for membership in
the North Atlantic Alliance and the European Union or declare their willingness to
accede to these organizations.

51.Poland is invariably in favour of maintaining UN responsibility for preserving

peace and international security as enshrined in the UN Charter and in favour of
strengthening the role played by the UN Security Council in this area. Efforts are
made to adapt the UN to the changing international situation and to new
challenges. Poland will continue to be engaged in UN-led activities aimed at
resolving conflicts and will propose its military, police and civilian staff as
candidates to participate in peacekeeping and stabilization operations. It will also
strive to increase UN’s effectiveness in counteracting threats which arise as a
result of economic underdevelopment and unresolved social problems.

52.Poland supports the development of international law and efforts to ensure that it

is universally respected. It will advocate the development of legal norms that will
become effective tools in combating new threats, especially those relating to the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, terrorism and organized crime and
the phenomenon of rouge states. Poland shall support the strengthening of
states’ responsibility for the protection of their citizens. It will also support other
actions for the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms and join aid
projects as well as seek to develop dialogue among cultures and civilizations.

53.Poland has taken actions to stop the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and to control international trafficking in arms and dual purpose commodities. It
will concern itself with the effectiveness of arms control, disarmament and
confidence and security building measures. The full implementation of binding


-----

international agreements regulating these fields is very important. The fact that
other states refrain from implementing these agreements is a challenge to
Poland’s security. Poland will seek to further develop multilateral control
mechanisms in this field, also by looking for new, ever more flexible and effective
solutions and instruments of cooperation.

54.Poland shall continue to be involved in the work of the Organization for Security

and Co-operation in Europe, the Council of Europe, the Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development and of other multilateral institutions.

## 3.2. Military security

55.Readiness to defend Poland’s territory and independence and its allies, the

elimination of military threats, as well as counteracting possible, negative changes
in military balance in the region comprise the overriding goal of our activities in
the area of military security. Poland builds its defence policy in relation to the
principle of solidarity and loyalty towards its allies. Readiness to assist any
member of the North Atlantic Alliance increases the deterrence potential, ensuring
security to member states and NATO as a whole.

56.In the foreseeable future the eruption of a large-scale armed conflict is unlikely.

Regional or local conflicts in which Poland will not be directly involved will be
more likely. Their course and consequences may create crisis situations which
carry the risk of spreading and transforming into a war. Poland has to be ready to
react to crises which may stir up conflicts requiring the implementation of defence
missions in light of Article V of the Washington Treaty.

57.Poland’s participation in collective defence pursuant to Article V of the

Washington Treaty and support of UN, NATO, EU policies in the field of crisis
response and in stabilization operations will involve the need for strategic
planning of a widened spectrum of dangers, especially asymmetrical ones, and a
new technological context. For military operations to be successful, they need to
achieve information dominance; use mission structures of armed forces, be
provided with technical equipment that is more modern than the enemy’s; use
advanced technologies in the field of command; possess the ability to use
effective fire, to perform manoeuvres and be able to protect themselves against
enemy fire; skilfully apply symmetric strategy to enemy actions, fully use the
country’s logistics resources and civil and military cooperation.

## 3.3. Internal security

58.A state’s overriding internal security goal is to maintain its ability to react –

depending on the situation - in the event of a threat to public security or universal
security, involving the protection of legal order, life and health of citizens and
national property against illegal actions and the consequences of natural
disasters and technical breakdowns.

59.To achieve this goal, coherent legal regulations have to be enacted, social

attitudes have to be developed, the work of all state and social entities whose
activity is related to state internal security needs to be improved. This will be
possible by increasing the effectiveness of operation of public administration and


-----

systematic increase of the professional level of public servants and state
institution employees who carry out tasks involving the functioning of the state,
and to disseminate knowledge about home security risks.

60.All actions aimed at ensuring adequate, acceptable by the society, level of home

security should be directed at carrying out tasks whose aim is to implement a
crisis management system, to establish a Population Protection System through
ensuring the operation of a Population’s Warning and Alert System and an
Integrated Rescue System, as well as to integrate and consolidate with activities
undertaken by NATO, UE, UN and other international organizations of which
Poland or Polish state institutions are members. The former involves the
establishment of a modern integrated crisis management system, while the latter
entails integrating and consolidating with activities undertaken by NATO, EU and
other international organizations of which Poland or Polish state institutions are
members.

61.As we build our home security, we should always bear in mind that terrorist

threats could appear and that we should counteract them. While doing so we
should ensure that there is adequate mobility, effective organization and citizens
are able to behave appropriately in the event of a real terrorist threat. This threat
should be defined broadly, accounting for not just a threat of attack, but the
support groups which exist, the threat’s international nature, its sources of
financing, our country’s international commitment and the technical methods used
to carry it out. For this reason, proper cooperation between services and
authorities responsible for counteracting terrorist threats and professionalism in
exercising statutory tasks are so important. In addition, we should also prevent
other actions that are a risk to our state’s home security, including those that
violate the constitutional order and that promote totalitarian ideologies, racial and
ethnic hatred.

## 3.4. Civil security

62.The overriding goal of the Republic of Poland’s actions as a democratic state

governed by the rule of law is to ensure a sense of security and justice to all
citizens. Special emphasis should be placed on streamlining the work of courts
and public prosecutor’s offices, shortening the length of proceedings and
guaranteeing effective enforcement of court judgements. The ability to guarantee
the security of business transactions by streamlining legal procedures and by
making them more flexible is also an important element that ensures security to
citizens. The constitutional guarantees of protection of rights and freedoms shall
be implemented fully, once judicial authorities become generally accessible, act
quickly and are friendly towards citizens.

## 3.5. Social security

63. **Labour and social policy. The overriding goal of the state’s activities in the field**

of social security is to ensure a fast and noticeable improvement of the quality of
citizens’ lives. This requires engaging in an active social policy – primarily a
radical limitation of poverty and reduction of area of social exclusion by increasing
real incomes of all social groups and decreasing the unemployment rate. Actions


-----

undertaken by state institutions should also be aimed at preventing excessive
stratification of the society and engaging in a policy of equal opportunities in
social development for regions.

64.An active social policy should also aim at ensuring an increase of citizens’ social

security, accounting for, in particular, a rise of the number of social groups that
are active in the labour market and who are in a difficult life situations; increase of
social integration and improvement of the social security system; levelling the
civilizational differences between towns and the countryside; counteracting
negative population changes and the migration of young generation citizens.

65. **Science and education. Poland is trying to build a knowledge-based society. It**

therefore seeks high quality of education on all levels of the educational system,
higher level of general knowledge among the public as well as further
development of specialised teaching, dissemination of innovativeness and new
technologies among the public and support for scientific research. The state has
to be concerned especially about the system of higher education, in particular its
relation with the labour market, the directions of economic development and the
demands of public administration.

66. **Active and efficient society. Providing conditions that guarantee the**

development of sports facilities and ensuring that they are accessible to the
greatest number of people possible is one of the priorities of social security. A
continued development of physical culture and the related knowledge about the
purposefulness of improving one’s physical fitness and by the same token the
health condition of the society is an important element that also affects national
security. Physical activity should be promoted as a special value in the broadly
understood system of individual and social values, serving man’s all-around
development.

## 3.6. Economic security

67.State security and its stability should be based on solid economic foundations. A

strong and competitive economy is one of the fundamental assets in internal and
external policy and a factor that contributes to the consolidation of national
identity. The Polish economy, overcoming the effects of many years of
degradation and now rapidly developing, determines the state’s international
position.

68. **The power industry.** A priority of the energy policy is to ensure stable and

uninterrupted supplies of energy carriers based on long-term contracts and with
the help of an independent industrial infrastructure directly connecting sources of
supplies (including deposits) with Poland’s territory. Actions undertaken in this
area have to combine the interests of national security with the demands of
economic performance. The Polish energy security strategy provides for close
cooperation with the producers of natural gas and crude oil in the North Sea and
the Norwegian Shelf. Permanently linking Poland with Scandinavia by gas pipes
lies in the interest of Poland and the whole of Europe for which the transport
routes of energy resources along the North-South axis are important. Projects to
launch a transport corridor from the Caspian Sea region via the Black Sea to
Poland and Central Europe are part of this strategy. The building of the LNG


-----

terminal in Świnoujście, combined with the implementation of the Baltic Pipe gas
pipeline project to import gas will ensure the necessary diversification of natural
gas supplies to Poland. Poland’s accession to the International Energy Agency is
also a very important element of its energy security. Also very important is to work
out a common position with respect to European Union’s energy solidarity to
enable it to better react in crisis situations relating to the security of infrastructure
and the supply of energy carriers.

69.Consolidation of Poland’s electrical power industry is in the interest of our

country’s security. The establishment of a number of large capital groups in place
of the existing fragmented and weak structure will enable us to increase the
competitiveness of this sector of the economy and can prevent it being taken over
by entities acting to the detriment of state security. It is necessary to develop
alternative methods of extracting energy by relying to a greater extent on
renewable and alternative sources of energy. Moreover, in the coming years
Poland intends to initiate a program of development of nuclear energy and will
attempt to implement a program of “clean” coal technologies. The development
and implementation of energy-saving technologies and technologies increasing
the efficiency of energy use in manufacturing and building industries are
considered particularly important. Improvement of the technical condition of
Poland’s infrastructure, enhancement of its transmission capabilities, increasing
the effectiveness of fuel and energy distribution facilities and increasing the
capabilities of storing primary energy carriers and maintaining strategic reserves
of crude oil and natural gas remain important tasks.

70. **Finances. Budget policy relating to public finances will ensure stability of outlays**

for expenditures relating to guaranteeing national security and sustainable
economic development. This requires primarily that the budget be balanced and
that internal and external debt be maintained at an adequate, safe level. The state
has to create stable conditions for foreign payment transactions, including in
particular seek to achieve and maintain a sustainable balance of payments and
appropriate freedom of capital flows. The country’s finances should be such in
such condition as to guarantee a steady inflow of direct foreign investments.
Responsible use of foreign currency reserves is also a must. Poland shall
continue to be involved in the work of international financial and business
institutions.

71. **Defence industry potential.** The development of the defence industry is an

important element of the economic sphere of Poland’s security. It has to take into
account the nature and intensity of ties with other sectors of the economy and
with the potential of science and technology. It has to be in a symbiosis with
defence requirements, as laid down in armed forces modernization programmes,
and also comply with Poland’s commitments as a NATO member. We should
make an effort to guarantee a share in long-term defence contracts of strategic
importance to the Polish defence industry and try to maximize benefits for
enterprises. It is important to ensure an inflow of innovative technologies to
Poland and the development of capital links between domestic and foreign
enterprises. Trading in commodities and services which have a strategic
importance and technological security are particularly important issues.
Accounting for actions carried out in the EU, we should improve the national
system of inspection of exports of such commodities, technologies and services.


-----

72.Poland will try to increase the share of its own defence industry in international

cooperation, especially in research and development programs. Poland’s active
participation in the European Defence Agency and in the implementation of NATO
programs will play a special role in these efforts. To this end it is necessary to
engage in measures to increase the competitiveness of the defence industry and
to develop its export potential. Its restructuring and further consolidation as well
as efforts to establish closer links with the scientific and technological community
and with research conducted in Poland have to be continued.  Poland will
endeavour to create a system of comprehensive support for the defence industry
in order to guarantee its stable financing in compliance with the requirements of
the EU’s common market.

73. **Transport and communication infrastructure. It is necessary to form and**

develop a national transportation sector which will be socially, economically and
ecologically sustainable and will be based on modern networks. These networks
should ensure effective, territorial and branch integration of transportation
activities, necessary to attain a high level of quality and security of transportation
services. This will require, among others: building a network of highways and
expressways, adapting national roads to the European tire pressure standard for
trucks and a decided improvement of the conditions in which all roads are
maintained; modernization of railroads using modern systems of railroad traffic
control, the development of rapid conventional railways transporting passengers
and starting to implement a system of high-speed railways; the development of a
network of airports and airport ground facilities and the modernization of
infrastructure of ports to improve access to ports and the quality of navigation;
creation of land-sea transport chains, among others, to service intermodal
transportation; to speed up the integration of municipal transportation, among
others, by modernizing transportation interchanges and streetcar infrastructure
and rolling stock as well as rapid suburban railway network. Measures aimed at
integrating Poland’s transportation network with EU’s infrastructure and the panEuropean structure will rank high on the agenda. The necessary investments
require a high level of financing of transportation, and by the same token an
effective use of domestic and EU funds allocated for this purpose. We need to
intensify the construction of a special communication network for the system of
crisis management and response to operate effectively, and also of the Integrated
Rescue System.

74.We should continue to develop a modern integrated electronic communication

structure which would be resistant to break-downs and potential cybercrime
attacks. This will require the right kind of cooperation between competent line
ministries and agencies as well as private entities.

## 3.7. Environmental security

75.The overriding goal of the state’s activities in the area of environmental security is

to ensure that its citizens are provided with the means to improve their standard
of living in a healthy environment through nature protection, including stimulation
of sustainable development processes.

76.In order to achieve this goal, we will have to fully implement European

environmental policy standards, particularly with regard to the completeness and


-----

stability of legal regulations, the cohesion and effects of monitoring and inspection
measures, to the scope and effects of educational measures and to the
development and implementation of environmental protection projects by NGOs.
We need to develop our economy’s macroeconomic indicators so that they are
conducive to bringing our country’s development closer to a sustainable
development model. Environmental protection will be financed from sources and
with the aid of mechanisms specified in Poland’s Environmental Policy.

77.Poland will continue to protect the environment to maintain a balance of nature

and the permanence of the basic natural processes in the biosystem. Particularly
important tasks include the improvement of the purity of water, reduction of air
pollution, prevention of soil degradation and limitation of the risk of occurrence of
environmental disasters from natural causes or caused by man and to minimize
their effects by developing chemical and environmental rescue system. These
tasks will be implemented pursuant to a comprehensive environmental policy
whose assumptions comply with respective EU regulations and programmes and
are carried out using Polish and EU funds. Poland will continue to be involved in
regional and global international cooperation for the benefit of environmental
protection, including counteracting the greenhouse effect.

## 3.8. Information and telecommunication security

78.We should effectively prevent attempts to exert destructive influence on the

country’s telecommunication infrastructure by making it less susceptible to this
influence, by minimizing the effects of possible attacks and by restoring its full
operability in a short time.

79.We should draft and develop long-term plans to protect key data communication

systems against unauthorized entities having access to data, their normal function
being disturbed, identity theft and sabotage. We should continuously assess the
possibility of breaking into data communication systems, prepare possible forms
of response to attacks and develop methods of evaluating suffered data losses.
Supporting national IT programs and technologies will be one of the state’s
priorities.

80.Counteracting threats to government data communication systems and

telecommunication networks is intended to prevent computer crime and other
hostile acts aimed at telecommunication infrastructure, including counteracting
attacks on elements of this infrastructure. Protection of secret information stored
or transmitted in electronic form is particularly important. Drafting and
implementing transparent rules of authorized state authorities’ access to contents
transmitted electronically is an important task. This entails continued
approximation of the telecommunication law so that – despite rapid technological
progress – it always corresponds to today’s reality, accounting for Poland’s
security.

81.Providing an adequate level of telecommunication security necessitates the

development of preventive measures against interference that may occur in this
area, as well as the enhancement of capabilities to coordinate investigative
processes within institutions that possess government telecommunication
infrastructure elements. Designated services will engage in appropriate activities


-----

independently or together with similar structures existing in other countries,
especially in NATO and EU member states, and also with manufacturers and
suppliers of IT equipment, national telecommunication operators, Internet service
providers, research and training centres. Special attention should be focused on
ensuring failure-free operation of the IT infrastructure of the banking system.
Poland should participate, to the fullest extent possible, in the work of NATO to
counteract attempts to destroy the country’s information infrastructure.

82.Providing a communication system for government administration, the armed

forces and other key institutions of the country that would be based on state-ofthe art telecommunication technologies and the highest security standards is
critical for state security. The Polish state should build, as soon as possible, its
own system of satellite communication, using the assigned positions on the
geostationary orbit.

## 4. The Republic of Poland’s National Security System

 4.1. Strategic directions of transformation of the national security
 system

83.The development of an effective, efficient and well organized system of national

security remains the fundamental task of the Polish security policy. This system is
made up of all authorities and institutions responsible for security under the
Constitution of the Republic of Poland and the relevant laws which belong to the
legislative, executive and judiciary branches of the government, including the
Parliament, the President of the Republic of Poland, the Council of Ministers and
central government administration agencies. Important elements of this system
include the armed forces and government services and institutions whose duty is
to prevent and counteract external threats, ensure public safety, engage in rescue
operations and protect the public and property in emergency situations, as well as
– to the extent provided for by the Constitution of the Republic of Poland and the
relevant laws – local government and other legal entities, including entrepreneurs
who create the industrial and defence potential.

84.A comprehensive vision of security on which this strategy is based, corresponding

to the current international situation and the nature of threats and challenges, and
evidencing the will to maximize the effects of measures taken to ensure security
of the state and its citizens, indicates that Poland needs to undertake efforts in
every sphere of public life. This gives rise to the need to develop capabilities of
coordination and integration of efforts undertaken by respective state authorities,
institutions and services. Consequently, as a matter of urgency, the National
Security System of the Republic of Poland has to become fully integrated,
cohesive and orderly. This will be accomplished by working out mechanisms of
comprehensive and long-term planning of the development of a security system
based on goals and requirements common to all its components and resulting
from national interests taken as a whole. Effective integration of the security
system will also necessitate a modification of certain legal regulations, which
should make its construction more orderly, the competencies of its respective
components, including the leading authorities, precisely defined, and should
enhance interministerial cooperation. Poland will seek to enhance the capabilities


-----

of the respective elements of the national security system to cooperate with the
relevant structures of other EU member states and allies, while maintaining the
capability of taking effective action independently.

85.The national security system has to be organised and furnished so that it

guarantees its rapid and efficient operation in any condition and in response to
any type of danger and crisis. This capability will be verified, in particular, by
regular exercises carried out within the entire national security system or its
designated parts. The national security system will also be subject to cyclical
reviews to assess its effectiveness, readiness to act and its adequacy relative to
the most important needs of the time and capabilities of the country. We should
focus our attention on the development of capabilities of the entire system and its
respective parts to carry out preventive operations and to respond to emerging
problems, challenges and threats at the earliest stage possible. This will require a
consolidation of capabilities of the competent institutions and state authorities
which form part of the system to forecast international and internal developments
and to detect in advance any changes negatively affecting Polish security.

86.Competencies, skills and specialist knowledge of persons participating in the

respective subsystems of the security system are particularly important for its
effective operation. Special attention should be focused on developing in
employees, especially managers, skills of cooperation on the interministerial level,
as well as – primarily in connection with the advancing European integration and
closer ties with allies – on the international level. Poland should develop its ability
to promote and implement – within the framework of competent authorities,
institutions and services – the most effective solutions in human resource
management, also by means of a system of interinstitutional exchange of
experiences.

87.The creation of a fully integrated national security system requires, in addition to

developing and implementing appropriate legal and organizational solutions and
ensuring high quality personnel, an ongoing improvement of communication
between all elements of the system. In this regard, continued informatization and
modernization of telecommunication networks of competent services and
authorities, especially central government administration and institutions
responsible for public order are particularly important.

## 4.2. Subsystem of national security management

88.Public authorities and heads of organizational units that perform tasks relating to

national security and the command authorities of the Armed Forces of the
Republic of Poland make up a management subsystem. The Parliament, the
President of the Republic of Poland and the Council of Ministers all have a special
role to play in managing national security. The overriding task of the management
subsystem is to ensure continuity of decision-making and actions in order to
preserve national security.

89.The national security management subsystem also implements projects involving

monitoring of sources, types, directions and scale of threats; preventing the
emergence of threats to national security in the territory of the Republic of Poland


-----

and abroad; counteracting effects of such threats and eliminating them, as well as
managing national defence.

90.To ensure efficient data transmission within the processes relating to national

security management, government authorities rely for this purpose on a dedicated
separated communication system which is at the disposal of the minister
competent for internal affairs. .This system ensures secure and dependable
communication among entities that implement national security management
tasks.

## 4.3. Executive subsystems

91.Executive subsystems comprise forces and resources controlled by government

ministers, central government agencies, Voivodes and local government
authorities and other entities responsible under law for national security.

92.The basic task of the executive subsystems is early reconnaissance of challenges

and prevention of threats to our country’s security and in the event they appear,
counteracting their negative consequences. An equally important task of these
services is increasing state potential and its capabilities of pursuing national
interests. The effectiveness of efforts taken will be ensured by harmonious and
effective cooperation of all state institutions, as well as private entities important
for state security. Public support for measures undertaken by state authorities is
equally important. This requires that competent public institutions properly inform
the public about the international security situation and about the state’s initiatives
undertaken in this field.

**Foreign affairs**

93.To ensure security of the state its authorities need to engage actively in foreign

policy. Memberships in the North Atlantic Alliance and the European Union have
added to the existing tasks of the Polish diplomacy. These cover many areas of
political, military, economic and social life. The nature of cooperation with many
countries in the field of security and multilateral relations has changed. Analytical
and promotion activities of the diplomatic service have grown in importance, while
its role as an intermediary in international contacts between Polish institutions and
their foreign counterparts and Community institutions has decreased. In light of
this situation, effective coordination of external activities of Polish government
institutions has become an increasingly urgent need. Further development and
improvement of the effectiveness of the consular services is required. Our state’s
active policy in the field of security requires greater protection of Poles abroad
and control of foreigners entering Poland’s territory and the Schengen Area.

94.Increased importance of commercial issues in our state’s security policy should

translate into the development of commercial diplomacy and a system of
commercial promotion of Poland and Polish businesses. In promotion activities, it
is necessary to influence the formation of positive opinions about Poland and to
support decision-making processes beneficial in terms of the Polish raison d’état
and its security. The reinforcement of international law and the development of
Poland’s treaty relations remain important tasks.


-----

**National defence**

95.The Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland are an essential element of our

national defence. Their fundamental task is to guarantee that the state is capable
of defending itself and is ready to counter aggression under our allied
commitments. Poland shall develop combat readiness of its armed forces to
ensure effective defence and protection of Polish borders within the framework of
operations carried out independently or as part of collective defence, as well as
outside its borders, pursuant to Article V of the Washington Treaty. The Armed
Forces of the Republic of Poland will maintain their readiness to participate in
operations of asymmetrical nature, including multinational, joint anti-terrorist
operations carried out in compliance with international law, organized by NATO,
EU or an ad hoc coalition of states.

96.The Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland participate in the process of

stabilizing the international situation. They are ready to take part in multinational
joint stabilization, peacekeeping and humanitarian operations outside Poland’s
territory. In order to effectively perform such missions, they should possess the
operational capabilities that would allow them to participate in a significant way in
NATO- or EU-led crisis response operations and to support such operations
organized by the UN. The Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland will continue
bilateral and multilateral military cooperation with all the interested partners,
especially with neighbouring countries.

97.Supporting other state authorities in maintaining Poland’s internal security and

providing necessary military assistance to competent central and local
government institutions and services, civil organizations and the public in
responding to threats is another important task of the Armed Forces of the
Republic of Poland. These types of operations comprise Poland’s air space
observation and control, supporting the protection of land border and territorial
waters, as well as reconnaissance and intelligence operations, monitoring of
radioactive, chemical and biological contamination in the territory of Poland and
clearing the terrain of explosives and dangerous objects of military origin. In
addition, armed forces maintain their readiness to carry out – individually or in
cooperation with other state authorities and services – search and rescue (SAR)
operations. They will continue to participate in the national crisis management
system and will continue to develop their capabilities to provide assistance to
relevant public administration authorities and the public in the event of natural
disasters, man-made disasters and terrorist threats.

98.Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland will continue to perform their

constitutional tasks effectively and to be capable of joint operations with allied
troops and will achieve and maintain modern army standards by their ongoing
transformation directed by assessments and recommendations of military reviews
carried out within the framework of the Strategic Security Review. Transformation
of armed forces will involve primarily the necessary replacement of armaments
and equipment and reorganization of structures to increase operational readiness
and troop mobility. The transformation of Polish armed forces will also lead to a
more flexible and internally integrated command system in order to ensure its
effective operation in time of peace, crisis and war.


-----

99.The size of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland will not be altered

significantly in the nearest future. Reductions made during the past 20 years or so
have brought the size of the armed forces to a level on which the continuation of
this tendency may carry unwanted risk. However, armed forces will gradually
become professional. The structure of the armed forces: the Land Forces, the Air
Force, the Navy, Special Forces and the Inspectorate for the Polish Armed
Forces Support, which organizes the system of logistic support of the armed
forces, is adequately prepared to perform missions. In the context of the ongoing
war on terrorism, Special Forces have gained more significance because they are
best prepared to carry out operations against asymmetrical threats and to
cooperate with other specialized institutions and authorities operating in the state
security system. Solutions aimed at effective use of this type of forces should be
supported.

100.As a result of transformation, in addition to the existing operational troops, very

effective, modern and well equipped National Reserve Forces should be created
to carry out tasks during emergency situations and to increase the country’s
defence potential. The system of long-term planning of technological development
should be improved and military technical equipment should be continuously
modernized to meet the requirements of innovation and technological
development in the context of visions of future operations. Reforming military
education to meet the needs of the armed forces and the whole national security
system regarding military and civilian personnel training is an important task.

**Special Services**

101.The nature of modern-day security environment of Poland requires a coherent

and comprehensive approach, taking into account cooperation, coordination and
exchange of information between institutions and services responsible for national
security. The authorities of the Republic of Poland, acting on behalf and in the
interest of the Polish people, regard special services as an important instrument
of protection of national security. The complex nature of modern-day threats
accounts for the fact that effective special services are crucial for the protection of
internal and external security, civil rights and the constitutional order. At the same
time, the need for effective, civil and democratic control over the operations of
these services has gained great importance.

102.Intelligence and counterintelligence operations of special services concern

reconnaissance and counteracting external and internal developments which put
the country at risk. The fundamental role of special services is to obtain, analyze,
process and hand over to competent authorities information that could be
significant for state security in all its aspects, and to inform in advance about
potential and existing risks for the country. Special attention is focused on
preventing and counteracting terrorism, protection of the country’s defence and
economic capabilities determining its international position, elimination or
reduction of the risk of disturbing internal security and constitutional order and
corruption, as well as counteracting unwanted activities of foreign special
services. Special services ensure counterintelligence protection of the country,
particularly with respect to the functioning of the main elements of critical
infrastructure, the national economy and its defence system.


-----

103.It is important that the special services be active in forecasting the development

of the international situation in terms of the occurrence of all kinds of threats to
Poland’s security and its citizens. The services’ most important tasks, primarily
military, include the protection of the Polish armed forces taking part in missions
abroad. The many challenges that special services are facing today include
reconnaissance and prevention of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and the means of transporting them. This development is particularly
dangerous in the context of the threat of terrorism, which is gaining in intensity
and can more easily move around the globe. Special services also have a duty to
protect the state and its authorities, protect secret information, including
information exchanged in the course of allied and international cooperation, as
well as to contribute to guaranteeing the country’s data communication security.

104.Poland’s membership in NATO and the EU is yet another premise mobilizing the

country to continue improving the effectiveness of special operations in the field of
protection of the country’s secret information system. In this respect, the
protection of secret information stored or transmitted in electronic form is
particularly important. Counteracting computer crime and other hostile acts
directed against the telecommunication infrastructure has become increasingly
important in the context of the development of computer technologies and
informatization.

105.Counteracting actions directed against fundamental economic and social

interests of the state constitutes an important area of operations of the Polish
special services. Out of concern for the quality of public life, actions are being
undertaken in the state to combat corruption among persons who perform
important public functions and are involved in organized crime activities. Special
services participate in combating particularly serious form of crime, including
those relating to the production of goods, technologies and services of strategic
importance and trading in them, illegal production of arms, ammunition and
explosives, their possession and trading in them as well as narcotic crimes.

**Public administration and home affairs**

106.Activities aimed at improving home security are one of the fundamental tasks of

government administration both on a central, provincial and local level.

107.The Police’s mission is to serve the public by providing effective personal and

property security and by maintaining public security and order. The police prevent
crimes and situations prone to crime, including transborder crimes and
criminogenic developments, by cooperating with other guards, services and
national inspections and police forces from other countries as well as with
international organizations. The police are also being prepared to provide more
extensive support to missions carried out by other state and non-governmental
entities, and also by the Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland. Prevention of
and effective response to organized crime should continue to be a concern of not
only the Police, but other services and line ministries too. Police actions should be
supported by civic initiatives, citizens’ security improvement programmes carried
out on a local-government level, particularly in the field of education and
prevention, in cooperation with other state services responsible for public security.
NGOs, civilian groups and platforms should also participate in this cooperation


-----

with the Police. Police cooperation on the international forum should be reinforced
and its ability to participate in international police operations in crisis areas should
be enhanced. Polish police should actively participate in and initiate solutions in
international institutions of police cooperation, such as Interpol or Europol and
develop a network of its liaison officers who actively represent Polish police
outside our borders. Cooperation of law enforcement agencies of the Police,
Internal Security Agency with the Central Anti-Corruption Bureau to eliminate
situations prone to corruption which have a destructive influence on morale and a
sense of fairness among the population are regarded as priority.

108.The overriding goal of the Border Guard is to effectively protect our state borders

and to control cross-border traffic in line with the interests of state security. It
owes its special role to the fact that it protects one of the longest sections of the
external land border of the European Union and NATO and that Poland will
shortly assume its commitments under the Schengen Agreement. The
transformation of the Border Guard structures should be continued to achieve an
ever greater organizational and functional rational formation and to significantly
increase its operational-cum-reconnaissance and criminal investigation
capabilities as well as to ensure effective cooperation with EU Member States
and neighbouring countries. Continuation and improvement of cooperation
between the Border Guard and the Police and other services are necessary.
Monitoring and the control of migration of foreigners within the whole territory of
Poland, which should also include prevention, is another important area where
these services should intensify their forms of cooperation. Both the Police and
Border Guard, within statutory operations, should monitor, on an ongoing basis,
terrorist threats and in doing so cooperate with other services.

109.An overriding goal of the Government Protection Bureau (Polish Secret Service)

is to provide effective control of persons, facilities and installations important on
account of state interest. The Government Protection Bureau’s activities will be
focused on intensifying reconnaissance and analysis of potential threats and their
prevention by continued training of its officers, modern equipment and close
cooperation with the police, the Internal Security Agency and other specialized
state institutions. Ensuring proper protection to Polish diplomatic posts, especially
against terrorist threats will remain one of its important tasks. In this regard, it is
necessary to ensure ongoing cooperation of all state authorities whose
competencies include the security of diplomatic posts in the broad sense.

110.The overriding goal of the State Fire Brigades is to identify threats and to

prepare and carry out rescue operations. The State Fire Brigades are capable of
responding immediately in the event of life or health emergencies and in the event
of situations threatening to the environment or property, and in the event of
extraordinary hazards, catastrophes and natural disasters. The State Fire
Brigades also organize the National Rescue and Fire Fighting System, which is
now being transformed into a general Integrated Rescue System. The State Fire
Brigades cooperate with all services and rescue entities and NGOs in developing
rescue services in Poland and in organizing rescue activities, search and rescue
operations and humanitarian relief operations outside Poland. Command posts of
the State Fire Brigades analyze current operational readiness of rescue services
and entities, distribute rescue forces and resources and coordinate rescue
operations. Training to meet the needs of protection of the population is also an


-----

important goal of the State Fire Brigades. The State Fire Brigades also support
state services and inspections and NGOs in the realization of tasks relating to
protection of the population. It is necessary to improve the operation of the State
Fire Brigades as a leading service in the now being created Integrated Rescue
System which is an integral part of the Population Protection System.

111.The emergence of new types of threats, especially asymmetrical threats and

threats related to civilizational development, political as well as social tensions
requires stronger efforts to find new solutions for a more effective implementation
of tasks in the field of crisis management and population protection, including civil
defence. The building of a crisis management system necessitates cooperation
among public administration authorities at all levels and entities from outside this
area. The functioning of a crisis management system has to be based on solid
legal grounds. One of them is a law on crisis management which is a fundamental
step leading to the implementation of a nationwide system solutions in the field of
crisis management.

112.The Population Protection System understood as a collection of tasks assigned

to respective public administration authorities and units, professional services and
NGOs, including volunteer rescue organizations should be correlated with the
crisis management system. In situations requiring support and involvement of
additional forces and resources to protect the population, this support should be
provided and crisis management structures should be involved in it. This system
should be able to respond flexibly to crisis situations, up to and including an
armed conflict. When building the Population Protection System, we should seek
to: create and ensure the operation of a Population Warning and Alerting System
and an Integrated Rescue System which will operate on the basis of and by using
the State Fire Brigades and its organizational and technical facilities, comprising
professional rescue groups and cooperating volunteer groups capable of
performing rescue operations. The Integrated Rescue System should operate on
the basis of a network of Emergency Call Centres handling the “112” emergency
telephone number. The introduction and application of standards in the
organization of the emergency call system and methods of financing it will
contribute to the creation of a uniform (compatible) emergency call system for the
whole country, capable of handling calls from callers who speak foreign
languages.

113.A response to the growing level of threats to infrastructure facilities and systems

of key importance for the security of the state and its inhabitants should consist in
efforts directed at creating a protection mechanism of critical national
infrastructure. We should seek to develop a national plan of protection of critical
infrastructure and to involve in the process of building the mechanism – in
addition to administration and public services – also operators and owners of
infrastructure, also private ones. Being aware of the supranational dimension in
which this critical infrastructure operates, we should enable Poland to actively
participate in the work relating to its protection in which NATO and EU are
engaged.


-----

**Informatization and telecommunications**

114.The overriding goal of informatization in Poland is widespread implementation of

solutions improving the technical condition of data communication systems and
networks and raising the level of electronic services so that they correspond to
the average level of their development in EU Member States. In connection with
this, a system of generally accessible electronic services in public administration,
business and health care should be developed; the creation and development of
Polish content in the Internet important for the competitive position of the Polish
economy and the development of entrepreneurship should be stimulated; the
state’s telecommunications networks should be developed to provide general
broad-band access to the Internet, to services provided electronically and
contents accessible there; skills necessary to actively and creatively participate in
the services of the information society should be developed and the education
system should be adapted to meet the needs of a knowledge-based society. The
Office of Electronic Communications, which also carries out important tasks in the
field of defence, state security and public order, plays an important role in the
process of regulation of telecommunication activities and spectrum management.

**Justice**

115.The legal system of the Republic of Poland should be primarily concerned with

safeguarding security and peace of its citizens. Amendments of criminal law
aimed at changing the philosophy of punishment and conducting a rational
criminal policy will contribute to enhanced security of citizens. Perpetrators of the
most serious crimes should be punished more severely out of a sense of justice.
A number of possible more flexible approaches of courts towards petty offences
committed by first-time offenders is also envisaged. To streamline criminal
proceedings instruments imposing trial discipline by courts on the trial participants
should be introduced. An innovative approach is also the introduction of a
summary procedure with respect to cases relating to offences of small or medium
gravity, including hooligan offences. Ensuring security of business transactions
and facilitating business start-ups are also important elements. This goal should
be achieved through comprehensive informatization of commercial sections of
courts, the training of judges who specialize in commercial issues and changes
relating to the entire civil procedure intended to accelerate and streamline civil
proceedings in a substantial way. Changes in the way court bailiffs operate and
foreclosure proceedings are run should lead to substantial increase of
effectiveness and speed of performed foreclosures. Making the legal profession
accessible is a very important element of ensuring security to citizens.

116.The protection of security and peace of ordinary citizens should become a

priority for prosecutors of common crimes. The security and peace of citizens is
threatened both by petty crime and hooligan behaviour, as well as by the
operations of organized crime groups and terrorist organizations. To this end, the
effectiveness and efficiency of proceedings should be enhanced and special
emphasis should be placed on the fight against organized crime and corruption.

117.Reform of the prison system is another important component of safeguarding the

security of citizens. In addition to creating new places in correctional institutions,
among others, by taking over and adapting military facilities, the building of new


-----

prisons in a public-private partnership system should be considered. The basis of
success in this field is also the creation of a modern and well trained uniform
formation. The nature of the prison system will also be changed when an
alternative system to deprivation of liberty by imprisonment will be introduced in
the form of electronic surveillance of the convicts.

118.Cooperation between Polish and European justice administration systems,

particularly in the field of combating organized crime and terrorism has to be
developed if Poland is to implement its commitments as an EU Member State. It
is also indispensable that work relating to the process of implementing Community
norms in the Polish legal system be continued.

**The economy**

119.The overriding goal of economic policy is to maintain financial balance, energy

and raw materials stability and growth potential of industry and services. Critical
tasks in this area are: diversification of the fuel and energy base, state
surveillance and influence over the condition of the strategic energy infrastructure,
modernization and development of production sources and the national electrical
power industry, building new trans-border connections and increasing
transmission capacity, building a modern data transmission network to monitor
the operated electrical power system.

120.The defence industry faces new challenges. Its market position will depend, to a

large extent, on the completion of structural transformations in the sector,
including the implementation of the second stage of capital consolidation and the
creation of an effective sector support system. A consolidated R&D base of the
defence industry should be established in order to intensify R&D in the defence
sector and to tighten cooperation of companies producing armaments and military
equipment with R&D units.

121.Efforts should be made to establish a Polish defence industry consortium,

conditions should be created in which it could grow to become more competitive
and the defence production more profitable. At the same time decisive actions
should be taken to involve defence companies in wider cooperation leading to the
development and production of military equipment, comprising NATO and EU
countries, and to continuously improve their economic and financial situation
through domestic procurement orders and expenditures relating to modernization
of the armed forces. We must also create conditions that would boost defence
industry exports.

**Maritime economy**

122.Key elements of maritime economy are navigation and sea ports. The most

important task in the development of maritime navigation is to improve the
competitiveness of the transportation fleet. This can be accomplished by renewal
and expansion of tonnage and by providing operating conditions for ship-owners
comparable to those prevailing in the European Union.

123.In the field of development of sea ports, the overriding task is to strengthen their

role in the land and transportation chain, primarily by modernizing and expanding


-----

port infrastructure and the infrastructure providing better access to ports from the
land and sea and by implementing EU standards with respect to port
management and operation. These measures will make it possible to integrate
the country’s transportation system and to link it with the European transportation
system. Development and implementation of effective security enhancing
mechanisms in seaports and at sea and improving maritime environment
protection are also important elements of this task.

**Budget and public finances**

124.The state shall focus its efforts on improving public finances and their

management, on increasing the absorption of EU funds and on creating
conditions for effective disbursement of EU structural funds and on stimulating
entrepreneurship and innovation of enterprises. The overriding goal is to reform
public finances. The reform envisages making public finances more open and
transparent, improving efficiency and effectiveness of spending budget funds,
effecting a real consolidation of public finances and streamlining public finance
management procedures. These goals will be achieved by changing the system
of planning, performance and assessment of the performance of the central
budget. Approach to expenditures will change from a subject-based to a targetbased approach, which takes into account the aspect of purposefulness of
expenditures and the implementation of a system of long-term budget planning
covering many years. Interministerial functions covering different organizational
units realizing a common objective will be created to ensure control over and a
rational disbursement of budget funds. The state will oversee the stability and
security of the domestic money market and the proper functioning of the banking
system. Efforts will be made to enhance the monitoring of financial transactions
and operational and investigative cooperation with the Internal Security Agency,
the Central Anti-Corruption Bureau, the Police, State Border, as well as – in the
international dimension – with financial intelligence units of other countries, aimed
primarily at preventing introduction into financial turnover of pecuniary values
originating from illegal or undisclosed sources and counteracting financial
terrorism. It is very important that we cooperate with those international
organizations which have as their goal counteracting money laundering.

125.The tasks of the Customs Service are primarily to protect the public against

threats, to protect the common market against unfair and illegal trade and to
secure the financial interests of European Union Member States. The Customs
Services are responsible, in particular, for identifying and disclosing offences and
petty offences which pose a threat to state security and its citizens. The Customs
Service enforces restrictions and prohibitions relating to the movement of goods
whose international trade is restricted or prohibited, implements tasks relating to
the management of the external border and cooperates with other services in
counteracting abuses, organized transborder crime and terrorism. It participates
in programmes guaranteeing safe deliveries and enforces sanctions imposed on
countries that ignore the rules of peaceful coexistence, preventing the realization
of deliveries of goods used for military purposes.


-----

**State Treasury**

126.The State Treasury ensures that the state has control over part of the economic

infrastructure and exercises ownership supervision over state-owned assets, their
privatization and restructuring processes. The overriding goal of efforts
undertaken by the State Treasury is effective exercise of ownership rights,
effective use of state-owned property and the processes of transformation and
privatization for the sake of properly functioning national economy where
companies are managed transparently and effectively.

**Transportation**

127.Building a modern transportation system, in particular public roads, and

modernization of railroads, airports and inland waterways, combined with the
introduction of modern means of transportation is a key element of the state’s
defence and crisis response system. In order to ensure high standards of security
in the transportation sector it will be necessary to implement an integrated
security system that will prevent the occurrence of dangerous situations and
effectively mitigate their effects. Integration of preventive measures is particularly
important in the case of transportation connection points, areas where different
branches of transportation overlap – air and sea ports as well as railway stations
integrating different means of transportation. The development of transportation
networks will contribute to the improvement of conditions of the movement of
people and equipment required in order to undertake activities within the
framework of the national security system. Life necessities of the population will
also be better met, including its evacuation, and it will become an important
element of support of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland and allied
troops in case of crisis or armed conflict.

128.The development of modern airport infrastructure will play an important role in

the national economy, international cooperation and state defence. The
modernization of existing airports and the emergence of new ones should ensure
a harmonious development of less development regions, a properly functioning
national transportation market and the airline industry as well as an adequate
number of airports for use by the air force within the framework of civilian and
military cooperation.

129.Membership in the EU has created development opportunities for Poland to

rapidly modernize and build a transportation system. Failure to benefit from these
opportunities may result in the marginalization of Poland as a transit country and
deprive it of the possibilities of engaging in trade exchange in the East European
market. At the same time we see the growing importance of effective control and
monitoring of transport, storage and distribution of hazardous goods and the socalled dual purpose commodities with the option of using them for terrorist
purposes.

**Building industry, spatial and housing management**

130.The overriding goal of the building industry, spatial and housing management

sectors in the area of home security is to implement tasks aimed at preventing
construction disasters caused by forces of nature, defects in the construction of


-----

buildings and bad technical conditions of housing resources. Ensuring adequate
legal regulations on investing in the building industry and instruments supporting
general repairs of buildings and thermo-modernizations are the basic elements of
measures undertaken in this field. Energy savings obtained as a result are an
important component of wider-scale measures aimed at guaranteeing energy
security of the country. An important element of the state’s housing policy is to
continue supporting private building industry, the development of the sector of
flats for rent as well as housing for social groups, which on account of housing
conditions are affected or are at risk of being affected by social exclusion.

**Agriculture, rural development and agricultural markets**

131.Agriculture is a strategic pillar of the national economy and is critical to the

livelihood of the population. Poland should guarantee to itself full self-sufficiency
in food production, meaning the ability to meet the population’s demand for food
and to ensure supplies of safe food in all possible conditions of the functioning of
the state. This goal will be achieved through the development of agriculture, rural
areas and agricultural markets. The existing level of agricultural production and
food processing as well as the state stocks and reserves required under separate
regulations, as well as their distribution capabilities at a level ensuring full supply
of agricultural and food products to the population should be maintained.

**Regional development**

132.Sustainable development of the country in the long-term perspective is possible

provided it is based on the development of the society, continued growth of
innovation and competitiveness of regional economy, investments in research
and development and on achieving stable economic, social and environmental
conditions. The overriding goal of the development policy is to noticeably narrow
the gap in the level of social and economic development of the regions, to
increase social, economic and territorial cohesion of the country by stimulating
economic activity,  especially in the Eastern regions and by implementing
operational programmes and by fully disbursing EU structural funds allocated for
this purposed. These programmes should ensure the development of
infrastructure, improvement of the natural environment, extension of the area of
scientific research and its stronger links with the economy, modernization of local
economies and higher employment and the development of human resources.

**Employment, social security and the family**

133.The overriding goal of the social policy is to achieve comparable to European

living standards, which comprise equal access to social rights, improvement of
the conditions in which families live and support for groups and persons
threatened with social exclusion. To this end, a pro-employment labour market
policy on the regional and local levels will be pursued, supported by active
implementation of sectoral and regional operational programmes and proper
disbursement of structural funds from the Social European Fund. It is necessary
to architect an employment policy based on adapting the increasing level of


-----

education and skills to the existing labour market demands, to pursue a selective
migration policy, to use structural funds for vocational training, to support
entrepreneurship and investments in human capital. The development and
maintenance of an effective pension system that would guarantee the payment of
decent social insurance benefits is a priority of social policy.

134.The overriding goals of family policy are to improve the situation of Polish

families, to strengthen them and to promote the creation of new families. This
policy will be pursued by ensuring that men and women have equal opportunities,
by improving the living standards of families and their development opportunities.
This will be achieved by supporting the education of young people, especially
from small towns and rural areas, by ensuring that they have full access to
medical care and by introducing solutions that would reverse negative population
trends in the Polish society.

**Health**

135.The overriding goal of the health service is to ensure protection of life and health

of the population in all the conditions in which the state functions, in particular to
check the expansion of chronic diseases connected with modern civilization and
to bring Poland closer to EU standards in this respect.

136.Taking into account the growing threats to health and life of large groups of

population as a result of terrorist attacks, including radiation and chemical
terrorism and bioterrorism, as well as mass events and disasters of different
nature, we need to possess well prepared and mobilized medical forces and
resources on central, provincial and local levels. They should be used to quickly
identify threats and to save lives and health of the injured population without
infringing on the core organizational and functional structure of health care units.
We need to enact laws that would precisely regulate the conduct of rescue
operations and define the sources of their financing. A medical rescue system
should be upgraded and provided with modern life saving and sustaining
equipment and equipment for quick diagnosis.

137.An important task in the field of health protection is to maintain reserves of state
owned medicinal products and medical devices, as well as equipment and drug
kits stored in hospitals and in warehouses of the Agency of Material Reserves
and in the Specialist Equipment Bases of the State Fire Brigades. Health
protection is also an important link in the chain of civilian logistics support from
national and allied armed forces responsible for the implementation of common
defence tasks and for comprehensive and extensive support provided by the host
state.

**Science and higher education**

138.The overriding goal is to support state security by building a knowledge-based

society and by creating educated people, by disseminating innovation and new
technologies relying on the potential of research communities and the higher
education system. It is necessary to create conditions for the broadest possible
contacts of national academic and research centres with foreign institutions and
for a significant participation of these centres in international research projects as


-----

part of scientific and technical cooperation and intellectual exchange. Taking into
account the state’s financial means, scientific research should be focused on
areas that can help to bridge the technological gap existing between Poland and
highly developed EU Member States. In this context, special importance should
be placed on shortening the time of implementation of scientific research results,
on monitoring the directions of scientific development, and also on systematically
increasing scientific research spending in line with the assumptions of the Lisbon
Strategy, and on research in the field of security and the creation of a more
effective procurement of EU scientific research funds. Ensuring a rapid flow of
research results to the national economy and linking it with science thanks to the
co-financing of the latter and dynamising the development of the public-private
partnership by supporting private sector initiatives will be instrumental here. An
important task is to ensure proper protection of intellectual property and to ensure
conditions that would encourage highly skilled persons or those that have
exceptional skills to continue their professional carriers at home. It is also
necessary to mobilize scientific communities and academic staff around the
problems of security and defence and to promote these issues as a universal duty
and the common good of citizens.

**Education and formation**

139.Civic education of children, young people and adults faces important tasks in the

field of national security. It is a task for the national education system, for public
media, NGOs and local government organizations. The main goal here is to build
awareness about the duties of citizens relating to security and state defence, to
form patriotic attitudes and to acquire knowledge and skills necessary to act
rationally and effectively in time of peace and in emergency situations. We need
to intensify efforts to prepare citizens for tasks resulting from situations posing a
threat to national security.

**Culture and protection of national heritage**

140.Culture as an inseparable element of survival and development of any society

remains the object of special care of the state. Threats to national heritage are not
decreasing from nature and the destructive activity of people. To meet the current
and foreseeable challenges, Poland will continue to attach great importance to
the development of national culture, to the preservation of national identify and to
the protection of the cultural heritage. Legislative, organizational, technical and
educational measures will be carried out to meet this objective.

**Natural environment**

141.The environmental policy of the state will strive to stimulate the country’s

development processes in such a way as to reduce the threat to the natural
environment and its sources to a minimum. This will be implemented in close
connection with Community strategies and policies, especially those that have
been renewed in the Lisbon strategy and the EU sustainable development
strategy. All sector strategies and policies have to take into account the
assumptions and principles of the environmental policy.


-----

142.On the basis of the existing legal regulations, a clear and easier to apply

environmental law should be created. There is a need to precisely regulate by law
the conduct of rescue operations and to identify their sources of financing. Plans
to evacuate people and to secure conditions in which they could survive for some
time should also be drawn up and updated. It also seems sensible to educate the
population on the subject of the environment.

**Provincial authorities of government administration and local government**
**authorities**

143.Provincial authorities of government administration and local government

authorities cooperate in the implementation of strategic goals of the Republic of
Poland’s security policy.

144.Supporting state security, provincial authorities of public administration carry out

planning, organizational and implementing activities. The voivodes (provincial
governors) play the leading role here. They direct national security efforts and
ensure cooperation between all organizational units of government and local
administration, administration controlled by the voivodes and administration
controlled by line ministers and entrepreneurs.

145.The involved participation of local government authorities in security

enhancement measures on the level of voivodeships (provinces) makes the
security system effective and ensures effective operation of rescue groups, as
well as crisis management and proper response in situations of threats. The role
of these bodies is to monitor and prevent all kinds of dangers, and in the event
they do occur – to try to control and eliminate them or to reduce their effects to a
minimum.

## Conclusion

146.The Republic of Poland’s National Security Strategy contains the official

interpretation of the Polish national interests, identifies the Republic of Poland’s
strategic goals in the area of security and sets out how it plans to achieve them,
taking into account tasks allocated to different executive subsystems. The
National Security Strategy also describes ways in which the national security
system will be maintained and the directions of transformation of the national
security system.

147.This strategy is addressed to all public administration authorities and to entities

implementing tasks in the field of security. Government ministers, heads of central
offices, voivodes, local government authorities and other entities, who by law
have been entrusted with competencies and duties in the respective subject
matter area of national security, are responsible for the implementation of its
decisions. After the National Security Strategy of the Republic of Poland is
implemented, strategies for the respective sectors of the government
administration, as well as action strategies for the respective institutions that have
been entrusted with special tasks in the field of national security should be
developed or adjusted.


-----

148.The conclusions of the National Security Strategy of the Republic of Poland and

proposals to update them will be reviewed during National Security Strategic
Reviews which will be run cyclically.

149.This National Security Strategy of the Republic of Poland supersedes the

strategy adopted on September 8, 2003.

****************************************************************
**Repertory no. 106/2007**
**I, the undersigned, KATARZYNA GÓRSKA-ŁAZARZ sworn translator of the**

**English language in Warsaw, license no. TP/117/05, hereby certify that the above is a**
**true and complete translation of the original document in the Polish language**
**presented to me on November 29, 2007.**


-----

