**SWORN TRANSLATOR**
**OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE**
**Katarzyna Górska-Łazarz**
**ul. Bociania 27 m 7**
**02-807 Warsaw**

_Certified translation from Polish_

# THE MINISTRY OF NATIONAL DEFENCE

## DEFENSE STRATEGY 

 OF THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND       

##### Sector strategy of 

 the National Security Strategy of the Republic of Poland

### WARSAW 2009 


-----

#### TABLE OF CONTENTS

**INTRODUCTION** **3**

**CHAPTER I. EXTERNAL CONDITIONALITIES OF DEFENCE OF THE REPUBLIC**
**OF POLAND** **4**
**1.1. International security environment** **4**
Global security..................................................................................................................................... 4
National security.................................................................................................................................. 5
**1.2. Conditions of the security and defence policy** **6**

**CHAPTER II.CONCEPT OF DEFENCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND** **7**
**2.1. Strategic defence goals** **7**
**2.2. Basic tenets of the Republic of Poland’s Defence Strategy** **8**
**2.3. State defence during peacetime** **9**
**2.4. Reacting to external threats against the state** **10**
**2.5. Defence against armed aggression** **11**

**CHAPTER III. STATE DEFENCE SYSTEM** **12**
**3.1. Demands on the state’s defence system** **12**
**3.2. State defence control subsystem** **13**
**3.3. The military subsystem – the AFRP** **14**
**3.4. The non-military subsystem – non-military defence structures** **14**

**CHAPTER IV. THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND’S ARMED FORCES IN THE STATE**
**DEFENCE SYSTEM** **15**
**4.1. AFRP’s missions and tasks** **15**
**4.2. The level of operational capabilities of the AFRP** **16**
**4.3. The organization structure of the AFRP** **19**
**4.4. Place and role of the AFRP command organization in the defence control subsystem** **22**

**CHAPTER V. DEFENCE PREPARATIONS OF THE STATE** **23**
**5.1. Preparations of the state defence control subsystem** **24**
**5.2. Preparations of the military subsystem** **24**
**5.3. Preparations of the non-military subsystem** **25**
State reserves ................................................................................................................................... 25
Mobilization of the economy.............................................................................................................. 25
Militarization ...................................................................................................................................... 26
Protection of installations of special importance to state security and defence................................ 26
Preparation of transportation and transportation infrastructure ........................................................ 26
Preparation of the health service ...................................................................................................... 26
Communications systems ................................................................................................................. 27
Defence training and inspection of defence tasks ............................................................................ 27
Research and industrial potential...................................................................................................... 28

**CHAPTER VI. DIRECTIONS OF TRANSFORMATION OF THE STATE’S DEFENCE**
**SYSTEM** **29**
**6.1. Transformation of the military subsystem** **29**
**6.2. Transformation of the non-military subsystem** **31**

**CONCLUSION** **31**

**LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS** **32**


-----

###### INTRODUCTION

1. At the turn of the 20th and 21st centuries important changes occurred in the
global security environment which significantly impacted the security of our
state. Poland has consolidated its position in the international arena,
becoming an important member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and
of the European Union. During that time, Poland has been actively involved in
international operations to stabilize global security and has taken measures to
turn its armed forces into a professional army.

2. In the global security environment a low probability of eruption of a large-scale
armed conflict has been maintained, while at the same time an increasing
possibility of eruption of local conflicts has been observed. There have been
major changes in the course of armed conflict: the dynamic stage of strictly
combat operations has been shortened, while the post-conflict stage of
stabilizing and reconstruction measures has been drawn out.

3. Effectively counteracting modern-day threats and challenges requires a
comprehensive approach to security on international and national levels. It
calls for the ability to use diplomatic, economic and military instruments in
synergy with a view to identifying, preventing and solving conflicts in their early
stages. It also signifies a need for a wider approach to understanding security
and for basing it not only on military capabilities and political efforts, but also to
factor in such components as economic, technological or educational aid.

4. Thinking about state defence has been evolving. Recent years have seen
many changes in the organization of national defence, so that now it is
perceived in broader terms not just the traditional categories. At present,
defence is a field of national security that constitutes the sum of all civilmilitary undertakings aimed at preventing and counteracting any potential
security threats to a state, both military and non-military ones, which could
potentially lead to a political and military crisis.

5. The Republic of Poland, together with its partners and Allies, will respond to
present-day challenges and threats, guided by its national interests identified
in the National Security Strategy of the Republic of Poland.

6. _The Defence Strategy of the Republic of Poland outlines assumptions_
underlying the operation of the state’s defence. It identifies the functions and
structure of the state’s defence system and maps out the main directions of
the development of its subsystems.

7. _The Defence Strategy of the Republic of Poland is a document that details and_
develops the defence provisions laid down in the National Security Strategy of
_the Republic of Poland adopted by the Council of Ministers, and subsequently_
approved by the President of the Republic of Poland on 13 November 2007.
Provisions of this Strategy formulate guidelines for documents in the area of
defence that are drafted at lower levels.


-----

###### CHAPTER I. EXTERNAL CONDITIONALITIES OF DEFENCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND

**1.1. International security environment**

**Global security**

8. The global security environment has become increasingly dynamic and
complex. In the wake of changes of the economic, population and military
potential of key states, the post-Cold War world order has been evolving in the
direction of a multi-polar order.

9. The intensity of the globalisation process in international relations enables
states and regions situated at great distance from each other to cooperate and
makes the international system increasingly more interdependent and
integrated. International policy is becoming a resultant of complicated
political, economic and financial relations.

10. Globalisation has made us perceive national security in a different light,
blurring the borderline between internal and external dimensions of security.
The growing international interdependency of today’s world often results in
our inability to predict many phenomena and their developments, the extent of
which is not limited by geographical barriers or political and economic
systems. In such arrangement of relations, the emerging threats and risks are
global in nature, while non-state entities that could disrupt this arrangement,
are gaining importance.

11. The security environment is marked by the concurrence and two-way
penetration of military and non-military threats, often asymmetrical in nature.
The risk of a large-scale conflict has been drastically reduced, but the threat of
regional and local conflicts has not disappeared. The conflict in Georgia has
demonstrated the topicality of traditional military threats and the importance of
military force, also in Europe’s backyard. The continuation of conflict prone
developments in the post-Soviet region and intensification of disputes in the
Balkans cannot be excluded. Tensions along the West – the Muslim world line
and the existence of an extensive instability area covering the Near and
Middle East also pose a serious global security risk.

12. The fact that states are holding back from implementing international
agreements in the area of non-proliferation, arms reduction and disarmament
as well as in confidence and security building measures can also have farreaching consequences. Nuclear and missile technology development
programmes implemented in breach of UN Security Council resolutions also
remain a significant threat to international security. The disruption of a regional
military balance resulting from such programmes could pose a significant
threat to global security.

13. Economic security risks, especially those relating to energy security, top the
list of non-military threats. A growing demand for energy resources accounts
for the fact that they are used to exert political pressure and increasingly
replace military power as a state’s policymaking instrument. Tensions resulting
from temporary shortages of gas supplies experienced by some countries
indicate that the energy supply market has weaknesses and that politics


-----

negatively impacts the economy. The integration of global economy, apart
from its undeniable benefits, also carries the risk of economic crises and of the
destabilization of financial markets. Climate change carries both humanitarian
and political consequences and the struggle for access to natural resources
has become a growing cause of conflicts. Other areas of potentially global
risks include uncontrolled population migrations from less developed countries
and infectious disease epidemics.

14. Asymmetrical threats feature prominently among security risks. In most cases,
they are generated by failing or failed states. The most serious threats
continue to be: international terrorism, including cyber terrorism and terrorism
that uses weapons of mass destruction; the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and means of transporting them; organized international crime
involved in the smuggling of arms and dual-use materials, drug and human
trafficking, illegal financial operations and maritime piracy.

15. Local ethnic, religious and cultural conflicts the causes of which are found in
historical, geographical or national disputes continue to pose a serious
challenge for the system of international security. Non-state entities through
their ability to effectively use armed force are increasingly involved in conflicts,
which threaten the foundations of national and international security. This
complex basis of modern-day armed conflicts and the mutual penetration of
different threats and methods of combat compel states and international
organizations to adopt a comprehensive approach to conflict resolution and to
invite a wide participation of civilian entities in the process of security building.

**National security**

16. The Republic of Poland, being a member of NATO and the European Union,
with its significant economic and population potential, is an important actor on
the international arena. Membership in both organizations as well as our
strategic partnership with the United States of America demonstrably
enhances Poland’s security. Our country wishes to further develop friendly
and partnership relations with all our neighbours.

17. Poland’s security is primarily determined by processes and developments
occurring in our vicinity. The stability of Central and Eastern Europe, but also
of the entire Euro-Atlantic region and its neighbourhood bears upon Poland’s
security.

18. There is little likelihood of a large-scale armed conflict erupting in the
foreseeable future. However, the probability of a local conflict occurring close
to Poland’s border cannot be excluded.

19. Threats to Poland’s security are closely related to global threats. The
catalogue of threats impacting Poland’s security is, in principle, identical with
the threats that its allies see in the surrounding world – the only differences
are in where the stress is laid. Counteracting threats to energy security and a
potential weakening of bonds linking the European and transatlantic
communities are priorities for Poland. International terrorism is a growing
threat for the security of Poland’s citizens. Counteracting and fighting the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and other asymmetrical and nonmilitary threats remain the fundamental functions of the state’s defence
system (SDS).


-----

**1.2. Conditions of the security and defence policy**

20. Membership in the North Atlantic Alliance and in the European Union and the
strategic partnership with the United States are the main reference points for
Poland’s foreign and defence policy. NATO’s and the EU’s positions have
been enhanced globally, which is vitally important, because this raises the
level of security of their member states.

21. Regardless of the enlargement of NATO’s and the EU’s sphere of geographic
influence, the political stability and the social and economic development of
the entire region of Eastern and Central Europe are in Poland’s national
interest. The development of good-neighbourly relations, based on mutual
understanding with Poland’s eastern neighbours: Russia, Belarus and Ukraine
remain one of the foundations of Polish foreign policy, Developments in these
states and their security policy, especially Russia’s policy, directly impact
Poland’s security.

22. The North Atlantic Alliance remains a key organization in the area of
international security and the most important guarantor of Poland’s external
security. An evolution of the North Atlantic Alliance’s directions and methods
of operation, including the continuation of its open-door policy, ensures that
the day-today and long-term security interests of its members are being
effectively implemented.

23. The development, together with other NATO members, of instruments aimed
at enhancing collective security remains a priority for Poland. These
instruments involve the Alliance’s preparation of an effective set of High
Readiness Forces, as well as the Allies’ active participation in NATO
Response Force operations. It also requires effective involvement in
international operations and efficient consultation mechanisms within the
North Atlantic Alliance.

24. The Alliance’s ongoing debate about its transformation and the work on a new
strategic concept bear out the fundamental dilemmas surrounding NATO’s
role in the changing international environment. These dilemmas primarily
involve the issue of balance between maintaining and enhancing the collective
defence function and the Alliance’s involvement in crisis management
operations in distance operational theatres.

25. The development of the European Union’s Common Foreign and Security
Policy, including the European Security and Defence Policy, is significantly
important for Poland. The state of cooperation in this area is a determinant of
European integration in a broad sense. At its root lies a desire to ensure
peace, stability and greater prosperity for European Union Member States and
of its neighbours. Rapid reaction forces engaged in military operations and the
conceptual development of the EU Battlegroups in which Poland takes an
active part serve this purpose.

26. The European Union provides a framework for cooperation in the procurement
of military capabilities and in the consolidation of the defence industry. Poland
will support and will be actively involved in further development of the
European Defence Agency, regarding it as a basic centre of stimulation and
coordination of the development of capabilities and of the European defence
market.


-----

27. The Republic of Poland has been developing political and military cooperation
bilaterally, including, in particular, a deepened political and military
cooperation with the United States of America and relations with its
neighbours, and on a multilateral level, in the Weimar Triangle and the
Visegrad Group, in particular.

28. Poland supports United Nations operations to maintain international peace
and security. A manifestation of which is the participation of the Armed Forces
of the Republic of Poland in UN peacekeeping operations. Poland has
emphasized the need to enhance international institutions by creating
mechanisms to enforce standards of international law.

29. Poland has been actively involved in the work of the Organization of Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), an important international institution
responsible for Euro-Atlantic security issues in three dimensions: political and
military, economic and environmental and the human dimension (human
rights). Poland is a state party to all international agreements entered into
under the OSCE auspices concerning conventional arms reductions,
disarmament and confidence and security building measures, including the
_Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) Treaty,_ _the Treaty on Open_
_Skies and the Vienna Document_ on confidence and security building
measures. These agreements are an important element of the security system
in Europe. The start of a new dialogue by member states on European
security, which could contribute to the enhancement of this Organization is a
positive development.

###### Chapter II.CONCEPT OF DEFENCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND

**2.1. Strategic defence goals**

30. Pursuant to the _National Security Strategy of the Republic of Poland, the_
supreme strategic goal of the Republic of Poland is to ensure favourable and
secure conditions for the realization of national interests by eliminating
external and internal threats, reducing risks and rightly assessing undertaken
challenges and ably using existing opportunities. The Republic of Poland’s
main strategic goals in the area of defence include:

       - ensuring independence and sovereignty of the Republic of Poland, its

integrality and inviolability of its borders;



- defence and protection of all the citizens of the Republic of Poland;



- creating conditions to ensure continuity of implementation of functions
by public administration authorities and other entities competent in the area
of national security, including entities responsible for running the economy
and for other areas important for the life and security of its citizens;

- creating conditions for improvement of the state’s defence capabilities
and ensuring defence readiness in the national and Allied structures;

- developing partnership military cooperation with other states, especially
neighbouring ones;

- implementing commitments arising from Poland’s NATO and European
Union’s membership;


-----

     - engagement in international crisis response operations led by NATO
and the EU in the first place, as well as by the UN or as part of emergency
coalitions.

**2.2. Basic tenets of the Republic of Poland’s Defence Strategy**

31. The basic tenets of the Republic of Poland’s Defence Strategy originate from
values and principles laid down in the _Constitution of the Republic of Poland_
and from guidelines adopted in national strategic documents, including the
_National Security Strategy of the Republic of Poland’s_ and the _Political and_
_Strategic Defence Directive of the Republic of Poland._

32. Care for security is an elementary duty of the state. The nature of security is
indivisible – its internal dimension is interrelated with the external dimension,
and the national one with the Allied one.

33. Regardless of the adopted projections of international environment
development and the related assessments of the real chance of eruption of
armed conflicts, the protection of state’s independence and integrity of its
territory and a common defence against aggression continue to remain a
Constitutional obligation and duty stemming from the North Atlantic Treaty
(NAT) ratified by the Republic of Poland.

34. The Polish state maintains continuous defence capability, and to this end uses
all available means and subordinates all of its political, economic, diplomatic
and military measures to this goal. The state’s defence will be implemented by
an efficiently running and continuously improved state defence system. The
Republic of Poland’s defence capability level is a product of national needs
and Allied commitments.

35. The Republic of Poland’s security and defence architecture is based on an
Atlantic and a European pillar. An important element enhancing our state’s
security and defence is a strategic bond with the United States of America.

36. Security and defence activities are and will be carried out mainly within the
Allied structure, although independent operations are not excluded.
Participation in military and non-military operations outside Poland’s borders is
a manifestation of responsibility for our common security and its aim is to
prevent threats of asymmetrical and global nature.

37. The Republic of Poland’s Armed Force’s main mission is to protect the state
and to participate in the protection of its allies. A transformation process in the
AFRP involving their professionalization and technical modernization is now
underway for the purpose of fulfilling this mission. Such changes are aimed at
increasing the military potential and operational capabilities of the forces and
the enhancement of their defence and out-of-area nature.

38. Integration of defence response with crisis management is required in order to
effectively counteract modern-day threats. Further harmonization of planning
procedures and projects as well as the improvement of coordination of
authorities competent in the respective areas are required.

39. The unpredictability of today’s security environment necessitates advance
planning with respect to hypothetical threat scenarios, the ability to respond


-----

flexibly corresponding to the nature, scale and location of threats and a
comprehensive approach to state security and defence.

40. Our concept of defence provides that specific strategic actions are undertaken
commensurable with our state’s defence readiness condition, having regard
for our strategic goals and relying on our adopted tenets.

**2.3. State defence during peacetime**

41. During peacetime, when no significant external security threats to the state are
identified, a condition of permanent readiness to defend the state is
maintained. During such time, state defence consists of implementing two
types of strategic operations: maintenance of good performance and
improvement of SOP integrated with the Allied security system and the
development of the international environment with a view to enhancing state
defence.

42. As part of maintaining good performance and improving SOP, functions
involving preparations to defend the state are carried out which include, in
particular:

    - analyses and assessments of challenges and threats against
international and national security;

     - identification and neutralization of intelligence operations against state
defence and security;

     - advance defence planning, covering operational planning and defence
programming;

     - improvement of common (national and Allied) operational procedures in
crisis situations and during wartime;

     - enhancement of the Republic of Poland’s Armed Force’s rapid reaction
capabilities against direct threats to state security, including enhancement
of their capability to wage operations independently;

     - maintenance and improvement of an integrated system of national
security control, including state defence control;

     - maintenance of capabilities to institute states of higher defence
readiness commensurate with the scale and nature of threats;

     - ensuring conditions for the acceptance on our territory of Allied
Reinforcing Force through the realization of functions resulting from hostnation support obligations (HNS);

     - maintenance of readiness to carry out production and service functions
laid down in the Economy Mobilization Programme (EMP);

       - maintenance of the required level of state and personnel reserves to
meet the needs of state defence and security;

     - development and maintenance of the defence infrastructure;

     - education in the scope of defence and patriotic formation of the public.

43. As part of our efforts to affect the international environment in order to
enhance state defence, the following activities are carried out intended to:


-----

     - ensure that Poland occupies a strong international position and that
Polish interests on the international arena are being effectively promoted
by supporting the improvement of Allied mechanisms, the effectiveness of
international institutions and international law, by developing friendly
relations with partners and neighbours, and by supporting transformation
processes in Central and Eastern Europe;

     - enhance inspection mechanisms with respect to the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, dual-use materials and technologies, and
arms control;

     - participate in actions to promote democracy and respect for human rights;

     - assemble and maintain forces and resources that will participate in Allied
crisis response operations, humanitarian, search and rescue operations,
as well as in possible coalition and national operations;

      - actively affect potential sources of threats relating to global terrorism, by
conducting preventive foreign policy, social and economic policy, and by
being ready to participate in anti-terrorist operations.

**2.4. Reacting to external threats against the state**

44. In the event of an external threat against the state, the Republic of Poland will
undertake actions to bring a crisis/conflict under control so as to keep its
effects to a minimum. In particular, it will act to prevent the crisis from turning
into a direct threat of war against Poland or its allies.

45. Depending on how a crisis develops, authorized bodies will take decisions to
carry out specific operations laid down in the _National Crisis Management_
_Plan, and in the event of a growing threat of armed aggression – in the_
_Republic of Poland’s Defence Response Plan_ (RPDRP). Such decisions will
enable public administration bodies to institute a state of defence readiness in
the state during crisis and to implement related measures.

46. In the event of a crisis occurring in Poland’s more distant neighbourhood,
when NATO or the EU become involved in it, the Republic of Poland, pursuant
to a decision of authorized bodies, will be ready to participate in Allied
operations. Poland’s Armed Forces’ engagement in crisis response operations
will be in line with priorities and tenets laid down in the _Strategy of the_
_Republic of Poland’s Armed Forces’ participation in international operations. In_
line with the comprehensive approach concept, in addition to armed forces,
political, diplomatic and economic instruments will be used, in cooperation with
non-governmental organizations.

47. In the event of a crisis occurring in Poland’s immediate neighbourhood,
national authorities will undertake appropriate measures on a national and
international scale in order to activate crisis response mechanisms. A state of
alarm and/or higher state of defence readiness corresponding to a specific
degree of threat will be instituted in the territory of the Republic of Poland.
Public administration bodies and the AFRP will institute selected crisis
management measures and will carry out functions resulting from operational
plans.


-----

48. In the event of a deepening crisis, authorized bodies will take a decision to
institute a state of defence readiness of the state during wartime. Following
that, martial law will be imposed, combat readiness of the AFRP will be raised
and a partial or general mobilization will be declared and the Supreme
Commander of the Armed Forces will be appointed.

49. As part of counterterrorism measures, the Republic of Poland will launch,
independently and as part of Allied response, comprehensive military and nonmilitary operations to minimise a threat. In the event that information is
obtained about a threat of a terrorist attack directed against the population, the
state’s critical infrastructural property and systems, functions which are
specified in a list of operations and procedures of the crisis management
system and in crisis management plans will be implemented. Authorities
competent in crisis management will mobilize the necessary force and assets
in order to eliminate the effects of terrorist attacks and to enhance the
protection of the state’s critical infrastructural property

50. Operations carried out by state services responsible for counteracting
terrorism may be supported by forces and assets assembled by the armed
forces. Depending on the degree of terrorist threat or the prevailing crisis
situation, the Council of Ministers may adopt a resolution to address a motion
to the President of the Republic of Poland to impose martial law in a part of or
in the whole country.

51. In its defence against terrorism Poland will become engaged in Allied and
international counterterrorist operations outside its territory. Such actions will
be carried out in the form of military operations or in the form of support
provided to the other country’s authorities to mitigate the effects of terrorist
attacks.

**2.5. Defence against armed aggression**

52. To protect the territory of the Republic of Poland against armed aggression
missions arising from national and Allied operational plans will be carried out
and these include: activation of a mobilizing system of deployment of the
AFRP, their regrouping to regions of operational assigned capacity and
demonstration of public determination and the state’s political will to oppose
armed aggression. The scale of engagement of forces will depend on the
development dynamics of a crisis.

53. In the event that a crisis leads inexorably to a military confrontation, Allied
Reinforcing Forces will be deployed in the territory of Poland, at the request of
Polish national authorities. The AFRP will also be assigned to the defence
grouping of joint Allied forces. The grouping’s mission will be to counteract
aggression, to retaliate against armed aggression and to prevent the
deployment of offensive operations.

54. SOP non-military subsystem operations will be directed mainly at maintaining
and regeneration of the state’s defence potential. As part of these operations,
functions will be carried out to ensure that public administration and the
economy function effectively during wartime, to meet the basic needs of the
population and to provide all-around support to armed forces (our own and
Allied), including a proper functioning of transportation and communication.


-----

55. In the event that Poland participates in a defence operation under Art. 5 of the
NAT outside the state’s territory, the AFRP may commit out of their order
forces declared as part of the Alliance’s defence planning.

###### Chapter III. STATE DEFENCE SYSTEM

56. To ensure the realization of national interests and strategic goals in the area of
security, the Republic of Poland organizes and develops an integrated system
of national security. The state’s defence system established to counteract
threats to vital national interests is a component of this system. This system
has been integrated with the Allied security system through common operating
procedures in crisis situations and during wartime and by participating in Allied
defence planning.

57. The state’s defence system is a coordinated set of control and execution
elements, as well as functions and processes realized by them and their
interrelations. All forces and resources assigned to execute defence tasks,
which are organized, maintained and prepared adequately to their tasks, form
SOP. The organization and running of SOP is abased on generally applicable
provisions of law as well as on provisions of international agreements and
treaties to which Poland is a party.

58. SOP consists of three subsystems:

1) the state defence control subsystem – formed by public authorities and

administration bodies together with offices that service them and the necessary
infrastructure and the Republic of Poland’s Armed Force’s command authorities;


2) two executive subsystems:



- a military subsystem – formed out of the AFRP;



- a non-military subsystem – formed out of the executive structures of public

administration, entrepreneurs and other organization units.


**3.1. Demands on the state’s defence system**

59. To ensure proper realization of the tasks it was called upon to perform, the
SOP should be organized and maintained in a way that would guarantee:

       - the capability to deter, protect and defend, and to execute tasks of

collective defence;

       - the capability to cooperate with Allied structures, while preserving the

capability to effectively act alone;

       - effective cooperation of all public authorities and administration bodies

and entrepreneurs that execute defence tasks, non-governmental
organizations and individual citizens for the purpose of defending the
state;

       - efficient operation in any condition through adequate organization,

equipping and circulation of information;

       - the capability to monitor and counteract threats and to respond to


-----

emerging threats in their early stage, as well as to eliminate their
consequences;

       - tapping into the competencies, skills and expertise of persons who

participate in the work of the respective subsystems.

**3.2. State defence control subsystem**

60. The state defence control subsystem is a core element of the national defence
control subsystem. This system is formed by public authorities and
administration bodies which are related by organizational and information
(together with the offices that service them and the necessary infrastructure)
and the heads of organizational units, which perform defence related tasks
and the Republic of Poland’s Armed Force’s command authority, adequately
to their hierarchical subordination and powers under the law. This subsystem
is intended to ensure optimal conditions for effective decision-making and for
an ongoing and permanent coordination of operations by public authorities
and administration bodies at all levels and by the Republic of Poland’s Armed
Force’s command authority during peacetime, crisis and, first and foremost
during wartime. Emergency and standing crisis management structures
(groups and centres) will be used to deploy elements of the state defence
control subsystem.

61. Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic of Poland, the President of the
Republic of Poland and the Council of Ministers – as the executive branch of
the government – are the supreme authorities to control defence. The
President of the Republic of Poland is the guardian of state sovereignty and
security as well as the inviolability and indivisibility of its territory and is also
the supreme commander of the AFRP. The Council of Ministers runs the
Republic of Poland’s internal and foreign policies, ensures Poland’s internal
and external security and exercises overall leadership in the area of defence.
The Chairman of the Council of Ministers (the Prime Minister) ensures that
defence policy is implemented by determining ways in which it is carried out.

62. State defence control essentially involves decision-making by competent state
authorities and actions taken to activate state military potential by imposition of
states of heightened defence readiness in the country and by initiating the
implementation of operational tasks to counteract emerging threats. State
authorities – the President of the Republic of Poland acting jointly with the
Council of Ministers – direct state defence consistently with their powers laid
down in the Constitution of the Republic of Poland and in acts of Parliament.
Interdependencies between the Republic of Poland’s authorities and NATO
and the UE bodies (including also between the AFRP command authority and
the relevant NATO commands) arising from adopted treaties and protocols are
accounted for in the decision-making process relating to state defence.

63. Competent ministers, heads of central offices (and other government
institutions), voivodes and local government authorities execute state defence
control missions. Such authorities control the implementation of tasks,
assisted by competent offices which have with a properly prepared
organization structure, based on a system of control posts. During war, the
Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces nominated by the President of the
Republic of Poland commands the AFRP and other subordinated organization


-----

units, using the War Command System links and elements of control of
mobilization and deployment of forces.

64. Armed forces in a crisis are commanded pursuant to the rules of command
during peacetime by relying on the Ministry of National Defence’s crisis
management structures. Forces assigned to international formations, which
perform crisis response missions will be commanded by operational
commanders of such formations. Troop units used in support of organizational
units subordinated to or supervised by a minister competent for internal affairs
remain in the organization structure and the command system of the AFRP.

**3.3. The military subsystem – the AFRP**

65. The military subsystem is formed by the AFRP. They perform missions arising
from the _Constitution of the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Poland’s_
_National Security Strategy_ and from the Republic of Poland’s Defence
_Strategy,_ detailed in the _Republic of Poland’s Political and Strategic Defence_
_Directive and in the relevant national and Allied operational plans. The AFRP_
are apolitical and are subject to civil and democratic oversight. _More on the_
_Republic of Poland’s Armed Forces in Chapter IV._

**3.4. The non-military subsystem – non-military defence structures**

66. The non-military defence structures are made up of: government
administration, local self-government administration and other government
entities and institutions, as well as entrepreneurs that are required to execute
tasks to defend the state. This subsystem implements tasks comprising:
ensuring an efficient and secure running of the state, providing human and
material resources to the AFRP and to organization units responsible for the
state’s internal security, as well as tasks arising from host nation’s obligations,
ensuring protection and securing basic needs of the population and creating
conditions for its survival.

67. Defence tasks, which form part of national security tasks cover activities
carried out by the executive branch of government and other state authorities
and institutions, entrepreneurs and citizens involved in the preparation of the
state for efficient action and for survival in conditions of external threat against
the state, of crisis and war, as well as the elimination, after warding off a
threat, of its effects in order to restore normalcy in the state.

68. The execution of defence tasks permits the attainment of an appropriate state
of defence readiness in the country and ensures a response in the event of a
crisis. The basic kinds of defence tasks include: general tasks of preparatory
nature; diplomatic tasks; information tasks; protective tasks aimed to ensure
efficient running of the state and to ensure the basic material, spiritual and
population protection needs; economic and defence tasks.

69. General tasks of preparatory nature serve to create organizational conditions
to enable non-military structures to operate in different states of defence
readiness of the country and during times when they are raised. They
comprise mainly: defence planning; defence training; defence education and
the fulfilment of the general duty to defend in a wide sense of the term.


-----

70. Diplomatic tasks are aimed at limiting to a minimum a risk of threat against
fundamental national interests and of foreign policy and security threats, as
well as diplomatic support during an armed conflict including extinguishing it.

71. Information tasks serve to protect and promote Polish interests, to weaken the
enemy by means of information, to strengthen willpower, morale, the
determination to defend and the society’s perseverance.

72. Defence tasks relating to ensuring efficient running of the state cover, in
particular: protection of state borders; protection of persons subject to special
protection and the installations and transport that serve them; the protection of
delegations and missions of other states; ensuring communication; protection
of especially important installations; protection of cultural and national heritage
property; ensuring security and public order; fire protection and oversight over
compliance with the rigor of the law during martial law.

73. The protection of and ensuring the material needs of the population essentially
covers: the supply of food products, water, medicine and medical devices,
basic general purpose industrial goods; electricity and energy resources;
alerting; evacuation; rescue; shelters; ensuring supplies of materiel, materials
and security means to civil protection formations; elimination of
contaminations; health protection; passenger and freight transport; child,
young people and disabled persons care.

74. The purpose of the implementation of economic and defence tasks is to
ensure a material basis for the realization of defence tasks, including:
maintaining production and repair capacities necessary to implement tasks
arising from the EMP; preparation for production and services and the
realization of tasks set out in the EMP; creation and maintenance of reserves;
preparation of transportation to meet defence needs of the state; preparation
to operate in conditions of limited supplies; activation of personal and in-kind
performances; evacuation of state reserves; acceleration of investments of
strategic importance; imposition of restrictions in transportation,
communication; reconstruction of destroyed infrastructure; ensuring supplies
of materiel, materials and protection agents to civil defence formation;
monitoring of the economic potential in industry, agriculture, transportation,
power industry, forestry and health protection.

###### Chapter IV. THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND’S ARMED FORCES IN THE STATE DEFENCE SYSTEM

75. The AFRP constitute the fundamental element of the state defence system,
designated to effectively conduct the security and defence policy. The
expanding spectrum of armed force’s tasks forces changes in the defence
planning process and periodic updating of the underlying planning
assumptions, including in particular the armed forces’ missions and tasks.

**4.1. AFRP’s missions and tasks**

76. In consideration of the assessment of security threats against the state and
the strategic goals in the area of defence adopted in the Republic of Poland’s
_National Security Strategy, the AFRP maintain their readiness to realize three_


-----

types of missions: guaranteeing defence of the state and counteracting
aggression; participation in the process of stabilization of the international
situation and in crisis response and humanitarian operations; supporting the
internal situation and assisting the population.

77. In their mission to ensure that the state has the capability to defend and
counteract aggression as part of Allied obligations, the AFRP maintain their
readiness to realize tasks relating to defence and protection of the inviolability
of the RP’s borders; by participating in counterterrorist operations at home and
abroad; by participating in the resolution of local or regional armed conflicts
within or outside of NATO’s area of responsibility; by participating in defence
operations outside the country according to Allied obligations under Art 5 of
the North Atlantic Treaty; by conducting a strategic defence operation in the
RP’s territory.

78. Participation in a mission to stabilize the international situation and in crisis
response and humanitarian operations requires that the AFRP maintain forces
and capabilities to: participate in peacekeeping and crisis response operations
led by NATO, EU, and the UN as well as in other operations arising from
international agreements; participation in humanitarian operations conducted
by international, government and other organizations; military cooperation in
the area of development and the use of confidence building and security
measures.

79. In order to fulfil their mission of supporting internal security and assisting the
population, the AFRP maintain their capabilities to realize tasks involving: the
monitoring and protection of air space and support of the protection of land
borders and territorial waters; the conduct of reconnaissance and intelligence
operations; the monitoring of radioactive, chemical and biological
contaminations in the country’s territory; conducting search and rescue
operations; assisting government authorities, public administration and the
population in responding to threats.

**4.2. The level of operational capabilities of the AFRP**

80. For future operations to be successful, key operational capabilities, most
important when it comes to effectively performing tasks by the AFRP have to
be achieved (developed or improved). The need to maintain such capabilities
derives from obligations under the Constitution, Allied commitments and the
resulting necessity to prepare and assign armed forces components to
participate in multinational joint operations in the territory of Poland and
abroad.

81. The AFRP maintain the necessary level of operational capabilities, which
should ensure:

      - during peace– territorial integrity and inviolability of state borders, as well
as the protection and defence of the country’s air space which is an
absolute priority; effective transition to implementation of tasks in the event
of an armed conflict; the possibility of engagement in international
operations in line with undertaken commitments;

      - in the event of a small-scale armed conflict – the defence of the state with
defence potential maintained during peace in one operational direction;


-----

     - in the event of a large-scale armed conflict – strategic deployment of the
entire force and strategic holding of important areas of the state,
acceptance of Allied Reinforcing Forces in the territory of Poland and
participation in a strategic Allied defence operation in order to create
conditions for a political resolution of the conflict in line with the Polish
raison d’état.

82. Waging of defence operations in the territory of Poland excludes the possibility
of a concurrent use of the AFRP in crisis response operations outside the
country’s territory. Assignment of forces and resources to participate in
operations outside of Poland has to be subordinated to the need to maintain
capabilities ensuring security and inviolability of the Republic of Poland’s
borders.

83. Moreover, the AFRP maintain the necessary potential of forces which
specialize in counterterrorist operations, in countering asymmetrical and nonmilitary threats and which realize tasks in crisis situations in support of
operations led by civil authorities.

84. The capability to act effectively, the level and quality of technical equipment
and the training of commands and staffs; possibilities of an integrated logistics
and medical protection; out-of-area capabilities; the ability to act in a networkcentric environment; proper counterintelligence protection; extended civilmilitary cooperation and professionalization will all impact fundamentally the
achievement of the desired state of the AFRP’s operational capabilities and
their further development.

85. The realization of Allied commitments, including the attainment of capability of
armed forces components to participate in multinational joint operations and
engagement in operations outside Poland’s borders requires efforts to achieve
full interoperability.

86. To ensure command capability, an integrated, fully automated and efficient
class C4ISR system (command, control, communications, computers,
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance) has to be implemented and
gradually developed. Such system has to be based on modern information
and communication technologies and comprises all levels of command and
types/components of armed forces. This system is intended to ensure
information advantage, which will allow a commander to obtain a decisionmaking advantage and, as a result, take over initiative on the battle field.
Acting in conditions of future network-centric warfare, the system should
integrate weapons, reconnaissance and decision-making centres, make
available information about resources and use mechanisms enabling data
transmission in real-time, while at the same time ensuring continuity of work
and the required level of security. This aim is served by electronic
counterintelligence operations and cryptographic protection measures.

87. We should strive to meet the Allied requirements regarding making forces
available for operations. This will require increasing the quantity of units
capable of movement and fully interoperable with the Allied forces. They
should be adequately trained, equipped and have the necessary materiél.
They should also comply with NATO standards regarding procedures,
doctrines and command and have an adequate quantity of supplies, weapons
and material resources.


-----

88. In order to enhance the effectiveness of logistical and medical support, a
system of medical supervision and medical intelligence will be deployed and
specialized subunits to support and secure operations in the same readiness
and availability category as the combat units which they serve will be
maintained.

89. The capability of troop movement will be realized by increasing the strategic
transportation potential to move forces the size of a brigade. To this end,
strategic transportation means (by air and sea) will be insured and the
potential of swift movement of land components of air force units will be
enhanced. Air and sea transport will be insured by: the procurement of air
transportation means, including utility transport aircraft and air refueling
aircraft; procurement by naval forces of transport vessels through their
purchase, charter or otherwise; the participation in multinational programmes
which guarantee strategic sea and air transport; and through contacts with
commercial entities.

90. The development of troop survivability and protection capabilities will aim at
increasing the operational effectiveness of means of combat identification
system by improving resistance to jamming, increasing the probability of
correct identification of targets, expanding the information potential of the
system and insuring electromagnetic compatibility of installations. The scope
of the identification of targets on the battlefield comprising a land component
and, in particular, artillery and missile weapon systems, armoured and
mechanized detachments, as well as the identification of a single soldier. The
Special Forces Command will be provided with this capability, in the first
place. Moreover, the capability to protect and defend military bases and
convoys will be gradually enhanced.

91. In order to insure security of persons involved in international operations and
to shape high morale and readiness to take risks, the capability to prevent,
recapture and minimize the effects of isolation of military personnel in a hostile
environment will be developed. In this regard, the implementation of
procedures of response by commands and staff to an event of isolation,
equipping troops with individual means of survival in isolation and the
dissemination of training on recapturing military personnel will be crucial to
achieving this capability.

92. To insure an effective defence against weapons of mass destruction, priority
will be given to the creation of an integrated system, operating in a data
communications network, of agent detection, telling, warning and alerting
troops. Equipping troops with modern means of individual and collective
protection against contaminations will remain crucial. It will also be important
to gain the capability of detecting biological agents, including remote
detection, as well as the capability to neutralize explosive materials and
hazardous items containing weapons of mass destruction.

93. To insure effective means of air defence, the capability to operate in a national
and Allied integrated system of air defence will be developed to enable
detection and destruction of aerial attack vehicles, including unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAV), cruise missiles and tactical ballistic missiles.

94. The aforementioned operational capabilities of armed forces will be developed
on the basis of the following principal functional systems: reinforcement,


-----

reconnaissance, strike, logistical support, command and communications
support, securing training, air defence, medical support, engineering support,
defence against WMD, information technology and IT and data communication
system development, meteorological support.

95. The fact that it has become increasingly difficult to distinguish between the
military aspect of a resolution of a crisis situation and non-military entities
reaffirms the need for an across-the-board approach to crisis situations. A
determined development of capability for extended civil-military cooperation,
both on a political and military level as well as on an operational and tactical
level will be crucial for the success of such operations.

96. The professionalization of the AFRP will lead to their increased capability to
respond to emerging new threats and challenges and to enhance their quality,
while rationalizing their running costs.

97. The process of professionalization of the AFRP will be supported by a new
model of military training, covering, i.a.: enhancement of the role of military
universities, training and in-service courses for soldiers aimed at continually
raising the professionalism of military and civilian staff; the implementation of
the desired standard of professional training at universities; training of reserve
personnel.

**4.3. The organization structure of the AFRP**

98. The structure, composition, dislocation and equipment of the AFRP should
follow from the nature and specifics of the missions they have been assigned
to perform and the need to insure appropriate operational capabilities. They
have to enable the realization of tasks during peace, crisis and war.

99. The AFRP’s organization structure should insure the required degree of
autonomy of operation, effective strike capacity and appropriate standards of
supply and support. Combat autonomy should be maintained from an
appropriate organization level upwards to enable the creation of combat
modules – task teams/groups.

100. The AFRP are composed of:

a) the operational army, comprising forces and assets of types of armed forces
prepared to wage joint operations at home and abroad, in the Alliance’s structures
and as part of other international security organizations and of emergency
coalitions. Depending on the nature of performed tasks, the following units are
distinguished in the operational army structures:

− combat units: general military, airborne, special, tactical air force, missile air
defence and groups of assault ships;

− combat support units: reconnaissance, intelligence, electronic warfare,
psychological activities, rocket and artillery; air defence; chemical,
engineering, air defence radio engineering, ships of anti-mine defence;
antisubmarine warfare and hydrographical support;

− combat service support units: command, communication and information
technology, logistical, medical, civil-military cooperation and other support
vessels.


-----

b) the support army, intended to support the operational army and to carry out
defence tasks mainly in the territory of Poland in coordination with non-military
components of the state’s defence system. They are composed of territorial
defence units, the Military Police, military administration bodies and station
logistical units, station medical posts and other securing posts in a stationary
system. In special situations, it is possible to temporarily subordinate a part of
such forces – in the area of direct operations in the territory of Poland – to Allied
and coalition commands.

101. The National Reserve Forces (NRF) will be an important addition to the armed
forces. Eventually they will enhance the operational army and the support
army. The NRF is composed of a selected volunteer corps of reserve soldiers
who have crisis assignments to specific service posts in military units which
they were awarded after they had entered into contracts, on a voluntary basis,
to perform reserve military duty and who put themselves at the army’s
disposal to be made use of in the event of real military and non-military
threats, both at home and abroad.

102. The AFRP’s units are graded into one of the following readiness states: forces
of different readiness (high readiness and lower readiness) and of extended
readiness time.

103. The AFRP comprise the following types of forces: the Land Forces, the Air
Force, the Navy and Special Forces

104. The Land Forces defend against land and air strikes in any region, at every
direction of operation and in the face of any form of military threat.
Additionally, it is prepared to execute tasks arising from Poland’s international
commitments to ensure security. The Land Forces’ specialized forces and
resources are prepared to eliminate non-military threats. Its structure is based
on tactical relations, units and subunits. The core of the Land Forces is
composed of mechanized and armoured cavalry divisions, brigades: airborne
and air cavalry and other units of types of forces, command and support and
military training. The Land Forces are composed of the following types of
units: armoured and mechanized; airmobile; missile and artillery; air defence;
engineering; chemical; communications and IT. In addition, the Land Forces
also comprise: units and subunits of reconnaissance and electronic warfare;
logistical and medical support units and subunits and subunits of
psychological activities and civil-military cooperation.

105. The Air Force is a force intended mainly to insure air defence of the country. It
operates in the national system of air defence, which is integrated with the
Allied system and with the relevant European civilian and military system.
Selected Air Force units are prepared to execute tasks arising from Poland’s
international security commitments. The core potential of the Air Force is
formed by tactical and transport air wings and Air Defence missile brigades,
and the Radio Engineering Brigade. The Air Force comprises the following
types of units: air; air defence, and radio engineering. The Air Force also
comprises: support and securing units and military training units.

106. The Navy defends the interests of the state in Polish maritime areas, defends
the seacoast from the sea and participates in the defence of the seacoast from
the land in coordination with other types of forces as part of a strategic
defence operation. Under its international commitments, the Navy maintains


-----

capabilities to execute tasks relating to the provision of security both in and
outside the Baltic Sea region. The Navy is principally tasked with defending
and maintaining maritime communication lines of the state during a crisis and
war and with preventing a naval blockade of the country. During peace, the
Navy supports Border Guards in their operations in the maritime area of
territorial waters and the exclusive economic zone. In its efforts to align the
naval forces of the Republic of Poland with Allied requirements, the Navy will
possess vessels enabling it to actively participate in the projection of the joint
forces of NATO and the EU. The core of the Navy’s structure consists of
flotillas of ships, the Navy’s Air Brigade, as well as coastal support and service
vessels and training centres.

107. Special Forces carry out special operations both at home and abroad during
peace, crisis and war. Operations carried out in coordination with conventional
forces or independently can be strategic or operational. The structure of
Special Forces is based on independent units and subunits composed of
especially selected, trained and equipped soldiers prepared to operate in a
heightened risk environment, capable of executing tasks which conventional
units are incapable of doing. The expansion of special units is a natural
development of the modern military doctrine, which assumes the formation of
highly specialized forces, capable of executing different and special tasks.

108. The AFRP is also composed of:

− the Armed Forces Operational Command, which is tasked with:
operational planning and operational command of a part of the AFRP,
separated from the Land Forces, Air Force and the Navy and assigned
under its command to carry out operations, including in foreign countries;
the performance of tasks of the Minister of the National Defence relating
to state border protection in the Republic of Poland’s air space; the
preparation of the AFRP’s operational command bodies and their
synchronization with commands of organizational unions and military
units intended to be assigned under its command;

− the Armed Forces Support Inspectorate, which is tasked with:
organization and control of a system of logistical support of the armed
forces, including provision of military units used or stationed outside the
state borders to provide host-nation support and to perform the role of the
sending state; the management of territorial defence, separated military
engineering forces and defence forces against weapons of mass
destruction; directing regional executive bodies of the Minister of National
Defence in operational and defence matters and government
administration not linked together;

− the Military Health Service Inspectorate, which manages the AFRP’s
system of provision of medical services is tasked with directing the
military health service, programming the development of the system of
provision of medical services and with civil-military cooperation in the
medical sector;

− the Military Police, being a separate and specialized service, is tasked
mainly with: the protection of the public order in areas and facilities of


-----

military units and in public areas; participating in the national crisis
response system; participating in search, rescue and humanitarian
operations and executing tasks supporting military operations;

− the Command of the Warsaw Garrison is principally tasked with: a
comprehensive preparation of conditions insuring efficient deployment
and functioning of strategic-level command posts during peace, crisis and
war; protecting and defending facilities and securing the functioning of
the Ministry of National Defence and organization units subordinated to
the Minister of National Defence.

In addition, after mobilization is announced, the AFRP will be composed of:
the Military Counterintelligence Service and the Military Intelligence Service.

109. Regional authorities of military administration, especially voivodeship military
staffs and military draft offices play an important role in securing mobilization
needs and in coordinating with non-military elements of the state’s defence
system. Their adjustment to new functions and tasks results from the process
of professionalization of the AFRP.

**4.4. Place and role of the AFRP command organization in the defence control**
**subsystem**

110. An integral part of the defence control system in all of the states of defence
readiness in the country is the AFRP’s strategic-level command organization.
This system is composed of strategic-level control and command organization,
i.e. the Minister of National Defence, the Chief of General Staff of the Polish
Armed Forces and the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces when
nominated. Other elements of the AFRP operational- and tactical-level
command system also participate in the defence control system.

111. The goal of commanding the AFRP is to maintain them in permanent combat
readiness and capability and to create adequate conditions in which
commands and military units can prepare for active exercise of their missions
and tasks during peace, crisis and war, in the national, Allied and coalition
systems.

112. The President of the Republic of Poland is the Commander-in-Chief of the
AFRP through the Minister of National Defence. The Minister of National
Defence directs overall activities of the armed forces during peace. The
Minister performs his tasks assisted by the Ministry of National Defence, which
comprises the General Staff of the Polish Armed Forces.

113. During peace, the AFRP – on behalf of the Minister of National Defence – are
commanded by the Chief of General Staff of the Polish Armed Forces, who in
terms of his function is the highest ranking soldier in active military duty. The
principal bodies of the AFRP’s command system during peace are: the
General Staff of the Polish Armed Forces, the Operational Command of the
Armed Forces, Commands of the Different Types of Forces of the Armed
Forces, the Armed Forces Support Inspectorate, the Military Health Service
Inspectorate, the Military Police Headquarters and the Command of the
Warsaw Garrison.


-----

114. In the event of crisis situations whose occurrence does not pose a direct threat
to the security of Poland, no material changes in the AFRP’s command
system are envisaged. Only additional assets and procedures of the crisis
management system will be activated. Forces assigned to international
formations that perform crisis response tasks outside Poland will be
commanded by the operational commanders of such formations.

115. During a crisis, the AFRP are controlled and commanded pursuant to the rules
adopted for peacetime and by using the crisis management system forces,
assets and procedures of the Ministry of National Defence. This system is fully
integrated with the national and Allied crisis management systems.

116. During war, the Minister of National Defence (MNA) controls subordinated
organization unit from the Control Post of the MNA and performs the role of a
planning and coordinating body supporting and securing the operations of the
AFRP and Allied forces that participate in operations counteracting and
resisting armed aggression against the Republic of Poland.

117. In a defence operation, the Minister of Supreme Commander of the Armed
Forces commands armed forces from the Command Post of the Supreme
Commander of the AF, who: commands the AFRP to fight back armed
aggression in the territory of the RP; insures coordination of armed forces
under his command with Allied forces in planning and waging warfare;
identifies within the scope of his competencies, the needs of the armed forces
with regard to supporting them by the non-military part of the state’s defence
system, assigns military bodies to execute central and local government tasks
in the area of direct wartime operations.

###### CHAPTER V. DEFENCE PREPARATIONS OF THE STATE

118. Defence preparations are intended to ensure the functioning of SOP in the
event of an external security threat and during war and they include the
planning of economic and defence activities and tasks executed for the AFRP
and Allied forces. The planning, organization and implementation of defence
preparations of the state fall under the competencies of the Council of
Ministers. The Minister of National Defence plays a coordinating role in this
process.

119. Defence planning is a common field integrating the SOP implementing
subsystems. It covers operational planning and defence programming and is
directed by the provisions of the _Political and Strategic Defence Directive of_
_the Republic of Poland_ and the _Council of Ministers’ Guidelines to the_
_Programming of Defence Preparations of the Republic of Poland, respectively._

120. The following plans are developed as part of operational planning: the DRP
RP operational plans of the armed forces, operational plans of running
government administration bodies, central government offices, voivodeships
and local government bodies, plans of special protection of facilities especially
important for state security and defence as well as plans of technical cover of
the country’s transportation infrastructure.

121. Defence programming is done pursuant to rules applicable in NATO, in a fouryear planning cycle for a ten-year planning period. Defence planning involves


-----

the development of programs crucial for the state’s defence and security,
namely: Programme of Development of the AFRP (based on guidelines taken
from the Main Directions of Development of the AFRP and their preparation to
_defend the state as well as the tenets found in the_ _Detailed Directions of_
_Reconstruction and Modernization of the AFRP),_ the _Programme of Non-_
_Military Defence Preparations of the RP,_ the _Civil Defence Upgrading Plan_
and the EMP. As part of defence programming, defence review is also carried
out as a result of which non-military defence preparations are assessed and a
_Report on the State of Defence of the Republic of Poland is drafted._

122. The implementation of defence preparations requires adequate financing.
Defence spending is planned under the procedure of drafting the budget law.
Military defence preparations are financed pursuant to arrangement adopted
in an up-to-date _Programme of Development of the AFRP,_ and in the nonmilitary area, financing is based on arrangements adopted in the Programme
_of Non-Military Defence Preparations,_ the EMP and in the _Civil Defence_
_Upgrading Programme._

**5.1. Preparations of the state defence control subsystem**

123. The purpose of defence preparations of the defence control subsystem is the
creation of organization and technical conditions to control the state in the
event of external threats to the state’s security. Efforts are undertaken to build
a uniform system of control, insuring consistent operations regardless of the
type and nature of threats, during all states of the state’s defence readiness,
run from prepared control posts. A Central Control Post is organized for
specific state authorities comprising control posts of the President of the RP,
the Chairman of the Council of Ministers (the Prime Minister), and ministers
and heads of central government offices designated by the Prime Minister.

**5.2. Preparations of the military subsystem**

124. Activities aimed at enhancing the AFRP’s potential within the existing financial
means of the government are carried out in the area of defence preparations
of the military subsystem, with emphasis placed on quality. A process of
transformation is underway involving, among others, the professionalization
and technical modernization of the AFRP.

125. It is necessary to adapt the assumptions underlying possible use and
operation of the AFRP to changing conditions. Efforts should mainly be
focused on achieving a high readiness to use combat modules, particular
mobile components of different types of armed forces in operations outside
Poland. The AFRP should be prepared in a planned way to swiftly move and
remain in distant and geographically and climatically different regions. It is
sound to prepare an adequate and modern defence infrastructure (control,
communications and transportation) to carry out tasks arising from host-nation
support obligations and civil-military cooperation (CIMIC).

126. Preparations of the military subsystem have to factor in the need to develop
capabilities and formations that perform rescue tasks (including those that
specialize in search and rescue of military personnel), humanitarian and law
and order tasks, as well as specialized units that eliminate chemical,


-----

biological, radiological and nuclear contaminations (CBRN) and subunits
protecting and defending installations.

**5.3. Preparations of the non-military subsystem**

127. The following are the basic areas of defence preparations carried out in the
non-military subsystem: state reserves; mobilization of the economy;
militarization; protection of installations especially important for the state’s
security and defence; preparation, use and protection of transport to meet the
state’s defence needs; the preparation and use of public and non-public health
service to meet the state’s defence needs; the preparation and use of
communications systems to meet the state’s defence needs; defence training;
inspection of the execution of defence tasks; the preparation and running of
observation, measurement, analyses, forecasting and telling systems about
radioactive, chemical, and biological contaminations in the territory of the RP.

**State reserves**

128. The state in order to effectively implement economic and defence tasks has to
maintain an appropriate level of strategic state reserves. The system of
strategic reserves constitutes an important link in the process of satisfying the
most urgent needs of the national economy, the population and the armed
forces. State reserve resources may be used in case of an external threat to
state security and during war, as well as during time of heightened defence
readiness of the state, as well as in the event of a crisis characteristic of a
natural disaster and when there are disruptions in the running of the economy

129. Reserves serve to meet the basic raw materials, material and fuel needs of
the economy, to maintain continuity of supplies to the population in basic farm
and food products, medical goods and devices and to provide the AFRP with
resources need to implement their tasks Reserve resources may be used for
peacekeeping and humanitarian missions, crisis response operations and to
implement tasks arising from international commitments and agreements.

130. Assessment of national security threats, global business cycle projections and
the economic and social situation of the state are accounted for in the process
of developing, management, administration, financing and control of strategic
reserves.

**Mobilization of the economy**

131. One of the core elements of mobilization of the country is the shifting of output
of industrial plants from peacetime to wartime production. This is done in
accordance with the Economy Mobilization Plan, which is developed as part of
defence programming and covers tasks of selected branches of the economy
to provide for the defence needs of the state in conditions of an external threat
to its security and during war. The EMP developed at the time of peace
significantly impacts the operation of the armed forces and other institutions
that realize defence tasks. Within a relatively short time, it permits the start of
production of weapons, military equipment and materiél and the maintenance
of equipment to meet the increased needs arising from the deployment of the
armed forces to tables of organization and equipment during “W” time and to
bear war losses.


-----

**Militarization**

132. An important element of defence preparations is the creation of conditions for
militarization of organization units performing tasks of special importance for
the state’s defence and security. The purpose of militarization is to raise the
preparedness of the staff resources of militarized organization units and to
enhance the effectiveness of control over such units. The Council of Ministers
on the motion of ministers and voivodes who perform tasks under the DRP RP
draws up a list of organization units to be militarized. The preparation of units
to be militarized involves several organization and planning activities, insuring
the readiness of such units to implement task laid down in branch ministry
and voivodeship specifications of tasks relating to militarization.

**Protection of installations of special importance to state security and defence**

133. Tasks relating to the protection of installations of special importance to state
security and defence are realized as part of the universal duty to defend the
RP. Installations under special protection are determined by the Council of
Ministers on the motion of ministers and voivodes and other state authorities.
Special protection of installations is prepared by authorities, institutions,
formations and entrepreneurs or organization units which have authority over
such installations, The protection of installations of special importance to state
security and defence is done by militarized units assigned to perform defence
tasks independently or with the participation of the AFRP, the Police, the State
Fire Service and civil defence formations. .

**Preparation of transportation and transportation infrastructure**

134. The preparation of the country’s transportation and transportation
infrastructure to meet the defence requirements consists of organization and
economic tasks undertaken with a view to using transportation
comprehensively during times of raising the state’s defence readiness. They
involve, in particular, planning the provision of transportation services,
preparation of maritime transportation, car, rail and air transportation, as well
as inland navigation to meet the state’s defence needs, preparation of the
country’s transportation infrastructure to meet its defence needs and its
protection and technical cover. Transportation will be used by the AFRP and –
as part of support – by Allied forces, militarized organization units and units
which serve as a base for especially formed militarized organization units,
organization units subordinated to and supervised by a competent minister of
the interior and civil defence formations.

**Preparation of the health service**

135. Defence preparations also cover issues relating to planning and
implementation of tasks relating to the preparation and use of public and nonpublic health service to meet the state’s defence needs. These include
increasing the hospital base and changing its profile, the creation of substitute
hospital places, activities relating to outpatient care, the organization of public
blood service, sanitary and epidemiological protection, rules on how to
proceed in case of radiation and other effects of the use of weapons of mass
destruction and the provision of benefits to certain organization units. The


-----

minister competent for health care, voivodes and local governments have
been charged with these tasks.

**Communications systems**

136. The preparation and use of communications systems to meet the state’s
defence requirements in communications is intended to provide the required
telecommunication services to the system users in a reliable and secure way,
enabling them to effectively implement tasks during peace, when the state’s
security is threatened and during war. Communications systems for the
purposes of defence should enable the applied means of communication to be
integrated on a uniform communications platform. Branch ministries’ and
telecommunication companies’ network resources are used to create them.
Inspiring and supporting the development of modern telecommunications
technologies, especially those that are failure- and interference-proof, as well
as their implementation in the existing communications systems expected to
be connected in an integrated telecommunications system is crucially
important. The preparation and use of the communications systems for the
state’s defence purposes with regard to the post is intended to ensure the
provision of required postal services to system users in an uninterrupted and
secure way, enabling them to effectively implement tasks during peace, when
the state state’s security is threatened and during war. Postal operators’
infrastructure, military field post, post subordinated to the minister competent
for internal affairs and courier services subordinated to the minister competent
for foreign affairs are used to prepare this system.

**Defence training and inspection of defence tasks**

137. Defence training is an element of non-military defence preparation. It
significantly contributes to raising the level of competence, skills and expertise
of employees and management staff responsible for the efficient operation of
individual elements of the SOP. The coordination of defence training courses
conducted by ministers directing government administration divisions and
voivodes is exercised by the Prime Minister through the Minister of National
Defence. Defence training at a central level is conducted through Higher
Defence Courses for public administration authorities and for public
administration personnel. Training is also provided to employees of
organization units that implement defence-related production and service
tasks. Major organizing functions relating to planning, conducting and
financing defence training fall under the competencies of government
authorities, while training courses for local government falls under the
competencies of marshals, voivodes, district governors (starosta), heads of
municipalities (wójt), town and city mayors. Defence training is also conducted
in the form of practical exercises, including trainings and games. They are an
important element of the state’s defence preparations which serves the
purpose of verifying adopted operational and strategic concepts and
organization and functional arrangements in the area of national defence.

138. Training in general self-defence of the population is also conducted and its
purpose is to prepare the population for self-defence against weapons of mass
destruction, including also teaching practical skills of health, life and property
self-protection and of providing aid to injured persons. Training of the


-----

population in general self-defence is done in the form of basic courses or
practical exercises.

139. “LEADERSHIP” (“KIEROWNICTWO”) Strategic Defence Games play an
important role in the process of upgrading the skills of making decisions on
key national security issues of government authorities and administration. This
activity is carried out under the formula of an extended meeting of the Council
of Ministers, attended by the President of the RP or his representatives. The
“LEADERSHIP” SDG are held cyclically on the basis of entries in the
summary of record of proceedings and decisions of the Council of Ministers
and are included in the _Programme of Non-Military Defence Preparations of_
_the RP. The Council of Ministers in recommending holding successive games,_
determined each time their subject matter. A fixed element of these games is
an assessment of the current state of the country’s security.

140. Inspections of the performance of defence tasks serve the purpose of
assessing the state’s defence preparations. The purpose of inspection is to
check whether defence tasks are carried out correctly and to determine the
state of defence preparations in the country. Inspection activities are
performed regularly under an ad-hoc inspection procedure. The Prime
Ministers orders the inspections and the Minister of National Defence
coordinates them. Individual organization units may not be subject to a
comprehensive inspection more than once in five years and to inspection to
find a problem more than once a year. These limitations do not apply to adhoc inspections.

**Research and industrial potential**

141. The Polish industry remains the main source of supply of materiél and military
equipment to the armed forces and Polish research and development
institutions are the main suppliers of production technology and engineering
ideas in the area of defence technology.

142. The integration of the Polish research and industrial potential in the area of
defence should be directed at EU and NATO member states and the
European Defence Agency and NATO Research and Technology
Organization should be platforms for the exchange of experience and the
procurement of state-of-the-art production technologies. The procurement of
state-of-the-art defence technologies for the AFRP and strengthening Poland’s
research and industrial potential should be the main goals of integration.

143. Research and industrial units should focus their efforts in the area of defence
technologies at developing production technologies that enhance the security
of troops, providing a big deterrent effect, permanently raising their combat
potential and ensuring manoeuvrability of armed forces.


-----

###### CHAPTER VI. DIRECTIONS OF TRANSFORMATION OF THE STATE’S DEFENCE SYSTEM

144. Transformation of the SOP is one of the most important strategic goals
realized by the government and public administration. Requirements of a
constantly changing security environment impose directions of transformation.

145. New laws regulating defence should be passed and the existing ones should
be perfected, especially with a view to improving the operation of SOP.
Transformation should extend to the cover the troublesome area of national
defence planning. Measures taken should be focused on the internal
harmonization of defence planning elements and the synchronization of
national planning with Allied planning. Improved planning system should
contribute to an effective decision-making in the area of defence. Planning
should be done in a methodical way, starting with planning at a strategic level
and ending with effective expenditure of the budget. Plans and programmes
developed as a result of the realization of defence planning should be
constantly monitored.

146. Transformation processes should lead to the enactment of a law providing for
a uniform legal basis for all activities relating to defence planning. The law
should define the basic terms, identify strategic and doctrine documents which
are the basis for defence planning, list planning documents and the rules
regulating their drafting, execution and approval as well as define the role and
tasks of state authorities in these matters. A uniform system of defence
planning will be sought that covers: political guidelines, long-term planning,
operational planning, defence programming (medium-term), budgeting based
on tasks and defence reviews.

147. Strategic Defence Reviews will be done in the Ministry of National Defence as
a component part of Strategic Reviews of National Security or independently.
They are an instrument of the defence policy aimed at guiding and
rationalizing choices in the process of transformation of the state’s defence
potential, in which the AFRP play the leading role..

**6.1. Transformation of the military subsystem**

148. The adaptation of the AFRP to new conditions will be made possible through
their constant transformation. The transformation of the armed forces is a
process of ongoing and proactive development through the integration of
innovative concepts and doctrines conductive to the adaptation of the armed
forces to changes taking place in the security environment. Their adaptation to
these changes is intended to attain the desired operation capabilities of the
armed forces.

149. The development of capabilities is done by means of formulating and
implementing doctrines, shaping the organization, providing training and
supplying technology, creating leadership, selection of personnel, building
infrastructure and achieving interoperability. The transformation involves all
areas of operation of the AFRP and their environment, accounting for the
existing political, economic, organization, legal and social conditions. The


-----

point of transformation is to look for and introduce innovative changes, to use
acquired knowledge and experience and to thoroughly change the way of
thinking about armed forces, from a quantitative to a quality-oriented
approach.

150. Transformation is a long-term process which relies on technological progress
and modern armed forces management and control methods. The following
transformation tools are applied: the development of new concepts and their
verification through experiments, defence planning based on the development
of capabilities and a system of tapping into experience.

151. As a result of transformation, the AFRP are to become a major instrument of
building Poland’s credibility and its international position through an ongoing
process of adjustment to the requirements of the security environment in the
wide meaning of the term. They should become professional and universal
forces of modular nature. The AFRP should be characterized by a high degree
of combat readiness, it should possess modern combat technology and
military equipment and they should have in place integrated reconnaissance,
command and logistical support structures.

152. Meeting Allied commitments and implementing tasks entrusted to the military
requires an intensive transformation effort and thorough changes in the
operation and structure of the AFRP. The ongoing professionalization which
represents not only turning the armed forces into a professional army, but
most importantly its qualitative upgrade will be conducive to its transformation.
The professionalization of the army is intended to raise its operational
capabilities and potential and to rationalize costs.

153. Improving the control and command structure of the AFRP will involve the
reduction of unnecessary command levels, separation of planning functions
from command and training functions and the introduction of modern
management based on a transparent division of powers. The flattening out of
the command structures and creating joint structures is part of a general
tendency to pool forces and resources intended to enhance the synergy and
integration effect.

154. An important goal of transformation has to be the development of capabilities
enabling the AFRP to participate in international conflict prevention operations
and resolving crises of different intensity. This will take pace in compliance
with the provisions of the _Strategy of Participation of AFRP in International_
_Operations._

155. Attainment of the desired state of the AFRP will be possible not only through
technical modernization or structural and organization changes, but primarily
through the introduction of thorough changes in the organization culture which
the armed forces are. Cooperation with Allies and coalition partners will
contribute to the implementation of best operating practices of the AFRP.

156. Allied (coalition) and multinational operations driven by effects, in which
identification and planning of the effects of operations will take place prior to
their commencement and will be done comprehensively is what the future
holds. Operation participants jointly define the end effect and assign
responsibility for the implementation of tasks and their coordination.
Consequently, planning and waging of international operations, including the


-----

preparation of an adequate civil-military component is the responsibility of the
entire state and requires the cooperation of many entities.

**6.2. Transformation of the non-military subsystem**

157. The changing definition of security and defence and the nature of present-day
and future operations require a comprehensive approach. On account of the
fact that the post-conflict stage is lasting increasingly longer, the role of nonmilitary instruments and of the civil component in military operations is gaining
in importance. This prompts us to seek adequate procedures and mechanisms
that harmonize the activities of all entities taking part in an operation at all
levels: strategic, operational and tactical. Thus, political, economic, social and
military instruments of influence have to be synchronized.

158. The transformation of the non-military subsystem of SOP should involve
mainly its upgrading so that it can perform tasks relating to mission fulfilment.
This translates into focusing our efforts on tasks relating to ensuring our
state’s capabilities to counteract threats and challenges found in today’s
security environment; guaranteeing a continuity of running the most important
state institutions (authorities and administration, important economic
installations and public utilities) in times of crisis and during war; maintaining
the appropriate level of support of operations of armed forces during peace,
crisis and war..

###### CONCLUSION

159. The Defence Strategy of the RP is addressed to all public administration
bodies and entities that perform defence tasks. Government administration
bodies, entrepreneurs and other entities that perform defence tasks, as well as
commands and military staffs are responsible for its implementation. Local
government bodies are recommended to fulfil the provisions of the _Defence_
_Strategy of the RP._ Its provisions will be developed and detailed in
implementing documents: directives, strategic and operational plans and in
defence preparation programmes, including programmes of development of
the AFRP.

160. Arrangements laid down in this strategy will be systematically verified in the
course of defence planning, in particular during Strategic Defence Reviews
and during strategic games and defence exercises. The _Defence Strategy of_
_the RP will remain in force for the duration of the National Security Strategy of_
_the RP._ Pursuant to a decision of the Council of Ministers of 24 November,
2009, adopting the _Plan to Systematize the Development Strategies, this_
strategy will become part of the National Security Strategy of the RP or its
implementing document.


-----

###### LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 

**C4ISR** command, control, communications, computers, intelligence,

surveillance and reconnaissance

**CBRN** _chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear contaminations_

**CFE** Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe

**CIMIC** _civil-military cooperation_

**HNS** Host Nation Support

**NATO** The North Atlantic Treaty Organization

**NRF** National Reserve Forces

**OSCE** Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe

**UN** The United Nations Organization

**AD** air defence

**EMP** Economy Mobilization Programme

**DRP RP** _Defence Response Plan of the Republic of Poland_

**RP** The Republic of Poland

**SGO** Strategic Defence Game

**SDS** state defence system

**AFRP** Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland

**NAT** The North Atlantic Treaty

**EU** The European Union

****************************************************************
**Repertory no. 246/2010**
**I, the undersigned, KATARZYNA GÓRSKA-ŁAZARZ sworn translator of the**
**English language in Warsaw, license no. TP/117/05, hereby certify that the above is a**
**true and complete translation of the original document in the Polish language**
**presented to me on February 1, 2010.**


-----

