# National Security Strategy
 Of The Republic Of Poland

 2020


-----

# National Security Strategy
 Of The Republic Of Poland

##### Warsaw

 2020


-----

###### The National Security Strategy of the Republic of Poland
 was approved on 12 May 2020 by the President of the Republic of Poland
 upon request of the President of the Council of Ministers.

 The approval of this Strategy by the President of the Republic of Poland
 renders null and void the National Security Strategy
 of the Republic of Poland issued in 2014.


-----

##   List of Contents

**INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................**

**SECURITY ENVIRONMENT...............................................................................................**

**VALUES, NATIONAL INTERESTS AND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES**
**IN THE AREA OF NATIONAL SECURITY..........................................................................**

**PILLAR I**
**SECURITY OF THE STATE AND ITS CITIZENS...............................................................**

National security management....................................................................................
Resilience of the state and common civic defence.........................................................
Polish Armed Forces...................................................................................................

Cybersecurity..............................................................................................................
Information space ....................................................................................................

**PILLAR II**
**POLAND IN THE INTERNATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEM.................................................**

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European Union................................
Bilateral, regional and global cooperation....................................................................

**PILLAR III**
**IDENTITY AND NATIONAL HERITAGE............................................................................**

National identity of the Republic of Poland ...............................................................
Creating a positive image of Poland ............................................................................

**PILLAR IV**

**SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.**
**ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION.........................................................................................**
Health and family protection.......................................................................................
Migration policy.........................................................................................................
Economic security......................................................................................................
Energy security........................................................................... ...............................
Protection of natural environment...............................................................................
Scientific and technological potential...........................................................................

**CONCLUSION.....................................................................................** ...............................


11

12

13

15
18

20

21

22

23

25

27

28

29

30

31

32
33
34
35

36

37


-----

## Introduction

The contemporary security environment is increasingly complex and uncertain. Political, milita
ry, economic and social interactions are increasing on the national, regional and global scale. This

exerts a powerful impact both on the strategy as well as on the main directions of the transformation

of the national security system. The development and implementation of the present National Securi
ty Strategy of the Republic of Poland stems from the need to render the state capable of counteracting

threats and living up to the challenges resulting from the evolving security situation faced by Poland.

It also aims at using the opportunities for improving the security of the state and its citizens, ensuring

its further development and boosting the Republic of Poland`s position in the international arena.

The strategy offers a comprehensive vision of shaping the national security of the Republic of Poland

in all its dimensions. It comprises the subject-oriented aspect (the internal dimension of national secu
rity as well as the international environment – bilateral relations, regional cooperation on a global

scale and cooperation within international organisations) and the object-oriented one (it encom
passes all dimensions regarding the functioning of the national security system). National interests

and the strategic objectives within the domain of national security have been formulated in line with

the national values as stipulated in the Constitution of the Republic of Poland.

The provisions of this document should be further extended and reflected in national strategic docu
ments pertaining to national security and development of Poland. The National Security Strategy

of the Republic of Poland takes into account the context of Poland`s membership in the North Atlantic

Treaty Organization and the European Union.


-----

## Security Environment

The progressive decomposition of the international order adversely affects the security environment

of Poland, hindering the pursuit of national interests and the achievement of strategic objectives.

As a result of these changes, the security environment has become uncertain and unpredictable, resul
ting, among others, from the lack of respect for international law and failure to meet international

obligations. The number of security threats and challenges of diverse nature is on the rise.

The most serious threat is the neo-imperial policy of the authorities of the Russian Federation, pursu
ed also by means of military force. The aggression against Georgia, the illegal annexation of Crimea

and activities in eastern Ukraine have violated the basic principles of international law and undermi
ned the pillars of the European security system.

The Russian Federation is intensively developing its offensive military capabilities (including

in the western strategic direction), extending Anti-Access/Area Denial systems inter alia in the Baltic

Sea region, including the Kaliningrad Oblast, and conducting large-scale military exercises, based

on scenarios assuming a conflict with the NATO member states, a rapid deployment of large military

formations, and even the use of nuclear weapons.

Furthermore, the Russian Federation carries out activities below the threshold of war (of hybrid

nature), which pose the risk of the outbreak of a conflict (including an unintentional one, origina
ting from a violent escalation as a result of an incident, especially a military one), and undertakes

multi-faceted and comprehensive actions using non-military means (including: cyber-attacks, disin
formation) to destabilise the structures of Western states and societies and to create divisions among

Allies. It should be assumed that that the Russian Federation will continue its policy of undermining

the current international order, based on international law, in order to rebuild its power and spheres

of influence.

The basic factor shaping Poland’s security is its strong embedding in the transatlantic and European

structures and the development of bilateral and regional cooperation with key partners. Over recent

years, the transatlantic relationship, as well as the process of the European integration, have been

put to the test. The strategic bonds between the United States of America and its European allies are


-----

evolving. Within the European Union, divergent approaches concerning its further development are

emerging. There is also a noticeable risk of undermining the coherence of the positions and actions

of the member states of North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European Union, as a result

of increasing internal tensions and actions undertaken by external entities.

Moreover, persistent regional and internal conflicts in the Southern European Neighbourhood

pose another risk. Because of them, and as a result of a rapid population growth, as well as diffe
rences in the living standards, the migratory pressure has increased, which remains a challenge

to Europe’s security.

At the global level, an important phenomenon is the one of the growing strategic rivalry between

the United States of America, the People’s Republic of China and the Russian Federation, which affects

the entire international system.

In recent years, we have seen a wide range of armed conflicts, varying, among others, in their scale,

intensity, complexity and duration, and the blurring of boundaries between war and peace. Global

insecurity is also fueled inter alia by the undermining of disarmament treaties and agreements, proli
feration of weapons of mass destruction and the threat of terrorism and organised crime.

Activities below the threshold of war, including hybrid ones, will continue to constitute an impor
tant policy tool serving both state and non-state actors in achieving their objectives. One can

expect further development of capabilities allowing to carry out activities in many domains,

including cyberspace and outer space.

The development of new technologies, both civilian and military ones, contributes to significant incre
ase in the employment of unmanned and autonomous systems, automated and robotized weapon

platforms using artificial intelligence, as well as long-range precision weapon systems, including

ballistic and cruise missiles. An increased likelihood of tactical nuclear weapons being used in a clas
sical military operation, including as a means of de-escalation, is regarded as particularly dangerous.

Digital technologies are advancing rapidly. This generates the necessity for an efficient use

of cuttin g-edge technologies. Development of solutions based on fixed line and mobile broadband

(5G and subsequent generations), the Internet of Things, cloud computing, quantum technologies,

automation of services, machine learning, nanotechnology and artificial intelligence create new


-----

development opportunities for Poland, while generating previously unknown threats. The challenge

for the state consists in joining the technological race in this area, which would offer Poland the oppor
tunity to overcome the position of a mere user and join the group of countries with effectively functio
ning digital economies, providing solutions and co-creating international standards.

Fixed and mobile communication networks form the basis for information exchange. They include

voice communication, data transmission, video and broadly defined Internet access for all key sectors

of the economy. As such, communication systems are a key component of national security assets

and preparatory measures for crisis situations and therefore they constitute an important element

of the national critical infrastructure. In this respect, a key challenge is to develop secure and modern

telecommunication networks capable of serving an increasing number of end users and systems.

In the context of the digital revolution, the specific role of cyberspace and information space should

be taken into account. This also creates room for disinformation and manipulation of information,

which requires effective strategic communication activities.

It is crucial for Poland to ensure energy security. The markets of Poland and other countries

of the Central European and Balkan regions are dominated by gas and oil supplies from the Russian

Federation. New projects, especially Nord Stream 2, will increase the dependence of the countries

in the regions on energy carriers from the East and will generate the risk of using selective gas supplies

as an instrument of political pressure. A separate challenge is to maintain the competitiveness

of electricity production in Poland due to the climate and energy policy of the European Union, which

aims to markedly reduce the use of coal in electricity production. A significant problem in the context

of energy security remains to be the condition of Polish infrastructure: power plants, underdeveloped

transmission networks, especially electricity and gas grids as well as gas storage facilities. The extension

of transmission networks as well as oil and fuel storage capacities has not been sufficient so far.

As regards the financial security of the state and the stability of the state economy, the challenge for natio
nal security is to ensure high efficiency and effectiveness of the instruments allowing for supervision

of the financial markets, in particular banking and capital markets supervision. It is reasonable to carry

out further actions based on modern solutions in the sphere of financial technologies, with simulta
neous implementation of solutions optimising the risks pertaining to their functioning.


-----

The persistent lack of replacement level fertility in Poland, the changing age structure of the society,

including a significant increase in the number of elderly people, presents a growing challenge for public

finances, in particular in terms of meeting the needs arising under the pension system as well as health

and institutional care.

As regards health care system it is of key importance to counteract the effects of civilization diseases,

to eliminate social inequalities in access to health care and to increase health awareness of the popula
tion. A major problem is the growing deficit of medical personnel and the concurrent increasing demand

for health services. Simultaneously, people expect an easy access to modern methods of diagnosis

and treatment. Globalisation and unlimited possibilities to travel fast around the world pose a number

of threats to health and life of the people, including Polish citizens. The sources of the above-men
tioned threats may be, among others, drug-resistant bacteria and viruses, leading to serious negative

consequences for health, economic and social consequences, as exemplified by the SARS-CoV-2 coro
navirus pandemic. The challenge in this area is to ensure an efficient and adequate response on part

of the state authorities in the fight against epidemic risks and their aftermath, the appropriate prepara
tion of procedures and the availability of the relevant number of medical staff and protective measures.

Another threat to security in the domain of environment protection is the advancing climate change,

which may cause dangerous and unprecedented weather anomalies (e.g. prolonged droughts),

affecting vast areas of the country, as well as pollution and emissions of harmful substances, including

those causing smog. This translates into deterioration of health of the Polish population and may

adversely affect food security of the country and the availability of good quality water resources.

The challenge is to preserve all the functions of forests as one of the key elements of the ecological

security of the state.

It is necessary to improve the management of national security (adequately to the contemporarily

faced challenges and threats) inter alia by integrating a number of dispersed solutions functioning next

to each other. Presently it is difficult to provide a flexible and swift response to emerging situations.

Hence, coherent and comprehensive organisational and legal solutions need to be devised in this area,

aimed at creating an integrated national security management system.

Poland is taking advantage of the opportunities to strengthen its national security and boost the deve
lopment of the state. The economic policy which the country pursues fosters the development of entre

-----

preneurship by increasing the competitiveness and innovation level of national business entities.

The growth of economic potential translates into constant increase in the activity of our enterpri
ses in international trade and increases the attractiveness of Poland for foreign investors. Despite

the observed global economic slowdown, Poland maintains a high rate of economic growth.

In the face of the progressing globalisation, the Polish economy has to face up to an increasingly strong

competition on foreign markets. In order to meet this challenge, economic and structural policy acti
vities are conducted, focused on innovation, identification of niches, adaptation and development of new

technologies and building global brands. The strength of the Polish economy translates into the strength

of the state’s defence potential. Actions are constantly being taken to increase the resilience of the state

and its society to contemporary threats.

In parallel, Poland also strives to beef up the external pillars of its security, e.g. through its member
ship in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European Union, the strategic partnership

with the United States of America, as well as regional cooperation for security. The process of strategic

adaptation of NATO has led to the strengthening of the allied policy of deterrence and defence, inclu
ding through the presence of allied forces in Polish territory. Poland’s security is also shored up through

the development of cooperation with the United States of America in the fields of security and defence,

energy, trade, investment as well as research and development. The factor which heightens the defen
ce potential is the strengthening of political, military and industrial-defence cooperation with major

European partners in a bilateral format, as well as within the framework of the EU Common Security

and Defence Policy, inter alia, through involvement in selected projects developed as part of the EU`s

Permanent Structured Cooperation and participation of Polish entities in projects financed from

the European Defence Fund. Poland also attaches great importance to the development of regional

cooperation, e.g. within the framework of the Bucharest Nine, the Visegrad Group, the Weimar Trian
gle, the Three Seas Initiative and collaboration with the countries of the Baltic Sea region. Another

vital instrument is Poland’s involvement in missions and operations led by the North Atlantic Treaty

Organization, the European Union, the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Co-opera
tion in Europe, as well as those carried out as part of coalitions.


-----

## Values, National Interests

#### and Strategic Objectives in the Area
 of National Security

The Republic of Poland creates favourable conditions to pursue its national interests and achieve stra
tegic objectives in the domain of national security in conformity with the following values: indepen
dence and sovereignty of the state, security of its citizens, human and civil liberties and rights, human

dignity, justice, national identity and heritage, democratic rule of law, solidarity, international order

based on the principles of international law and environment protection.

National interests in the field of national security include:

1. Guarding independence, territorial integrity, sovereignty and security of the state

and its citizens.

2. Shaping international order, based on solidarity and respect for international law,

which guarantees safe and secure development of Poland.

3. Strengthening national identity and guarding national heritage.

4. Ensuring conditions for sustainable and balanced social and economic development

and environment protection.

The above-listed national interests form the pillars of the national security of the Republic of Poland.

Their implementation is ensured through the achievement of the strategic objectives resulting from

them, which requires the planning and implementation of specific tasks and the possession and use

of appropriate forces, resources and capabilities. These include key preparatory and strategic activities

described hereinafter.


-----

# Pillar I

 Security of the State

### and Its Citizens

Guarding independence, territorial inviolability, sovereignty as well as ensuring the security

of the state and its citizens shall be pursued through the achievement of the following

strategic objectives and the implementation of tasks and actions arising under them.


-----

## National

#### security management

**1. Integrating national security management, including state defence management and building**

**of adaptation capabilities:**

1.1 Integrate the national security management system, including state defence management,

enabling the unification of processes, procedures and working practices by merging

the so-far existing systems, in particular, national security management, crisis management

and cybersecurity. Provide the ability of swift adaptation to new challenges and threats

as well as identification of opportunities.

1.2 Create an interagency coordination mechanism for the management of national security

through setting up a committee of the Council of Ministers, responsible, at the strategic level,

for dealing with issues in the field of policies, strategies and programmes pertaining to natio
nal security management, in a manner ensuring their consistent and coherent implementa
tion and linking the committee with the new role and competences of the Government Crisis

Management Team and the Government Centre for Security.

1.3 Involve the Marshals (Speakers) of the Sejm and the Senate of the Republic of Poland

in the preparation for the sake of managing national security.

1.4 Adjust mechanisms and instruments supporting the President of the Republic of Poland

in a way which reflects changes in the sphere of security and defence, including state defence

management.

1.5 Adjust the national crisis management system to NATO Crisis Response System through

extending it also to the field of political and military conflict and allowing for smooth tran
sition from the state of peace to the state of crisis and war, as well as ensuring that it provides

effective tools to prevent and combat threats, including hybrid ones.


-----

1.6 Review, prioritise and interlink strategy and planning documents as well as the implemen
ting mechanisms in the areas of national security and defence and the socio-economic deve
lopment of the country.

1.7 Prepare and implement a communication system for the purpose of managing the national

security system, including state defence management.

1.8 Ensure, within the framework of a comprehensive and integrated national security system, at all

levels of government and localgovernment administration, the coherence of civil and defence

planning, as well as the possibility of selective implementation of tasks, as needed.

The Act on National Security Management will be developed to implement the above-listed measures.


-----

## Resilience of the state

#### and common civic defence

**2. Increasing the state’s resilience to threats by creating a system of common civic defence,**

**based on the efforts of the entire nation, and building an understanding for the development**

**of the Republic of Poland’s resilience and defence capabilities:**

2.1 Build a system of common civic defence, making full use of the potential of the state and local

government institutions, education and higher education entities, local communities, econo
mic entities, non-governmental organisations and citizens, which will provide comprehensive

resilience of the state to non-military and military threats.

2.2 Build the state’s resilience to threats, including hybrid ones, ensure the universal nature

of civil defence and protection of the population as well as build-up and maintain the capaci
ty to recover the necessary resources.

2.3 Develop the capacity of the health system and public administration structures to fight against

epidemic threats, especially against highly infectious and particularly dangerous diseases.

Measures should be taken aimed at developing diagnostic facilities, including, in particu
lar, the capacity for rapid detection of epidemic threats, as well as the analyses and forecasts

of their spread in real time. Appropriate protection measures and medical equipment should

be included in the strategic reserve programme. The state should support the development

of medical industry production capacities located in Poland.

2.4 Build knowledge and capacities allowing to shape national security, based on the broad

involvement of the public authorities, including local government, education, higher educa
tion and scientific institutions, the economy, non-governmental organisations and citizens

to adapt to the constantly changing needs, in connection with fostering patriotic attitudes,

civic duties and pro-social attitudes.


-----

2.5 Build social capital by developing cooperation skills, networks of formal and non-formal social

organisations and shaping the community of values within the Polish society.

2.6 Redefine the civil defence system and the population protection system by making it universal,

both within urban agglomerations, as well as in rural areas, focusing on building the capacity

of the system to constantly adapt and respond to the changing challenges and threats. Develop

a law comprehensively regulating the subject matter of civil defence.

2.7 Increase resilience to threats, predominantly in the scope of: the continuity of government

and the functioning of the state, resilient energy supplies, uncontrolled movement of people

and relocation of the population, collection, protection and management of food and water

resources, ability to deal with mass casualties, resilient telecommunication networks

and Information and Communications Technology systems, population information

and alert systems and resilient transport system.

2.8 Implement a model of critical infrastructure protection, ensuring its continued operation

and uninterrupted provision of services.

2.9 Introduce a homogenous system of human resources management, including administra
tion of personnel reserves for national security purposes, assigning priority to the Polish

Armed Forces.

2.10 Develop the state’s capacity to prevent and respond to terrorist threats and to fight organised

crime, including criminal activities in cyberspace.

2.11 Strengthen legal certainty by: ensuring effective legal protection for citizens, an efficient judi
ciary system and proper enforcement of court decisions.

2.12 Continue to strengthen counter-intelligence protection of the state authorities and critical

infrastructure in the way adequate to the increasing activities of foreign intelligence services,

both in the military as well as in the civilian domain.

2.13 Develop the capacities of national intelligence services to identify risks at an early stage.


-----

2.14 Carry out tasks in the field of spatial planning and development of the state, including

in the maritime areas of the Republic of Poland, i.e. internal waters, territorial sea, contiguous

zone and the exclusive economic zone, as part of the public purpose investments, taking into

account the requirements of the security and defence of the state and the resulting needs

as regards their financing.

2.15 Create conditions, in the area of spatial planning and development, allowing for effective

and efficient consideration of the requirements of national security.

2.16 Provide, in the sphere of non-military defence preparations, optimal legal and organisatio
nal conditions for acting flexibly in the event of an external threat to state security in times

of peace, crisis and war.

2.17 Strengthen interagency coordination with a view to developing capabilities of the national

industrial and technological defence base, relevant to the needs of the state security, inclu
ding inter alia the selective launch of actions to mobilise the economy and to meet the needs

of the Polish Armed Forces.

2.18 Take into account, within the strategic reserves system, the needs resulting from changes

in the security environment.

2.19 Increase capabilities in the field of cryptology, the production of telecommunication applian
ces equipped with cryptographic modules consisting of microelectronic subassemblies

manufactured in Poland and own software.

2.20 Build capacities for technology development and production of strategic resources in time

of peace, crisis and war.


-----

## Polish Armed Forces

**3. Strengthening operational capabilities of the Polish Armed Forces to deter and defend against**

**security threats, with particular emphasis on enhancing the level of mobility and technical**

**modernisation:**

3.1 Strive to accelerate the development of operational capabilities of the Polish Armed Forces

by increasing the growth rate of defence spending, reaching 2.5% of GDP in 2024.

3.2 Continue the adaptation of the peace and war time command structure of the Polish Armed

Forces to reflect the needs resulting from changes in the security environment.

3.3 Strengthen the operational capabilities of the Polish Armed Forces by increasing person
nel and equipment to the foreseen levels, as well as adapt training programmes to respond

in particular to the challenges presented by the modern multi-domain operational environ
ment, capabilities to conduct asymmetric operations, building Anti-Access/Area Denial

systems (battlefield isolation) and maneuverability of operations, as well as the ability to stay

away from permanent dislocation for a lengthy period of time.

3.4 Enhance the mobility of troops and the efficiency of their support and logistics system by focu
sing on investments in the necessary infrastructure and means of transport.

3.5 Improve management of personnel resources of the Polish Armed Forces, taking into acco
unt in particular the improvement of: qualification and recruitment processes to the Polish

Armed Forces, the system of education and professional training of soldiers as well as winning

and use of personnel reserves.

3.6 Build a national integrated situational awareness system, based on various means

of reconnaissance, communication, command and control, including national Earth

observation satellite systems and unmanned aerial vehicle systems operating in network

-----

centric structures, while maintaining full cryptographic security. Build up national satellite

communications systems.

3.7 Ensure the state’s capability for effective air defence, including missile defence.

3.8 Build operational capabilities of the Polish Armed Forces to carry out precision long-range

strikes as well as capabilities for anti-aircraft and anti-tank defence.

3.9 Develop operational capabilities of the Polish Armed Forces, in particular of the Special Opera
tions Forces, to combat threats, including hybrid ones and to conduct counterterrorist opera
tions during all possible extraordinary states and in states of defence readiness.

3.10 Attain operational capabilities to conduct full spectrum of military operations in cyberspace,

develop Cyber Defence Forces and build capabilities to conduct activities in space as well

as to carry out information activities.

3.11 Improve the mobilisation system, including the training of personnel reserves.

3.12 Strive to build capabilities ensuring full protection and defence of the national maritime inte
rests, in particular the operational capabilities of the Polish Navy and strengthen its coopera
tion within allied and regional formats.

3.13 Implement the programme of building Territorial Defence Forces, creating conditions

for the development of common civic defence readiness in the territory of the whole country.

3.14 Create conditions for the Polish defence industry, regardless of the form of ownership, to meet

long-term needs of the Polish Armed Forces, including by implementing the results of rese
arch and development.


-----

## Cybersecurity

**4. Increasing resilience to cyber threats and boosting information protection in the public, mili-**

**tary and private sectors as well as fostering knowledge and good practices enabling citizens**

**to better protect their information:**

4.1 Increase the resilience in the public and private, as well as in the military and civilian

information systems and attain the capability to effectively prevent, combat and respond

to cyber threats.

4.2 Strengthen the defensive capabilities of the state by ensuring continuous development

of the national cyber security system.

4.3 Attain capabilities to conduct full spectrum of military operations in cyberspace.

4.4 Develop national capabilities in the area of testing, research, assessment and certification

of cyber security solutions and services.

4.5 Develop competences, knowledge and awareness of threats and challenges among public

administration employees and in the society, in the domain of cyber security.

4.6 Strengthen and develop national potential, inter alia, through development of domestic solu
tions in the area of cyber security and by conducting state-funded research and development

work in the domain of modern technologies, among others, machine learning, the Internet

of Things, fixed-line and mobile broadband networks (5G and subsequent generations),

including cooperation with universities, scientific institutions and enterprises from both

public and private sectors.


-----

## Information space

**5. Ensuring secure functioning of the state and its citizens in the information space:**

5.1 At the strategic level, build capabilities to protect the information space (including systemic

fight against disinformation) understood as the merging layers of space: virtual (the layer

of systems, software and applications), physical (infrastructure and equipment) and cognitive.

5.2 Create a homogenous system of strategic communication of the state, whose task should

consist in forecasting, planning and implementing coherent communication activities, using

a wide range of communication channels and media, and apply identification and influence

tools in various domains of national security.

5.3 Actively counteract disinformation by building capabilities and creating procedures defining

cooperation with the information and social media while ensuring the involvement of citi
zens and non-governmental organisations.

5.4 Aim to increase public awareness of threats related to the manipulation of information

through education in the field of information security.


-----

# Pillar II

 Poland in the International Security System

Shaping of the international order, founded on solidarity-based cooperation and respect

for international law, which guarantees Poland`s

safe and secure development, shall be pursued through the achievement

of the following strategic objectives and the effectuation of tasks and actions arising under them.


-----

## The North Atlantic Treaty
 Organization and the European Union

**1. Strengthening the capabilities of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European**
**Union to ensure the security of Poland and the entire Euro-Atlantic area:**

1.1 Work towards strengthening of the transatlantic bond, political cohesion, solidarity, credibili
ty and effectiveness of NATO and consolidate Poland’s position within its structures.

1.2 Seek to enhance the deterrence and defence of NATO and ensure its ability to conduct

the most demanding collective defence operations, including by increasing preparedness

and availability of forces for its needs, strengthening allied defence and operational planning

adapted to contemporary challenges and threats.

1.3 Take actions aimed at speeding up NATO`s decision-making processes, _inter alia through_

boosting Supreme Allied Commander Europe`s (SACEUR`s) level of enablement.

1.4 Pursue the increase and consolidation of the military presence of NATO on its Eastern flank.

1.5 Improve Host Nation Support both in the military and non-military part of the national de
fence system.

1.6 Participate actively in shaping the policy of nuclear deterrence of NATO.

1.7 Participate in the process of adaptation of NATO to contemporary challenges and threats,

according to the 360-degree approach.

1.8 Maintain a dual-track policy towards the Russian Federation within the framework

of NATO, consisting in enhanced deterrence and defence combined with readiness to engage

in a conditions-based dialogue.


-----

1.9 Pursue the development of relations between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization

and the Republic of Finland as well as the Kingdom of Sweden as NATO`s closest part
ners, taking into account their importance for the security of Poland and the entire Baltic

Sea Region.

1.10 Develop NATO`s Partnership Policy and take actions aimed at the continuation of NATO`s

„open door policy”.

1.11 Work towards development of NATO-EU cooperation, including the unification of standards

and improvement of infrastructure enabling the deployment of troops to Europe and military

mobility within Europe, with a view to ensuring synergy between the two organisations.

1.12 Engage pragmatically in the development of the European Union’s Common Security

and Defence Policy, including in the framework of the European Union’s Permanent Struc
tured Cooperation and the European Defence Fund, striving to ensure its complementarity

with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

1.13 Seek greater involvement of the European Union in activities directed at improving security

in the Eastern Neighbourhood, including within the framework of the Eastern Partner
ship, and actively participate in them. Strive to maintain the enlargement policy within

the European Union.

1.14 Prevent the deepening of divisions among European Union Member States and engage

constructively in the process of the European integration, by participating actively in shaping

EU policies, in conformity with Polish interests.


-----

## Bilateral, regional

#### and global cooperation

**2. Developing cooperation in bilateral, regional and global formats to strengthen Poland’s po-**

**sition as an important element of the international security system:**

2.1 Develop strategic cooperation with the United States of America, particularly in the areas

of security and defence (including in the form of enduring presence of the US Armed Forces

in Poland), technology, trade and energy.

2.2 Deepen bilateral and regional cooperation with key European partners, especially in the frame
work of the Bucharest Nine, the Visegrad Group and the Weimar Triangle, as well as in other

multilateral cooperation formats.

2.3 Take actions aimed at strengthening the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity

of Ukraine, Georgia and the Republic of Moldova, including support for their efforts to fulfil

the European and Euro-Atlantic aspirations and engage in stabilisation activities in Poland’s

eastern neighbourhood, including within the framework of the Eastern Partnership.

2.4 Take steps to enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations responsible for keeping peace

and international security and of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe

as vital part of the cooperative security system in Europe.

2.5 Work towards strengthening international law as well as arms control, disarmament

and weapons of mass destruction non-proliferation regimes.

2.6 Pursue national interests and participate, in the spirit of solidarity with allies and partners,

in missions and operations led by international organisations (including the United Nations,

the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the European Union and the Organization for Securi
ty and Co-operation in Europe) and in a coalition format, respecting obligations arising under

United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 ”Women, Peace and Security”.


-----

2.7 Take advantage of the geographic location to boost the development of the country (transit

location on North-South and East-West routes, the potential of the Baltic Sea and the Three

Seas Region).

2.8 Expand the transport network ensuring even saturation with infrastructure, especially in areas

with limited transport accessibility to the Core and the Comprehensive TEN-T networks,

including the construction of the Polish section of Via Carpatia, and improve access to border

crossings on the EU’s eastern border.

2.9 Selectively participate in geostrategic connectivity projects in line with national interests,

and in particular, with the national security of the Republic of Poland.

2.10 Exploit the potential and opportunities arising from Poland as a littoral state.

2.11 Develop sea ports having the status of ports in the TEN-T Core network and regional ports.

2.12 Implement the programme for the development of inland waterways having crucial impor
tance for transport, including those aimed at, inter alia, improving access to sea ports and their

inclusion in the TEN-T network.

2.13 Build the Solidarity Transport Hub and integrate it into the national transport system.


-----

# Pillar III

 Identity and National Heritage

Strengthening national identity and guarding national heritage shall be pursued through

the achievement of the following strategic objectives

and the effectuation of tasks and activities arising under them.


-----

## National identity

#### of the Republic of Poland

**1. Strengthening national identity, rooted in the Christian heritage and universal values:**

1.1 Shape and develop patriotic attitudes as an indispensable factor in building community

and national identity rooted in the Christian heritage and universal values.

1.2 Refine instruments and procedures for the protection of cultural heritage in the event
of a looming war or crisis, including entities and services tasked with ensuring national
security.

1.3 Use Poland’s activity in the international arena to promote the development and protection

of traditional family values, Polish national identity, culture and tradition.

1.4 Strengthen links between the Polish diaspora and the home country, as well as strive

to increase the involvement of the former in activities related to the promotion of Poland.


-----

## Creating a positive

#### image of Poland

**2. Strengthening the positive image of the Republic of Poland and its cultural and economic**
**attractiveness:**

2.1 Aim to strengthen the position of the state using public and cultural diplomacy as well

as social communication technology, taking into account the objectives resulting, among

others, from the state’s historical policy. Build a positive image of the Republic of Poland inter

_alia by: promoting the Polish language, culture (including mass culture), science and history_

and the Christian heritage of the Nation.

2.2 Strengthen, in cooperation with Polish entrepreneurs, the brand of the Polish economy

and support Polish companies in the process of internationalisation, with particular empha
sis on producers of innovative goods and services.

2.3 Boost public diplomacy activities and improve cooperation with Polish community social

organisations to promote Polish culture and economy.


-----

# Pillar IV

 Social and Economic Development
 Environment Protection

The conditions for sustainable and balanced social and economic development and environment

protection shall be pursued through the achievement of the following strategic objectives

and the effectuation of tasks and activities arising under them.


-----

## Health and family protection

**1. Improving conditions for the protection and development of the family; increasing the level**

**of health security of the citizens:**

1.1 Consolidate measures to improve the demographic situation, including a birth rate which

will ensure replacement level fertility, e.g. by improving the financial situation of families

and supporting their care and socialisation functions. Implement a policy dedicated to senior

citizens to ensure social and health security for the elderly and mobilise this group to remain

active, also professionally, for as long as possible.

1.2 Improve the coordination, continuity and comprehensiveness of patient care in the health

care system and increase the quality and availability of health services, inter alia, by provi
ding better access to health care infrastructure, high-quality and safe medical products with

proven efficacy and wider use of telemedicine.

1.3 Take action in the field of prevention and health education, early diagnosis and rehabilita
tion. Extend support for persons with disabilities and dependent ones. Develop capabilities

to counteract epidemiological threats.

1.4 Increase the number and enhance the competence of health professionals and prevent

the migration of health care workers abroad, inter alia, by improving employment conditions

as well as the quality and availability of education.

1.5 Continue to develop physical culture and in particular: popularise the need to stay physically

fit to improve the health of the population in general, apply innovative methods and modalities

of sports training at all levels of education, provide support to all entities involved in physical

culture and ensure universal access to sport by financing the modernisation of the existing

and the construction of new sports and leisure infrastructure.


-----

## Migration policy

**2. Coordinating migration policy with the economic, social and security policies:**

Develop and carry out a comprehensive migration policy, coordinated with security, economic and so
cial policies, taking into account both current and projected needs of the labour market, integration

of migrants with the Polish society ensuring social cohesion as well as counteracting possible threats

to public order and security related to migration processes.


-----

## Economic security

**3. Strengthening economic security, including financial security:**

3.1 Support measures to increase resilience to international financial crises in particular

by strengthening the stability of the system of public finances while ensuring conditions

for stable and balanced economic growth.

3.2 Continue working towards a change in the structure of public expenditure in order

to increase resources for development-oriented activities.

3.3 Continue efforts to close the development gap with respect to better developed economies,

while maintaining capacity to respond flexibly to external and internal challenges.

3.4 Ensure efficient cash flows in times of disruption in the functioning of the banking system.

3.5 Strengthen the supervisory capacity and competence to counter threats related to destabilisa
tion of financial markets, speculative attack on the Polish currency or capital drain.

3.6 Strengthen instruments of supervision over financial markets, including the expansion

and intensification of cooperation between supervisory institutions and law enforcement

agencies.


-----

## Energy security

**4. Ensuring energy security of the state, based on traditional energy sources, by creating conditions**

**for the development of alternatives:**

4.1 Expand and modernise generation capacities and electricity transmission and distribution

networks to ensure the continuity of supplies, including the prevention of unexpected power

cuts. Develop dispersed electric energy sources in a sustainable manner, ensuring the adaptation

of the National Power System to the operation characteristics of these sources.

4.2 Increase diversification of oil and gas supply sources. Expand the existing natural gas import

capacities (inter alia increasing reception capacity of the LNG terminal in Świnoujście)

and build new entry points to the Polish transmission system (construction of the Baltic Pipe,

construction of the LNG terminal in the Gdańsk Bay). Continue to work on projects diver
sifying gas supplies to the countries in the region, including the Three Seas Initiative states.

Continue to work on the extension of natural gas transmission and storage systems, including

the completion of the North-South route which will lay foundations for the operation of a gas

hub in Poland.

4.3 Increase the capacity, work safety and the range of oil and fuel pipelines as well as the capaci
ty of fuel and crude oil storage facilities.

4.4 Continue diplomatic, legal and administrative efforts to halt the construction of the trans
mission infrastructure increasing the dependence of Central Europe on gas supplies from

the Russian Federation, strengthen the region’s resilience to the risk of using gas supplies

as an instrument of political pressure.


-----

## Protection of natural environment

**5. Ensuring ecological security of the state:**

5.1 Create conditions for effective enforcement of environment-related legislation.

5.2 Establish a coherent policy for the protection, restoring and management of water resources

taking into account food security of the state.

5.3 Intensify efforts to combat smog, develop electromobility and the use of alternative fuels,

support the development of energy industry based on the use of zero-emission energy sources

and improve waste management.

5.4 Adjust national policies and actions to the climate objectives agreed on in the fora of interna
tional organisations related to energy transition and achieving climate neutrality, in a way that

takes into account the specificity of the country and maximizes their positive impact on the stan
dard of living of the citizens, the economic development of the country and the competitive
ness of the economy, taking advantage of the opportunities arising from the implementation

of new energy production technologies.

5.5 Aim to preserve all functions of the natural environment, including forests as one of the key

elements of the country’s ecological safety.


-----

## Scientific and technological potential

**6. Management of human capital, scientific and technological potential for the economic deve-**

**lopment of the country:**

6.1 Provide conditions conducive to the development of innovation, inter alia, through state aid

in financing projects, their commercialization and internationalization, as well as counterac
ting the outflow of human capital and projects abroad.

6.2 Promote exact sciences in order to increase technological competence, especially

in the field of security, including defence, and the directions of education particularly desira
ble for the development of the country.

6.3 Promote the development and implementation of modern technologies and use of their

effects for national security.

6.4 Increase investment in research and development to reach the European average and enhan
ce the effectiveness of the use and commercialization of its results.


-----

## Conclusion

The mechanisms for the implementation of the provisions of the present Strategy shall be defined

in the Act on National Security Management. Pending its adoption, the Strategy shall be implemented

within the framework of the currently binding law.

The ministers in charge of the departments of government administration, heads of central offices,

province governors, local government bodies and other entities competent in the field of national se
curity shall be responsible for implementing the provisions of this Strategy. They are obliged to take

into account national interests and strategic objectives in the area of national security, included in this

Strategy, in all projects planned for implementation and in day-to-day operations.

Verification of the implementation of the tasks set out in this Strategy and development of proposals

to update it may take place as part of national security strategic reviews.


-----

-----

