THE NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY OF THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND

The national security policy of a free and democratic Poland stands out for its
enduring principles and goals. It has assured Poland of a historically exceptional
security standard based on, among other things, the North Atlantic Treaty guarantees.
The national security strategies that the Republic of Poland had adopted first in 1992
and then in 2000 reflected a continuity of the Polish national aspirations in this
respect.

But the international situation has been going through a dynamic change. New
challenges and risks have been arising, their extent being starkly revealed in the tragic
events in the USA in September 2001. Security determinants have also been changing
along the way. The upcoming accession to the European Union generates a new
context for our policy. NATO has been enlarging and transforming itself, while
strengthening its relations with Poland's eastern neighbours - Russia as well as
Ukraine. Also, international organizations and individual states are learning important
lessons from the Iraqi conflict and other international crises of the present day.

The dynamics and scale of change therefore induce a reassessment and adjustment of
Poland's strategy accordingly, as expressed in the present document.

I. New challenges

The fundamental security policy objectives of our State invariably encompass the
safeguarding of Poland's sovereignty and independence, border inviolability and
territorial integrity. The State policy promotes security of the citizens, human rights
and fundamental freedoms, democratic order, stable conditions for Poland's
civilisational and economic progress, well-being of the people, protection of national
heritage and national identity, implementation of allied commitments, defence
capability and interests of the Polish State.

Over the recent years, the European security environment has evolved in agreement
with our strategic objectives. It has shed the threat of a major military conflict in
Europe that would immediately endanger our aspirations. As a NATO Member State,
we command the solid security guarantees and we have been developing relations
with neighbours in a friendly spirit. Our sense of security will shortly gain an added
strength in our European Union membership.

The processes of enlargement of NATO and the European Union are doing away with
the last vestiges of the post-Yalta division of Europe. Some of Poland's neighbours
will soon be joining the Alliance to strengthen the regional stability. The region's
processes of transformation are consistently on course. The incidental strains that they
may touch off now and then in the political, social and ethnic life of some European
countries should not have a major adverse impact on the security system.


-----

The lingering bastions of authoritarianism in the Euro-Atlantic area give rise to a
concern.

The aftermath of the recent tensions in the Balkans is melting away and although the
normalization processes in that region are, potentially, still at risk, the threat of relapse
into an open conflict is only slight. On the other hand, the conflicts in Caucasus and
Transcaucasia are still in need of an enduring peaceful settlement.

Despite diverse threats to stability, the course of change within the European security
environment is a positive one.

However, new global challenges have appeared. They primarily stem from tensions
and instability provoked by international terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, as well as the unpredictable policies of authoritarian regimes and
the phenomenon of "failed states", which largely exacerbate the risks of international
terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass destruction. Being a member of the
Euro-Atlantic community, Poland is directly facing such concomitant risks.

This is the case, since our security increasingly depends on the outcomes of the
globalisation and fragmentation processes as they unfold in the world today. Security
challenges firstly associate with the weakening of the regulatory capabilities of states
and international organizations, widening polarities of growth and living standards of
the rich and poor countries, and the resultant public frustration and discontent.
Economic backwardness, poverty, degradation of the natural environment, lethal
disease epidemics, uncontrolled migrations and ethnic tensions tend to increasingly
erode stability of the international system.

Thus, the changes in our security environment essentially consist in a shift of
emphasis away from the classical risks (armed invasion) that decrease in importance
and towards the unconventional risks that originate also with hardly identifiable nonstate entities. Such risks might endanger the security of our citizens, facilities and
services essential to the effective governance of the State. We must keep them in
focus of attention. However, monitoring the situation for any resurgence of
conventional risks also remains a valid priority.

Of the new risks to international system and the security of individual states,
including Poland, organized international terrorism is the most serious, although the
extent of this threat to individual states is different. The aim of terrorism is to strike
out at the values, institutions and interests of the states of the Euro-Atlantic zone. The
masterminds behind it take advantage of advanced communication technologies,
freedom of movement and financial operations. Their actions are insensate and
calculated to maximize destruction.

An uncontrolled proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the means of their
delivery has become a threat to individual states, whole regions and also, under
specific circumstances, the entire global system. Several states are pushing ahead with
weapons of mass destruction capability and rocketry programs that in the years to
come can put Poland's territory within range of non-Europe-based ballistic missiles.
This risk is mounting with the increasing likelihood of terrorist and criminal
organizations' appropriating such weapons and their means of delivery.


-----

Our national security is facing a threat from organized international crime - both its
character (trafficking in arms, dangerous materials, persons and drugs) and modus
operandi (corruption, money laundering, financial system destabilization). Poland's
territory, due to its transit location, attracts a growing interest of organised
international crime gangs.

There is a growing, potential risk that foreign special services as well as terrorist,
extremist and organized crime groups can attempt to acquire unlawful access to
classified information, including data shared within allied collaboration. Risks to
Poland in the area of computer network communications become more and more real.
There is an increasing threat of operations designed to disrupt the key information
systems of government institutions and some private sector segments with an impact
on the State security system, and of operations designed to intrude into databases and
pursue disinformation.

In the long term, State security status depends also on how we cope with complex
challenges that call for measures going beyond the conventional instruments and
methods of the security strategy. The cases in point are some economic,
environmental and population problems.

A continuing challenge for Poland is to prioritise such a profile of modernisation
processes, including the structure of foreign investments, as to assure the economy of
a stable sustainable growth and to strengthen our links to the world centres of
technological progress and scientific expertise. It is in Poland's interest to work for
undisturbed global trade flows and the extension of free trade standards to our
neighbours.

The development of communications and information technologies and the
globalisation of capital markets lay them open to the risk of actions that would erode
the stability of equity markets and economies. The State shall continue to assure the
appropriate conditions to ensure effective functionality of its key economic and
financial infrastructure.

Another important challenge is that of Poland's energy security, part of which is to
diversify the supplies of energy carriers, particularly crude oil and natural gas. In our
security policy we need to take account of the fact that the worldwide increase in oil
and gas demand and prices requires looking after the security of oil and gas
production regions and transit routes.

Our continuing concern is to prevent the degradation of the natural environment,
especially in our neighbourhood, and also to avert ecological disasters that can be
brought about by man, including the prevention of accidents in nuclear power plants
and chemical works, in the transport of dangerous materials, large-scale air and water
pollution, radioactive waste contamination of surface water and soil, and of
contamination of air with heavy metals, sulphur and carbon dioxide.

Poland, as an integral part of the West, can face a rising challenge of mass migrations
from poor and underdeveloped countries, population flows that are increasingly
precipitated by conflicts, political repressions, the "failed state" phenomenon and
environmental devastation. The mounting "migration pressures" will add fuel to the


-----

illegal smuggling of and trafficking in persons. The lessons of Western states tell us
that migrations and population changes may, given a large percentage of inbound
migrants, cause shifts in the conventional social structures and touch off social and
political tensions.

II. General assumptions

Challenges in the area of security necessitate a holistic approach, as the line of
distinction between the external and internal security aspects becomes blurred. The
importance of the international factor is growing and so is the role of international
collaboration, including, in particular, one within the allied arrangements. The impact
of non-military factors, including, above all, economic, social and ecological, is
growing. The respect for universal human rights, democratic principles and the rule of
law has an essential bearing on the international security status.

Our security policy gives emphasis to the need to strengthen international
cooperation, as well as the role of international law and multilateral institutions.
International institutions are presently adjusting their ways of action to new
challenges. The adaptation of the North Atlantic Alliance to missions required for
global stability, while sustaining its classical defence capabilities, is of particular
significance to Poland's security. The international institutions' efficiency and ability
to address new challenges will have a beneficial impact on our security.

Poland shall continue its policy of active engagement in the maintenance of
international peace and security on both a regional and global scale. Our engagement
in the stabilization process in Iraq is an expression of Poland's readiness to play a
responsible international role. The taking up of the stabilization role in Iraq enhances
Poland's international standing and the due execution of the mission entrusted to us
will add to Poland's prestige and image as a responsible and dependable partner on the
international scene. At the same time, we remain aware of the fact that our active role
in the antiterrorist coalition may expose us to the risk of attacks and other hostile acts
by groups on which the international community has declared war.

The effectiveness of our security strategy depends on the congruent interoperation of
all State institutions, bodies of State authority and administration in accordance with
the powers and responsibilities assigned to them by the Polish Constitution and laws.
These institutions and bodies are facing the task of adequately adapting their working
methods to the new security challenges.

The assurance of State security in the new international circumstances calls for
increased efforts in the foreign policy sphere. The foreign policy goal is to promote a
favourable international security environment for Poland. As part of its major
objectives in this respect, Polish foreign policy will foster the proficiency of Allied
mechanisms, effectiveness of international institutions and international law, friendly
relations with partners, including neighbouring states, support for transformational
processes in Eastern and Southern Europe, improvement of the control and


-----

monitoring mechanisms to ensure the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and the means of their delivery, readiness to participate in conflict
prevention and peacekeeping operations, commitment to the international efforts for
the benefit of the natural environment, participation in actions to promote democracy
and respect for human rights.

The mission of State policy and defence system is to counter politico-military threats
and above all defend Poland's territory against any armed aggression, to secure
inviolability of the borders, to protect State bodies and public institutions and ensure
continuity of their operation, to protect population and assure its survivability in a
situation of crisis or conflict. The defence system is responsible for detection of risks,
the management of defence preparedness in peacetime, crisis response, defence of
State and participation in the allied common defence under Article 5 of the North
Atlantic Treaty. As part of defence preparedness, bodies of public administration, the
armed forces and selected entrepreneurs take part in defence planning, which includes
operational planning and programming for defence.

The size, organisation and assets of the armed forces will be continually adapted to
defence requirements, allied and international commitments and the social-economic
potential of the State. As the nature of security threats evolves, static armed forces
designed for territorial defence will be gradually phased out in favour of advanced,
mobile, highly specialised units. The nature of new risks necessitates cooperation
between the armed forces and civilian structures within the scope of response to nonmilitary threats, as well as in rescue and antiterrorist operations in the homeland and
outside its borders.

Growing in significance is the internal security sphere, which incorporates all bodies
of public administration and other social and economic entities that implement
security and defence tasks. Civil defence, special services, police, border guard, fire
fighter service, rescue units and other specialized agencies, inspection bodies and
services have responsible roles within this sector.

New challenges today dictate the need to create a comprehensive national system of
crisis response that would stand up to external as well as internal security threats.
Respective State institutions will take on the task of establishing an integrated crisis
control and management system. It becomes necessary to consistently legislate the
respective tasks and competences of State bodies and institutions, and also social
organisations involved in State security issues.

To be effective, security strategy and policy must be assured of a strong socialeconomic backup. A healthy economy is at present one the basic guarantees of
national security. The particular role of the State for this purpose is to provide the
material bedrock for implementation of defence tasks and hence to build up and
sustain national, economic and mobilisation reserves, safeguard food, energy and fuel
supplies, maintain defence infrastructures and, including an adequate defence industry
base, incorporate defence objectives in the national zoning plans and pursue state-ofthe-art research and development projects.

Competent public institutions are responsible for keeping society informed about
international security status and the likely risks to Poland, for advancing our security


-----

interests on the international scene, strengthening the patriotic attitudes and
determination of society in the face of possible threats and crises or the necessity to
deliver on the allied commitments. In peacetime, such tasks include nurturing the
citizens' awareness of their duties towards national security and defence and the
acquisition of credible information about the threats arising from potential external
offensive operations that can be of propaganda, intelligence or subversive nature.

III. Tasks of state services

1. International activity.

A. The North Atlantic Alliance. Poland is part of the allied defence system. NATO
and our bilateral political-military cooperation with the USA and other major Member
States constitute the most important guarantee of external security and stable
development of our country. Our bilateral relations with the USA also represent an
essential link of the transatlantic relationship. Active and close political and military
contacts with the USA, reinforced by cooperation in the armed intervention and
stabilisation operation in Iraq, make up a significant achievement of the Polish
security policy.

NATO is for Poland the key platform for multilateral and bilateral collaboration
within the scope of security and defence preparedness and the main pillar of politicomilitary stability on the continent. An essential task at present is to strengthen the
North-Atlantic Alliance as a plane for deeper transatlantic ties and to work out allied
decision-making procedures.

Poland supports NATO's evolution towards new missions and capabilities, while
preserving NATO's credible assets and capability for the classical collective defence
functions. These functions guarantee stability in the Euro-Atlantic region and
safeguard Poland against the likelihood of direct threats. Our country, together with
the other Allies, will participate in combating the threats of international terrorism and
other threats of the new type. NATO also needs to develop capabilities in regard to
crisis response, civil emergency planning, prevention and combating of the
consequences of "asymmetric attacks". Essential is the implementation of the allied
decisions made at the Prague Summit in 2002 and concerning the creation of a NATO
Response Force (NRF) and the streamlining of command structures in line with the
present operational requirements. Poland shall actively contribute to the
implementation of these decisions. We support the Alliance's selective engagement in
out-of-area stabilisation missions. Such missions represent in practice a new form of
Allied involvement that adds to the vitality of the Alliance. The transformations
taking place in the Alliance's missions and doctrinal message merit a profound
consideration and reflection in the NATO strategic concept.


-----

The sustained vitality of the transatlantic link guarantees the extension of the area of
democracy and stability in Europe and adjacent regions. Poland shall continue to act
in support of NATO's cohesion, including the congruence of allied interests on the
international scene, elimination of the technology gaps between the Allies' military
assets and capabilities, increased access of European states to NATO's operational
and defence capabilities and the American know-how. An enhanced responsibility of
NATO's European members is consistent with Poland's interests. It is in the same
context that one should perceive the enlargement of the Alliance by successive states
in our region. This process, with its stabilising impact on the entire continent, is in our
interest and Poland shall support its continuation as it has done so far.

Poland will take practical measures in support of deepening NATO's partnership with
Russia based on the provisions of the Founding Act and the Declaration of Rome.
This partnership should contribute to Russia's increased participation in the EuroAtlantic cooperation without any adverse impact on NATO's effectiveness and
internal decision-making process. Poland will support the fulfilment of Ukraine's
Euro-Atlantic aspirations, also as part of the continuation of NATO's "open door"
policy. This cooperation should contribute to consolidating Ukraine's meaningful role
in the European security policy. Our country also favours the strengthening of the role
of the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council and the Partnership for Peace in
safeguarding the security of South-Eastern Europe, Transcaucasia and Central Asia.
We support, too, the development of NATO's Mediterranean Initiative.

B. The European Union. Poland's accession to the Union fortifies the foundations of
Poland's broadly conceived national security. Poland is joining the EU collaborative
framework in the area of internal security and the Common Foreign and Security
Policy (CFSP), the aims of which include an effective deterrence of existing and
potential threats, consolidation of the underlying values of the Union and an influence

- through cooperation and crisis response instruments - on the shape of the
international environment, particularly within the immediate neighbourhood of the
Union. Positive effects for our security will accrue from our participation in the EU
Single Market and common trade policy, and from our use of the Union support
measures for less developed regions. This will definitely furnish propitious conditions
for Poland's economic growth and civilisational advancement, thus contributing to
Poland's reinforced security.

As a member of the Union Poland will play an active part in the CFSP mechanism.
We regard it as an opportunity to amplify our voice in international policy within the
scope of common activities by the Union. Poland shall act in favour of strengthening
the Union's role in international affairs, deepening cooperation among the Member
States, extension of the areas of common interest and actions and the further
development of the common policy instruments that the Union has at its disposal. Our
priority will also be to strive for the development of the EU Eastern Dimension, with
our simultaneous active involvement in the Union policies for other areas. We shall
also join in the EU cooperation for growth. It contributes to eliminating poverty and
other social problems that are at the root causes of threats to security.

We shall be actively participating in the development of the European Security and
Defence Policy (ESDP) as an indispensable complement to the CFSP and a
mechanism enabling the streamlining of the operational capabilities of the Member


-----

States. Poland, as a member of NATO and EU, will support the construction of
military and civil emergency capabilities within the Union as they, too, constitute
NATO's European pillar and make use of NATO resources. For its part, Poland will
endeavour to make a corresponding contribution, both military and civil, to the
Union's capabilities. Essential in this context will be a gradual harmonisation of
European procurement policies and armament market in ways to guarantee taking
advantage of the specific capabilities and experiences of all EU members. The EU
efforts in the sphere of operational capabilities and the Prague Summit defence
commitments for NATO should be mutually complementary and synergic. This will
also manifest itself in peacekeeping operations undertaken by European forces. As a
member of both organisations, Poland would like to see the growth of their permanent
and institutionalised cooperation so as to ensure full complementarity of the EU and
NATO operations. Thus, we will take and support initiatives aimed at the structural
reinforcement, collaborative and working interoperability of both organisations and
also initiatives that maximise the efficiency of use of their respective available
resources. The European security and defence identity is to assure to the EU the status
of an increasingly important partner of the USA. At the same time, however, the
American presence, including military, in Europe is to continue strengthening the
sense of security within the transatlantic and European dimension.

Poland's accession to the European Union will strengthen our capabilities to deliver
on internal security objectives, particularly those related to cooperation in justice and
home affairs, combating organized crime, terrorism, drug trafficking and other threats
of the new type. Poland intends, in particular, to join the Schengen collaborative
mechanism. The establishment of the common immigration and asylum policy is also
part of security interests of Poland as a member of the Union. The participation in the
EU procedures will enable Poland to effectively control cross-border transactions in
the scope of export and import licences and the transit of strategic goods or
technologies subject to controls.

In connection with the accession to the European Union, Poland will carry on with the
measures aimed at the strengthening of the State's legal and institutional capacity to
ensure effective fulfilment by Poland of its membership responsibilities in all of the
areas covered by the European integration.

C. United Nations and other international institutions; arms control. Poland is
invariably in favour of the UN continued responsibility, as enshrined in the UN
Charter, for the maintenance of international peace and security. To this end, Poland
will come forward with appropriate initiatives and share in the efforts designed to
adapt the Organization to new challenges and to countering the related risks,
including those arising from economic underdevelopment and social problems. It is
necessary to rid the United Nations of the weaknesses that the Iraqi crisis strikingly
exposed. Poland will contribute to developing standards that will turn international
law into an effective instrument of addressing new international challenges, including
particularly those arising from international terrorism, proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, the "failed states" phenomenon and the states that support terrorism.
This should lead to an expansion of the measures that the international community is
able to take to counter the emerging threats.


-----

Poland's part in the Iraq operation and its responsible role in the Iraqi reconstruction
and stabilisation have leveraged Poland's active position in non-European affairs.

Polish diplomacy shall step up its activity in other than European areas, join in relief
operations and take part in the dialogue of cultures and civilisations. We shall back up
the endeavours aimed at the strengthening of democracy, defence of human rights and
fundamental values across the world.

We will act in favour of reforming the United Nations, promoted by, among other
things, the initiative to adopt a New Political Act for the United Nations for the 21st
Century. Poland will support the United Nations operations aimed at solving regional
conflicts and will, in particular, offer its civilian, military and police personnel trained
for the UN peacekeeping and stabilisation missions, thereby adding to the abundant
traditions of Poland's peacekeeping role.

Our country will play an active part in strengthening the international mechanisms to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and to control international
trade in arms and in dual-use materials. We shall pursue the efficacy of the arms
control and disarmament regime and the confidence and security building measures.
Poland, together with other members of the international community, will oppose any
increases of military capabilities of the states that pose a threat to international
security, enforce the total or partial embargoes imposed on them by the UN and UE
and, if necessary, suspend any trade exchanges with such countries.

Poland will continue its involvement in the work of the OSCE, Council of Europe,
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and other
multilateral organisations and institutions. Our activity will also take the form of
comprehensive and practical regional and sub-regional cooperation with all countries
that share an interest in safeguarding security and stability in Europe and worldwide.

D. Regional aspects of security policy. Poland shall develop bilateral cooperation
with its neighbours and also other countries in the region for the benefit of all-around
stabilisation of the security situation in this part of Europe. We shall pay particular
attention to relations in this respect with the states, which have been invited to, or
declare the will to, join NATO and the EU. Poland will actively seek to direct the subregional multilateral cooperation institutions towards the issues of democratic stability
and security in Central and Eastern Europe. At the same time, we will be taking
measures against the emergence in our part of Europe of new divides that might come
in the wake of the EU and NATO enlargements.

Poland wants the development of partnership-based relations with the Russian
Federation, comes out in favour of the strengthening of Russia's cooperation with
NATO and the EU and of making the Kaliningrad District part of various forms of
pan-European collaboration in the spheres of security, economy and human contacts.
In recognising Ukraine's importance for the European security and supporting its
European aspirations, Poland will make its best to fill with real substance the formula
of strategic partnership with that country.


-----

2. The armed forces

The Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland serve to assure Poland's security and to
offer allied assistance under Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty. Their purpose, too,
is to protect the Polish interests and to build Poland's position in NATO and the
European Union.

The national defence role of the Armed Forces consists in the adequate preparation
and use of the assets and means available to them to counter any threats to the
national security and to safeguard Poland's interests. At the same time, the Armed
Forces of the Republic of Poland share in the implementation of the allied
commitments and assuring the collective security in Europe pursuant to the
international agreements and within the organisations that Poland is a member of. The
Armed Forces act together to enforce security in situations of threats of terrorist
attacks on Poland's territory and take part in NATO's area and out-of-area operations
as part of the antiterrorist coalition.

The fundamental mission of the Polish Armed Forces in peacetime is to maintain the
assets and capabilities needed to safeguard and assure Poland's security and to extend
to the civilian authorities indispensable military assistance, mainly in case of nonmilitary threats (natural disasters and catastrophes).

Poland's membership in NATO entails the necessity to develop allied interoperability,
to deliver on capabilities as appropriate within the agreed national specialisation and
to be ready to build defence preparedness through the international collaborative
effort.

Poland's Armed Forces are part of the security assurance process in Poland's
immediate neighbourhood and the entire European territory through an expanded
military cooperation with other states. They participate in consolidating the
international order by sharing in military stabilisation operations, mainly as part of the
United Nations, OCSE, NATO and UE, as well as ad hoc coalitions.

In order to guarantee the practical effectiveness of their mission, Poland's Armed
Forces need to improve their operational capabilities within the scope of:

- protecting forces against the weapons of mass destruction,

- enhancing military command systems, including the security of command and
control systems as well as information superiority,

- ensuring the effectiveness of combat operations and the attainment of the required
standards by the deployable armed forces,

- assuring the possibility of rapid deployment and sustained support of combat units.

The Forces on High Stand-by status and selected units of Forces on the Stand-by
status must be assured of state-of-the-art armament and military equipment
corresponding to NATO standards.


-----

The armed forces have the obligation to come up with and maintain an expeditionary
force capability for crisis-response and peacekeeping operations in and out of Poland,
conducted under the aegis of NATO, EU and the United Nations.

The Strategic Defence Reviews responding to specific needs will serve to define
Poland's defence requirements and to adapt its armed forces to changing scenarios and
new challenges.

3. Intelligence

Due to the nature of new risks to the national security, the special role of intelligence
services consists, among other things, in:

- acquisition, analysis, processing and delivering to the relevant authorities of
information that may be of essential importance to Poland's security and international
position, economic potential and defence capability;

- identifying external threats to Poland's security, defence, independence and
territorial inviolability, and the countering of such threats;

- uncovering other-than-governmental entities that pursue, instigate or fund
international terrorist activities, are engaged in organised crime or are of extremist
nature;

- uncovering international trafficking in arms, ammunition, explosives, drugs and
goods, technologies and services of strategic significance to national security, as well
as detecting international trafficking in weapons of mass destruction and the threats of
proliferation of such weapons and the means of their delivery;

   - identifying and analysing the risks that occur in regions of tension, conflicts
and international crises and taking actions designed to eliminate such risks.

4. Internal aspects of security

Assuring the citizens of security and the protection of the national property and
borders of Poland increasingly come within the remit of institutions and services
active in the sphere of internal security of the State. The threats of the new type
essentially are such that whereas their origins frequently reside in geographically
remote places, they can materialise on the country's territory following an
uncontrolled penetration of its borders. For this reason, the internal aspect of the State
security grows in significance. The tasks of the State within this sphere include:
strengthening of the public order and the institutions that enforce it; measures against
the organised and common crime so as to improve the citizens' sense of security;
protection of the population against the threats and consequences of natural disasters,
ecological catastrophes and biohazards such as unidentified and incurable disease
epidemics; assurance of the efficient and effective protection of the State border in


-----

compliance with our international obligations, especially arising from our integration
with the EU.

The Police will implement the basic tasks of ensuring security of the citizens. To this
end, appropriate legislative solutions will be enacted, reorganisation and ITenablement of the Police will continue, and also, to increase the Police success rate,
the local self-governments will have their powers and responsibilities in combating
crime precisely determined within the territorial arrangement. Another indispensable
factor of the improved public security programme will be the raising of public
involvement and civic awareness of the need to improve the internal security
standards locally and nationwide.

Legislative activity will lead to adequate legal regulatory provisions to enable
effective operations by all institutions and services appointed to prevent and combat
crime.

The purpose of the Police organisational reform will be to increase the number of
Police officers assigned to preventive patrolling (beat) services and investigative
proceedings, to augment the mobility of Police forces and to rationalise their
deployment on the national scale. In parallel, the Police work will be comprehensively
computerised to enable fast access to the indispensable data and to unify the Police
communications system.

The Polish Police will participate in international institutions for police cooperation,
particularly in Interpol and Europol, and will also develop capabilities with a view to
participating in international policing operations in crisis-stricken areas.

An important factor of improving the success rate of the Police work is the precise
definition of the self-governments' powers and responsibilities in combating crime.
The assessment of the actual crime threat and the decisions and responsibility for the
deployment of the law enforcement forces remain within the competence of the selfgovernment authorities, which must be assured of adequate financial resources to this
end. Non-government organisations and other forms of civil activity should be invited
to collaborate with the Police and self-governments, notably in the scope of awareness
building and crime prevention.

Special services, including counterintelligence, discharge responsible functions within
the internal security. They implement, in compliance with the law in force the main
tasks associated with Poland's internal security assurance, particularly through such
activities as:

ˇ identification, prevention and combating of threats to the internal security and
constitutional order, notably the sovereignty, territorial inviolability and defence
capability of the State;

ˇ detection and combating of terrorist crime, espionage and breaches of State secrets
directed against the economic foundations of the State, of corruption of persons
holding important public functions; the crime related to the manufacturing of and
trade in goods, technologies and services of strategic importance to the national
security; the crime of illicit manufacturing, possession and trade in arms, munitions


-----

and explosives, weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery, narcotic
drugs;

ˇ operations linked to the counterintelligence protection of Poland, particularly in the
scope of responsibility for the functional viability of strategic elements of the
economic-defence infrastructure;

ˇ combating, in conjunction with the police and other State services, of the transfrontier threats to the national security;

ˇ implementation - as part of protection of classified information, including the one
shared within the allied and international cooperation - of the tasks belonging to the
State protection service and the national security authority as laid down in the
respective laws and international agreements.

Protection of government information and telecommunication infrastructure. The
fight against the threats posed to the government information systems and networks is
within the competence of specialised units established by the State civilian and
military services. Their mission is to combat cyber crime directed against the
government and self-government telecommunications infrastructure and to head off
any attacks on its components.

To ensure adequate protection of this infrastructure, it is necessary to develop and
maintain the capability to prevent any disturbances that may arise in this sphere, as
well as the capability to coordinate investigative proceedings within the institutions
that are in possession of the government information infrastructure components.
Appointed services will take the relevant measures jointly with the allies, as well as
the producers and vendors of government information hardware and software,
national telecom carriers and the Internet service providers, research and training
centres.

For these actions to be effective it is necessary to give priority to the development and
application of the indigenous encryption technologies and to adjust accordingly the
telecommunications Act provisions, which, given the speed of technological progress,
may become insufficient for ensuring the security of the sensitive government
information infrastructure.

An important role in assuring security of the population, fixed property and, more
broadly, security of the State, is being played by State offices, agencies, inspection
bodies, guards and other specialised services. Among them is the Border Guard, the
Fire Fighter Service, including its voluntary detachments, the national rescue system,
notably medical rescue, the marine search and rescue services.

The special role of the Border Guard results from its mission, which is to effectively
protect the State border. The high requirements that the Border Guard should meet in
its work also derive from the provisions of the Schengen Agreement, which will be
binding for Poland, as well as the intensity, and specificity of the challenges and risks
originating in the Euro-Asian zone.


-----

The legal regulatory provisions enacted over the recent time lay down the groundwork
for implementing a civil emergency response system that will make use of the crisis
response teams operating at all levels of the government administration and selfgovernment authorities. The follow-up development of the civil security legislation
should enhance the self-governments' and central government's capability to resolve
problems in both normal conditions and contingencies and to work together for this
purpose. Measures will also be introduced to create the legislative basis for a single
nationwide rescue system, which will embrace all agencies needed for the conduct of
rescue operations. A long-term programme headlined "Civil Security 2004-2007" will
be elaborated to coordinate the relevant activities by the government and selfgovernment bodies.

IV. Economic foundations of the state security

The democratic stability and security of the State must rest on firm economic and
civilisational foundations, which, on one hand, condition the provision of resources
for the security policy in its external aspect and, on the other hand, generate the
necessary components of the State's stability, national identity and civilisational
vitality and constitute the premises for its international position as a desirable ally and
partner.

1. Finance.

The public budget and finance have to ensure the indispensable level and stability of
expenditures on the measures to safeguard the national security.

The State will act to keep the public finances in good condition, i.e. mainly to
maintain a balanced budget and to manage the domestic and foreign debt of the State
Treasury at a secure level, and also to make optimised and stable financial
appropriations to the areas connected with the defence preparedness and security of
the State.

The State will also take measures conducive to creating conditions for the security
and stability of the structure of payments in foreign trade, particularly to attain and
maintain an enduring equilibrium of the balance of payments, assure a steady flow of
foreign direct investments into Poland and to maintain and manage foreign exchange
reserves.

The implementation of the tasks linked to the financial aspects of national security
requires that the public authorities pursue a policy of enduring economic growth,
adaptation and streamlining of legal regulations to strengthen the public finance
discipline and effectively use public funds, develop the right regulatory regime for
payments in foreign trade and the disclosure of funds originating in crime. This
process also requires making proper use of the membership in international financial


-----

and economic institutions, analytical work to monitor developments that affect the
State budget and public finance, early warning against crises and the application of
broad preventive measures in financial security by continuously improving the legal
rules for public finance discipline and the prevention of financial-fiscal offences.

An essential element of the State security policy will be a further improvement of the
legal and organisational system of combating the entry into legal transactions of the
proceeds from crime (dirty money laundering) and of combating the funding of
terrorism.

2. Economy.

A stable economic growth and technological progress are among the key factors of
assuring the general security of the State and represent indispensable components of
the national defence capability. Other essential elements of the economic aspect of
national security are: trade in goods and services of strategic importance, defence
industry development path, energy security and technological security.

Poland will expand the internal system of export controls for goods, technologies and
services of strategic significance. The functional efficiency and effectiveness of the
system requires close cooperation by all competent State offices, agencies and
services, as well as cooperation and information sharing between the enterprises
concerned and the government administration.

Poland's energy security requires, among other things, an import policy towards
energy carriers that will reduce the structural external dependence of our country,
enable a diversification of the import structure and directions, safeguard reliability of
the supplies, ensure favourable contractual prices and clauses. It will also be
necessary to observe the relevant standards and requirements related to Poland's
membership in the EU and NATO including, among other things, the stockpiling and
storage of strategic reserves of crude oil and natural gas. Equally important to the
energy security of the State is the condition of national infrastructure, including the
technical viability and functional efficiency of facilities and transport systems,
transmission and distribution of fuels and energy and the level of stocks.

The defence industry is integral to the national security system. The general principle
of the Polish security policy in this respect is to possess an advanced defence industry
that is - alongside the Armed Forces - one of the fundamental factors of national
independence and the indispensable prerequisite of the implementation of Poland's
security strategy. To play this role, the defence industry needs to develop links to
other economic sectors and the national scientific-technological potential.

Poland's defence industry will develop according to the size and type of defence
requirements as defined by the programme for armed forces modernisation,
programmes for the development of non-military ramifications of the defence system,
undertaken allied commitments, agreed specialisation within NATO, procurement
based on large strategic contracts and their related off-set deals and programmes, as
well as by export opportunities. Orders to produce the range of armament, hardware


-----

and equipment of key significance to our defence preparedness, will be placed with
national manufacturers.

To make sure that the defence industry meets the quality standards for products and
defence infrastructure, Poland will continue restructuring it by way of consolidation,
co-production system and close links to domestic scientific centres. Such restructuring
projects will also promote the participation of Poland's defence industry in industrial
and research programmes and structures of other NATO and EU countries.

3. Infrastructure.

Activities in favour of maintaining the Polish infrastructure up to standard are among
the prerequisites of ensuring an adequate defence capacity and security of the country,
both internally and externally. In the coming years, the State will have to step up its
efforts to modernise the transport infrastructure, to include the construction of
motorways and expressways, sustainable development of the rail transport,
construction of airports and landing zones as well as the navigation system, changes
in the structure and volume of cargo handling in the marine and inland shipping and
the land-sea transport and logistics flows.

It will be necessary to intensify the work to provide infrastructure on Poland's eastern
border, which will become an external border of the EU area. Also among the
priorities is the establishment of an adequate number of logistics centres in the
vicinity of the eastern and western borders and in the middle of Poland.

An effort will be made - in indispensable cooperation with the respective ministries
and agencies - to develop state-of-the-art communications, including an efficient and
secure government information infrastructure, and to lay down the conditions for
building the information society.

4. Natural environment.

To be assured of ecological security, Poland will continue its activities in favour of
environmental protection, being guided by the principle of sustainable development,
so as to preserve a balanced wildlife and basic natural processes in the biosystem. We
will also be implementing a biological security system.

Poland will continue to play an active part in the international cooperation for
environment protection, including the assurance of this country's ecological security,
particularly in the context of the trans-frontier pollution of air, water and the
consequences of industrial and transport accidents. Poland will take part in regional
cooperation, in the implementation of action programmes elaborated by the EU,
United Nations and the OECD, and also, within its possibilities, in the solving of
global ecological problems. Poland will implement at length the relevant international
obligations that it has accepted.


-----

5. Civic education.

The education of society is an essential condition of democratic stability and enduring
security of the State in a world marked by accelerated processes of modernisation and
globalisation. The State will provide the conditions for raising the overall and
specialist education standards of Poland's society to assure us of a due share in the
worldwide scientific research and technology progress. This task includes the training
of high-class specialists in response to Poland's defence and security requirements. It
is indispensable to develop various forms of civic education to include the nurturing
of antiterrorist attitudes in order to render the society sensitive to the State security
requirements associated with the new types of challenges and threats. The public
media, non-government and self-government organisations have a corresponding part
to play in this process.

The citizens' identification with their State is an important pillar of a stable and secure
democracy. Thus, it is necessary to expand society's participation in democratic
procedures and in the efforts initiated by the competent bodies of public
administration to reduce poverty and structural unemployment and to proactively
solve difficult social problems.

- * *

The present National Security Strategy of the Republic of Poland is both the basis of
and point of departure for individual sectoral strategies in areas of fundamental
importance to the security and defence preparedness of the State.

Its substance and implementation will be subject to a regular review in accordance
with the constitutional tasks of the bodies of State authority. It will also be modified
and supplemented in step with the evolving determinants of Poland's national
security.

Warsaw, 22 July 2003


-----

