# Rustrans

#### Useful translations


**[Create account or Sign in](javascript:;)**

|Search this site|Search|
|---|---|


[Translations](javascript:;) [contact](http://rustrans.wikidot.com/contact)


1. Russia has overcome the consequences of the systemic political and socio-economic crisis of
the end of the 20th century — having stopped the decline in the quality of life of Russian citizens;
withstood the pressures of nationalism, separatism and international terrorism; prevented the
discreditation of the constitutional form of government; preserved its sovereignty and territorial
integrity; and restored the country's potential to enhance its competitiveness and defend its
national interests as a key player within evolving multipolar international relations.
Russia is pursuing a state policy of national defense, state and social security, and stable
development, which responds adequately to internal and external conditions. The preconditions
for reinforcing the system of national security have been created, and the relevant legal space
has been consolidated. Priority issues in the economic sphere have been resolved, and the
attractiveness of the economy for investment has grown. Authentically Russian ideals and
spirituality are being born, alongside a dignified attitude to historical memory. Social harmony is
being formed on the basis of shared values — the freedom and independence of the Russian
state, humanism, the peaceful coexistence and cultural unity of Russia's multinational
population, respect for family traditions, and patriotism.
Overall, the preconditions have been formed for the reliable pre-emption of internal and external
threats to national security, as well as for the dynamic development and transformation of Russia
into a world leader with regards to the level of technological progress, quality of life, and influence
over global affairs.
In the context of the globalisation of processes of world development, as well as of international
political and economic relations, which creates new threats and risks to the development of the
individual, society, and the state, Russia is transitioning to a new state national security policy,
as a guarantee of successful national development.

2. The main directions of the national security policy of the Russian Federation are the [socalled] strategic national priorities, in the form of important social, political and economic
transformations intended to create secure conditions for the realisation of Russian citizens'
constitutional rights and freedoms, the stable development of the country, and the preservation of
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the state.

3. The national security strategy of the Russian Federation until 2020 is an officially
acknowledged system of strategic priorities, goals and measures with regards to domestic and
foreign policy, which determine the degree of national security and the level of stable, long-term
development of the state.
Conceptual assumptions in the area of ensuring national security are based on the fundamental
interconnectedness and interdependence of the National Security Strategy of the Russian
Federation to 2020 and the Concept for Long-Term Socio-Economic Development of the Russian
Federation to 2020.

4. The given Strategy forms the basis of the development of a system ensuring the national
security of the Russian Federation, and presents a plan of action and measures intended to

|Welcome How to join this site Site members Recent changes List all pages Site Manager Page tags It seems you have no tags attached to pages. To attach a tag simply click on the tags button at the bottom of any page. Add a new page new page edit this panel|Russia's National Security Strategy to 2020 As far as I can tell, this is the only non-machine-translated version currently on the web (NB this was back in 2009, now the official Kremlin version is up as well). Judging from the feedback I've had, it's a pretty accurate translation and should be sufficient to give the reader an idea of the contents of this important document. All are welcome to contribute suggestions and make changes on the page where the Russian text is juxtaposed with the English. Approved By Decree of the President Of the Russian Federation 12 May 2009 No. 537 National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation to 2020 I. General Provisions 1. Russia has overcome the consequences of the systemic political and socio-economic crisis of the end of the 20th century — having stopped the decline in the quality of life of Russian citizens; withstood the pressures of nationalism, separatism and international terrorism; prevented the discreditation of the constitutional form of government; preserved its sovereignty and territorial integrity; and restored the country's potential to enhance its competitiveness and defend its national interests as a key player within evolving multipolar international relations. Russia is pursuing a state policy of national defense, state and social security, and stable development, which responds adequately to internal and external conditions. The preconditions for reinforcing the system of national security have been created, and the relevant legal space has been consolidated. Priority issues in the economic sphere have been resolved, and the|
|---|---|


-----

g y, y

5. The main purpose of the given Strategy is to formulate and support, with the aid of national
security forces, the internal and external conditions conducive to the implementation of strategic
national priorities.

6. The given Strategy employs the following concepts:
"national security" - the protection of the individual, society and the state from domestic and
foreign threats, which in turn ensures constitutional rights and freedoms, an appropriate quality of
life for citizens, sovereignty, territorial integrity and stable development of the Russian federation,
the defense and security of the state;
"national interests of the Russian Federation" — the aggregate of the internal and external needs
of the state in ensuring the protection and stable development of the individual, society and the
state;
"threat to national security" — the direct or indirect possibility of damage to constitutional rights
and freedoms, quality of life, sovereignty/territorial integrity, stable development of the RF,
defense and security of the state;
"strategic national priorities" — the most important directions in terms of ensuring national
security, in accordance with which are realised the constitutional rights and freedoms of RF
citizens, stable socio-economic development, and the protection of the country's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity;
"system of national security" — the forces and means which ensure national security
"forces of national security" — the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, other troops,
military formations and bodies which under federal legislation are designated as engaging in
military and/or law enforcement service, and likewise federal organs of state power which
participate in the provision of national security on the basis of legislation of the Russian
Federation;
"means of ensuring national security" — technologies, and likewise technical, programming,
linguistic, legal, and organisational resources, including telecommunications channels, which are
used within the system of provision of national security in order to collect, formulate, process,
transmit or receive information on the status of national security and measures for its
reinforcement.

7. The forces and means which ensure national security concentrate their efforts and resources
on the provision of national security in the political, economic and social spheres, in the areas of
science and education, in the intercultural, spiritual, informational, military, military-industrial and
ecological spheres, and likewise in the area of social security.

II. Russia and the modern world: Current conditions and trends of development

8. World development is following the path of globalisation in all spheres of international life,
which in turn is characterised by a high degree of dynamism and interdependence of events.
Nation-states have experienced the intensification of conflicts connected to unequal
development, as a result of globalising processes, and of the deepening rift between rich and
poor countries. Values and models of development have become the subject of global
competition.
The vulnerability of all members of the international community to new threats and challenges
has grown.
As a result of the rise of new centres of economic growth and political influence, a qualitatively
new geopolitical situation is unfolding. There is an increasing tendency to seek resolutions to
existing problems and regulate crisis situations on a regional basis, without the participation of
non-regional powers.
The inadequacy of the current global and regional architecture, oriented (particularly in the EuroAtlantic region) towards NATO, and likewise the imperfect nature of legal instruments and
mechanisms, create an ever-increasing threat to international security.

9. The transition in the international system from opposing blocs to principles of multivector
diplomacy, together with Russia's resource potential and pragmatic policy for its use, have
broadened the possibilities for the Russian Federation to reinforce its influence on the world
stage.
The Russian Federation has sufficient potential to count on the creation, in the medium-term, of
conditions conducive to its entrenchment among the leaders of the world economy, on the basis
of effective participation in global division of labour, improved global competitiveness of the
national economy, of defense potential, and of the level of state and social security.

10. A negative influence on the assurance of Russia's national interests will be exerted by the
likely recurrence of one-sided use of force in international relations, disagreements between the


-----

g, p g gy g gg

intensify, threats will increase to the stability of industrialised and developing countries, their
socio-economic development and democratic institutions. Nationalist sentiments, xenophobia,
separatism and violent extremism will grow, including under the banner of religious radicalism.
The global demographic situation and environmental problems will become more acute, and
threats associated with uncontrolled and illegal migration, drug and human trafficking, and other
forms of transnational organised crime, will also increase. Epidemics caused by new, previously
unknown viruses are likely to spread. The deficit of fresh water will become more obvious.

11. In the long term, the attention of international politics will be focused on ownership of energy
resources, including in the Near East, the Barents Sea shelf and other parts of the Arctic, in the
Caspian basin, and in Central Asia.
In the medium term, the situation in Iraq and Afghanistan, as well as conflicts in the Near and
Middle East, in a number of South Asian and African countries, and on the Korean peninsula, will
continue to exert a negative influence on the international situation.

12. The critical condition of physical storage of dangerous materials and objects, especially in
countries with unstable political situations, together with the proliferation of regular armaments
beyond the control of the state, can lead to the intensification of existing, as well as the creation
of new regional and interstate conflicts.
Under conditions of competition for resources, it is not excluded that arising problems may be
resolved using military force, and that the current balance of power on the borders of Russia and
its allies may be disturbed.
There is an increasing risk that the number of countries possessing nuclear weapons will rise.
The possibility of maintaining global and regional stability will substantially decrease with the
placement in Europe of elements of the global missile defense system of the United States of
America.
The consequences of global financial-economic crises may become comparable, in terms of
overall losses, to the consequences of large-scale application of military force.

13. In the long term, the Russian Federation will seek to construct international relations based
on the principles of international law, and on the institution of reliable and equal security of
nation-states.
For the defense of its national interests, Russia, while remaining within the boundaries of
international law, will implement a rational and pragmatic foreign policy, one which excludes
expensive confrontation, including a new arms race.
Russia perceives the United Nations and the Security Council of the United Nations as a central
element of a stable system of international relations, at the basis of which lie respect, equal
rights and mutually beneficial cooperation among nations, resting on civilised political
instruments for the resolution of global and regional crisis situations.
Russia will increase its interaction with multilateral fora such as the G8, G20, RIC
(Russia/India/China), BRIC (Brazil/Russia/India/China), and will likewise capitalise on the
potential of other informal international institutions.
The development of bilateral and multilateral cooperation with member states of the
Commonwealth of Independent States is a priority direction of Russian foreign policy. Russia will
seek to develop the potential for regional and subregional integration and coordination among
member-states of the CIS, first of all within the framework of the Commonwealth, and also the
CSTO and EvrAzEs, which exert a stabilising influence on the overall situation in the regions
bordering on the CIS.
Moreover, the CSTO is regarded as the main interstate instrument for responding to regional
threats and challenges of a military-political or military-strategic nature, including the fight with
illegal trafficking in narcotic and psychotropic sybstances.

14. Russia will promote the strengthening of EvrAzEs as the nucleus of economic integration,
and instrument of assistance to the realisation of major hydropower, infrastructural, industrial and
other joint projects having a primarily regional significance.

15. Of particular significance for Russia will be the reinforcement of the political potential of the
SCO, and the stimulation within its framework of practical steps towards the enhancement of
mutual trust and partnership in the Central Asian region.

16. The Russian Federation is in favour strengthening the mechanisms of cooperation with the
European Union by all possible means, including the continued formation of common spaces in
the economic, educational, scientific and cultural spheres, and in terms of internal and external
security. The long-term national interests of Russia are served by the creation of an open system
of Euro-Atlantic collective security, on a clear legal and treaty basis.


-----

functions that go counter to norms of international law, are unacceptable to Russia.
Russia is prepared to develop relations with NATO on the basis of equality and in the interests of
strengthening the general security of the Euro-Atlantic region. The content and depth of these
relations will be determined by the preparedness of the alliance to recognise Russia's legal
interests when engaging in military-political planning, and to respect norms of international law;
and likewise NATO's readiness to consider the further transformation of these relations and the
search for new tasks and functions with a humanist [humane?] orientation.

18. Russia will strive to build an equitable and valuable strategic partnership with the United
States of America, on the basis of shared interests and taking into account the key influence of
Russian-American relations on the international situation as a whole. In terms of priorities, these
will continue to be the achievement of new agreements in the sphere of disarmament and arms
control, the reinforcement of confidence building measures, and likewise the resolution of issues
surrounding non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the development of antiterrorist
cooperation, and the regulation of regional conflicts.

19. In the sphere of international security, Russia will maintain its adherence to the use of
political, legal, economic, military and other instruments to defend state sovereignty and national
interests.
The execution of a predictable and open foreign policy is inextricably tied to the realisation of
Russia's stable development. The successful integration of Russia into the global economic
space and the international division of labour is inhibited by the slow pace of transition of the
national economy towards an innovation-based development trajectory.

20. For the prevention of threats to national security, it is essential to guarantee social stability,
ethnic and denominational harmony, increase the mobilisation potential and growth of the
national economy, as well as improve the quality of work performed by state bodies and
formulate effective mechanisms for their interaction with civil society, in order to realise the right
of every Russian citizen to life, security, work, housing, health and a healthy way of life,
accessible education and cultural development.

III. National interests of the Russian Federation and Strategic National Priorities

21. The national interests of the Russian Federation in the long term consist of the following:
developing democracy and civil society, and the enhancement of the competitiveness of the
national economy;
ensuring the solidity of the constitutional system, territorial integrity, and sovereignty of the
Russian Federation;
transforming the Russian Federation into a world power, whose activity is directed at supporting
the strategic stability and mutually beneficial partner relationships within the multipolar world.

22. The internal and external sovereign needs of the state with regards to ensuring national
security are realised via the strategic national priorities.

23. The main national security priorities of the Russian Federation are national defense, state
and social security.

24. In order to ensure national security, the Russian Federation, as well as achieving the basic
priorities of national security, concentrates its efforts and resources on the following priorities of
stable development:
increasing the quality of life of Russian citizens by guaranteeing individual security, high
standards of living, and economic growth which is achieved first and foremost by developing a
national system of innovation and by investing in human capital;
science, technology, education, health care and culture, which are developed by reinforcing the
role of the state and improving public-private partnership;
ecology of living systems and rational resource use, supported by balanced consumption,
development of progressive technologies, and expedient use of the country's resources;
strategic stability and equitable strategic partnership, on the basis of Russia's active participation
in the development of the multipolar model of the international system.

IV. Ensuring national security

25. The main components of the provision of national security consist of the maintenance of legal
and institutional mechanisms, and likewise of the resources of the state and society, at a level
corresponding to the national interests of the Russian Federation.
The state of national security of the Russian Federation is directly dependent on the economic
potential of the country and the effectiveness of the system of provision of national security.


-----

g, g g

ensuring the country's military security.
Strategic deterrence presupposes the development and systemic realisation of a range of
interconnected political, diplomatic, military, economic, informational and other measures,
intended to forestall or reduce the threat of destructive action on the part of a state aggressor
(coalition of states).
Strategic deterrence is realised with the use of the state's economic resources, including support
for the forces providing national security, by means of the development of a system of militarypatriotic education of Russian citizens, and likewise of military infrastructure and administration
systems for the state military organisation.

27. The Russian Federation provides national defense on the basis of principles of reasonable
sufficiency and effectiveness, including by means of non-military response, mechanisms of
public diplomacy and peacekeeping, and international military cooperation.

28. Military security is ensured by developing and improving the military organisation and
defensive potential of the state, and likewise the allocation of sufficient financial, material and
other resources for this purpose.
The strategic objectives of national defense are realised by developing the system of national
security, implementing a long-term military-technological policy and developing military
infrastructure, and likewise by improving the system of administration of the state military
organisation and by realising a range of measures increasing the prestige of military service.

29. The long-term state policy of the Russian Federation in the area of national defense and
military construction, including within the framework of the Union State [with Belarus], is oriented
towards the improvement of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, other troops, military
formations and bodies, called upon to ensure the security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the state, under any given conditions of the military-political environment.

30. Threats to military security include the policies of a number of leading foreign countries,
directed at achieving predominant superiority in the military sphere, primarily in terms of strategic
nuclear forces, but also by developing high-precision, informational and other high-technology
means of conducting armed warfare, strategic non-nuclear arms, by unilaterally creating a gobal
missile defense system and militarising space, which could lead to a new arms race, and
likewise policies directed at the proliferation of nuclear, chemical, and biological technologies,
and the production of weapons of mass destruction, their delivery systems or components.
Negative influences on the military security of the Russian Federation and its allies are
aggravated by the departure from international agreements pertaining to arms limitation and
reduction, and likewise by actions intended to disrupt the stability of systems of government and
military administration, rocket attack warning systems, control of outer space, the functioning of
strategic nuclear forces, nuclear weapons storage facilities, nuclear energy, nuclear and
chemical industry, and other potentially dangerous sites.

31. The Russian Federation realises the long-term state policy of national defense by developing
a system of foundational conceptual documents, and likewise of documents concerned with
planning and developing norms of legal regulation of state bodies, of institutions, enterprises and
organisations of the real economy, and of civil society institutions, in times of peace and war;
and moreover with the improvement of the forces and means of civil defense, as well as the
country's communication networks and transport infrastructure in the interests of national
defense.

32. The main challenge of strengthening national defense in the medium term is the transition
towards a qualitatively new profile for the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, while
maintaining the potential of the strategic nuclear forces, by improving the organisational staff
structure and system of territorially-based troops and forces, increasing the number of divisions
at constant readiness, and likewise improving operations and combat training, as well as
improving the organisation of interaction among different troops and forces.
To this end, the recruitment system of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, other
troops, military formations and bodies is being clarified, including personnel training and
development of relevant infrastructure; optimal standby mechanisms are being developed; the
prestige of military service and officers' status is being enhanced; and likewise government
programmes and contracts are being executed for the development, creation and modernisation
of arms, military and specialist technology, including means of communication, reconnaissance,
electronic warfare and control [command?].

33. In the medium term, the transition towards a single system of contracts by the federal organs
of executive power for armaments, military and specialist technology to supply the Armed Forces


-----

g pp

reserve should be achieved, and likewise collaboration with other states in the area of military
security.

34. The restructuring, optimisation and development of the military-industrial complex of the
Russian Federation in the medium term corresponds to the resolution of challenges regarding the
comprehensive and timely provision of modern armaments and specialised technology to the
Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, other troops, military formations and bodies.

2. State and public security

35. Strategic national security objectives in the sphere of state and public security are the
protection of Russia's constitutional system, of the basic rights and freedoms of the individual
and the citizen, of the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the Russian
Federation, and likewise the preservation of civil peace, political and social stability.

36. For the provision of national security in the domain of long-term state and public security, the
Russian Federation starts from the necessity of constant improvements to law enforcement
measures for the exposure, prevention, disruption and discovery of acts of terrorism, extremism,
and other criminal infringements on the rights and freedoms of the individual and the citizen, on
property, social order and public security, and on the constitutional system of the Russian
Federation.

37. The main threats to national security in the sphere of state and public security are as follows:
investigative or other activity by the special services and organisations of foreign countries, and
likewise by individual persons, directed at causing harm to the security of the Russian
Federation;
the activity of terrorist organisations, groups and individuals, directed at violent changes to the
constitutional system of the Russian Federation, the disruption of normal functioning of state
bodies (including violent action against governmental, political and social actors), the destruction
of military or industrial sites, enterprises and institutions providing for vital social activities, and
intimidation of the population, including by means of nuclear and chemical weapons or
dangerous radioactive, chemical and biological substances;
the extremist activity of nationalist, religious, ethnic or other organisations and structures,
directed at destroying the unity and territorial integrity of the RUssian Federation, destabilisation
of the interla political and social situation in the country;
the activity of transnational criminal organisations and groupings, connected to illegal trafficking
of narcotic and psychotropic substances, weapons, ammunition and explosive substances;
the persistent growth of criminal acts, directed against the individual, property, state power,
public and economic security, and likewise acts connected to corruption.

38. The main long-term directions of state policy in the sphere of state and public security must
be the reinforcement of the role of the state as guarantor of the security of the indivdual, first of all
children and adolescents; the imrpovement of normative legal regulation of the fight against and
prevention of criminality, corruption, terrorism and extremism; more effective defense of the rights
and lawful interests of Russian citizens abroad; and the expansion of global collaboration in law
enforcement.

39. Long-term state and public security will likewise be supported by the increased effectiveness
of law-enforcement organs and special services, by the creation of a single state system for the
prevention of criminality (first of all concerning minors) and of other unlawful acts, a system which
will encompass monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of law enforcement practises, and
developing and applying special measures directed at reducing the level of corruption and
criminalisation of social relations.

40. In order to ensure state and public security:
the structures and activity of federal organs of executive power are being improved, a National
Anticorruption Plan is being implemented, a system of discovery and response to the global
threats and crises of modernity is being developed, including international and national terrorism,
political and religious extremsim, nationalism and ethnic separatism;
mechanisms for the forecasting and neutralisation of social and interethnic conflicts are being
created;
a long-term concept for the comprehensive development and improvement of law-enforcement
organs and special services is being formulated, social guarantees for their employees are being
strengthened, scientific-technical support for law enforcement activity is being improved,
promising specialist means and technologies are being adopted, a system of professional cadre
training is being developed in the areaof state and public security;


-----

pp y p p ;

the social responsibility of bodies providing state and public security is being increased.

41. One of the conditions of national security is the reliable defense and protection of the state
borders of the Russian Federation.
The main threats to the border-related interests and security of the Russian Federation are the
presence and possible escalation of armed conflicts near its state borders, and the
Security threats to borders include the activity of international terrorist and extremist
organisations which base their emissaries and terrorist means in Russia and organise sabotage
on Russian territory, and likewise the increased activity of transnational criminal groupings
engaged in the illegal transfer across the Russian border of narcotic and psychotropic
substances, goods and cargo, water and biological resources, other material and cultural
valuables, and in the organisation of channels for illegal migration.
A negative effect on the reliable defense and protection of Russia's state borders is exerted by
the insufficient level of development of border infrastructure and of technological equipment for
border-related bodies.

42. The resolution of border security problems is achieved by creating high-technology and
multifunctional border complexes, particularly on the borders with the Republic of Kazakhstan,
Ukraine, Georgia and Azerbaijan, and likewise by increasing the effectiveness of state border
defense, particularly in the Arctic zone of the Russian Federation, the Far East and on the
Caspian.

43. The provision of national security in emergency situations is achieved by improving and
developing a single public warning and relief system for emergency situations of both a natural
and man-made character (comprising territorial and functional segments), and integrating it with
analogous systems abroad.
The resolution of national security challenges in emergency situations is achieved by increasing
the effective implementation of the powers of local self-government bodies pertaining to the
security of the population's vital activities, renewing technological equipment and the
technologies of production at potentially dangerous sites and essential facilities, introducing
modern technological means of informing and notifying the population in public places, and
likewise developing systems of preventative measures to lower the risk of terrorist acts and allay
the consequences of emergency sitautions of a man-made or natural character.

44. The Russian Federation is strengthening national defense, and providing state and public
security with the goal of creating internal and external conditions favourable to the achievement of
socio-economic development priorities.

3. Improvement of the quality of life of Russian citizens

45. The strategic goals in terms of ensuring national security in the area of improving the quality
of life of Russian citizens are the reduction of social and material inequalities within the
population, the stabilisation of population size in the medium term, and in the long term — the
fundamental improvement of the demographic situation.

46. The improvement of the quality of life of Russian citizens is guaranteed by ensuring individual
security, and likewise access to comfortable housing, safe and high quality goods and services,
and a dignified wage for active labour.

47. Sources of threats to national security could include factors such as a crisis within global
and regional financial-banking systems, an intensification of competition over insufficient raw
materials, energy, water and food resources, or a lag in the development of cutting-edge
technologies, which increase strategic risks associated with dependence on changes in external
factors.

48. National security in the domain of improving the quality of life of Russian citizens will be
supported by the reduction of organised crime, corruption, and drug addiction; by preventing
organised criminal groups from legalising their economic activities; by achieving socio-political
stability and a positive dynamic of development of the Russian Federation, as well as the
ensuring the stability of the financial-banking system, broader exploitation of mineral and raw
material resources, accessibility of modern education and healthcare, high social mobility and
support for socially significant labour activity, superior qualifications and quality of labour
resources, and finally the rational organisation of migratory flows.

49. One of the main elements of ensuring national security in the medium term includes food
security and the guaranteed provision of high-quality, accessible medications.


-----

p g y g p,

food products made from genetically modified plants, with the use of genetically modified
microorganisms and microorganisms having genetically modified analogues.

51. In the interests of developing the pharmaceutical sector, conditions are being created to
overcome its dependence on foreign suppliers for raw materials.

52. In order to counteract threats to national security with regards to the quality of life of Russian
citizens, the forces of national security together with civil society instutions:
improve the national system of human rights protection by developing an appropriate legal
system and legislation;
assist the growth of well-being, the reduction of poverty and of income disparities with the goal of
ensuring continuous access of all citizens to a quantity of food products essential to a healthy
lifestyle;
create the conditions necessary for living a healthy lifestyle, stimulate birth rates and lower death
rates;
improve and develop transport infrastructure, increase protection of the population from
emergency situations of both natural and man-made origins;
ensure the preservation of a cultural and spiritual legacy, the accessibility of information
technologies, and likewise of information on various issues of the socio-political, economic and
spiritual life of society;
improve public-private partnership with the goal of strengthening the material-technical base of
healthcare, cultural and educational institutions, of developing residential construction projects,
and enhancing the quality of housing and community services.

4. Economic growth

53. Strategic national security objectives include Russia's entry, in the medium term, into the
ranks of the top five countries by size of GDP, and likewise the achievement of the necessary
degree of national security in the economic and technological spheres.

54. The provision of national security by means of economic growth is achieved by developing a
national system of innovation, increasing the productivity of labour, acquiring new resources,
modernising priority sectors of the national economy, and improving the banking system, the
financial services sector and intergovernmental fiscal relations in the Russian Federation.

55. The main long-term strategic risks and threats to national security in the economic sphere
are the maintenance of a raw materials export model of economic development, the lessening of
competitiveness and the high dependence on external economic conditions, the loss of control
over national resources, the worsening of the condition of the industrial and energy resource
base, the unequal development of the regions and progressive labour shortages, the low levels of
stability and protection of the national financial system, the persistence of conditions conducive
to the corruption and criminalisation of economic and financial relationships, and also to illegal
migration.

56. The insufficient effectiveness of state regulation of the national economy, falling economic
growth rates, the appearance of trade and balance of payment deficits, and the contraction of
budget revenues could lead to delays in the transition to innovation-based growth, and to the
consequent accumulation of social problems in the country.

57. A direct negative effect on national security in the economic sphere may be exerted by a
deficit of fuel-energy, water, and biological resources, by the adoption of discriminatory measures
and the intensification of unfair competition with regards to Russia, and likewise due to crisis
phenomena in the global financial-banking system.

58. For the provision of national security by means of economic growth, the Russian Federation
is concentrating its main efforts on the development of science, technology and education, and
on the improvement of national investment and financial institutions, in the interests of achieving
an essential level of security in the military, military-industrial and international spheres.

59. Threats to national security related to disproportional levels of development among subjects
of the Russian Federation are prevented by means of a rational regional policy directed at the
improved coordination of state bodies, local administrations, the business community and civil
society.

60. One of the main long-term directions of national security in the economic sphere is energy
security. Essential conditions of national and global energy security include multilateral
cooperation in the interests of creating markets for energy resources that correspond to WTO


-----

p gy y pp y q y

of energy; the effective use of energy resources by increasing the competitiveness of domestic
producers; the prevention of possible fuel-energy resource deficits; the creation of strategic
stocks of fuel, reserve capacities and standard equipment; and ensuring the stable functioning of
the system of energy and fuel provision.

61. In order to counteract threats to economic security, the forces of national security in
cooperation with civil society institutions aim to support state socio-economic policy, which is
directed at:
perfecting structures of production and export, antimonopoly regulation and support for
competition policy;
developing a national system of innovation with the goal of implementing highly effective projects
and priority programmes developing the high-technology economic sectors;
strengthening financial markets and increasing the liquidity of the banking system;
reducing the informal sector and legalising labour relations, increasing investment in the
development of human capital;
balancing the interests of the indigenous population with those of migrant labourers, taking into
account their ethnic, linguistic, cultural and denominational differences, including by improving
migration records, and likewise by ensuring the fair territorial distribution of migrant labour based
on the labour resource requirements of the regions;
establishing a system of scientific and technical forecasting and implementing scientific and
technical priorities, intensifying the integration of science, education and industry;
creating conditions for the development of a competitive domestic pharmaceutical industry;
developing the industries of information and telecommunication technologies, computer
technology resources, electronics, telecommunications equipment and programming.

62. In the interests of ensuring national security in the medium term, competitive economic
sectors are being developed and markets for Russian products are being expanded, the
effectiveness of the fuel-energy complex is being enhanced, instruments of public-private
partnership are being used to resolve strategic challenges to economic development adn to the
completion of a basic transport, energy, information and military infrastructure, especially in the
Arctic zone, Eastern Siberia, and the Far East of the Russian Federation.

63. The strengthening of economic security will be supported by the improvement of state
regulation of economic growth, by developing conceptual and programmatic documents of
interregional and territorial planning, and creating a comprehensive system of risk control,
including:
introduction of an active state anti-inflation, currency, exhange rate, monetary-credit and
taxation-budgetary policy, aimed at import-substitution and supporting the real economy;
stimulation and support for the development of a market for innovation, high-tech production and
high value-added production, and the development of promising general-, dual- and specialpurpose technologies.

64. At the regional level, the stable condition of national security is ensured by the balanced,
comprehensive and systemic development of the subjects of the Russian Federation.
One of the main medium-term directions of national security at the regional level is the creation
of mechanisms intended to reduce the level of interregional disparity in the socio-economic
development of the subjects of the Russian Federation, by means of balanced territorial
development.
In the long term, threats to national security related to the disproportionate levels of development
of the Russian regions are prevented by launching a full-scale national innovation system, by
creating territorial-industrial areas in the southern regions and Povolzhye, in the Ural region and
in Siberia, in the Far East and in other regions of the Russian Federation.

65. In order to achieve regional development, the forces of national security in cooperation with
civil society institutions support the effective implementation of the powers of state bodies of the
subjects of the Russian Federation and local self-governing bodies, by coordinating and
implementing measures taken at the federal, regional and municipal levels, directed at the
development of the regional economic and social sphere, including the equalisation of their
budgetary provisions.

5. Science, technology and education

66. Strategic national security goals in the sphere of science, technology and education are as
follows:
developing state scientific and scientific-technical organisations, capable of providing competitive
advantages for the national economy and the needs of national defense, by means of effective


-----

p q g y q, y y p

education.

67. A direct negative effect on national security in terms of science, technology and education is
caused by the country falling behind in the transition towards the next technological order, by
dependence on imported deliveries of scientific equipment, instruments, electronic components,
and strategic materials, by the unsanctioned transfer abroad of competitive domestic
technologies, by unfounded unilateral sanctions against Russia's scientific and educational
institutions, by the insufficient development of the normativ legal base and weak motivation to
formulate policies around innovation and industry, by the low level of social protection for
egngineering-technical, professorial and pedagogical, the low quality of general secondary
education, and of professional primary, secondary, and higher education.

68. One of the main policy directions of the Russian Federation in the medium term is
determined by technological security. To this end, a state policy pertaining to industry and
innovation is being perfected; fundamental and applied research, together with education, are
defined as unquestionable priorities of the innovational development of the national economy; a
system of federal and public contracts for the training of highly qualified specialists and workers
is being improved; public-prviate partnerships are being developed in science and technology;
conditions are being created for the integration of science, education, and industry; systemic
research is being conducted in the interests of resolving strategic challenges of national defense,
state and public security, and likewise of the country's stable development.

69. In order to counteract threats in the spheres of science, technology and education, the forces
of national security in cooperation with civil society institutions implement the civil education of
new generations in the traditions of the prestige of the scientist and the pedagogue, ensure the
effectiveness of state regulation in relation to integrating science, education and hightechnological industry.

70. The resolution of national security issues in the area of science, technology and education in
the medium and long term are achieved by the following means:
formulating systems of targeted fundamental and applied research and their support by the state
in the interests of an organisational-scientific approach to achieving strategic national priorities;
creating a network of federal universities and national research universities that woud ensure,
within a framework of cooperative relationships, the training of specialists for work in science and
education, the development of competitive technologies and exemplary high-tech production, the
organisation of high-tech production;
implementing programmes establishing institutions of learning oriented at training cadres to serve
the needs of regional development, as well as the organs and forces of national security;
ensuring the participation of Russian scientific and scientific-educational organisations in global
technological and research projects, taking into account the state of the intellectual property
market.

6. Healthcare

71. Strategic national security goals in the area of healthcare and the health of the nation are as
follows:
increasing life expectancy, reducing disability and mortality;
improving disease prevention and the provision of timely, qualified primary healthcare and hightechnology medical assistance;
improving standards of medical assistance, and likewise of the quality, effectiveness and safety
of medicines.

72. One of the main threats to national security in terms of healthcare and national health is the
appearance of large-scale epidemics and pandemics, the mass spread of HIV infection,
tuberculosis, drug addiction and alcoholism, and the increased accessibility of psychoactive and
psychotropic substances.

73. A direct negative effect on national security in the domain of healthcare and the health of the
nation is exerted by the low effectiveness of the medical insurance system and the low quality of
healthcare specialist training and retraining; the insufficient level of social guarantees and wages
for medical workers and insufficient financing for the system of high-technology medical
assistance; the incomplete formation of a normative legal basis for healthcare oriented at
increasing accessibility and implementing guarantees of medical assistance for the general
population.

74. The state policy of the Russian Federation relating to healthcare and the health of the nation
i d t ti di i d l t ti th d f i ll d


-----

y

preventative orientation of healthcare, focusing on preserving human health, and preserving the
institution of the family, motherhood, fatherhood and childhood, as the foundations of social
vitality.

76. The strengthening of national security in the area of helathcare and national health will be
supported by enhancing the quality and accessibility of medical services, by using promising
information and telecommunications technologies, by means of state support for promising
pharmaceutical, biotechnological and nanotechnological research, and likewise by modernising
economic mechanisms involved in the functioning of healthcare and developing the materialtechnical base of state and municipal healthcare systems, taking regional particularities into
consideration.

77. In order to counteract threats to healthcare and the health of the nation, the forces of national
security in cooperation with civil society institutions ensure the effectiveness of state regulation
in the area of standardisation, licensing, and certification of medical services, in the accreditation
of medical and pharmaceutical establishments, in the provision of state guarantees for receiving
medical assistance and modernising the system of obligatory medical insurance, and in the
definition of uniform criteria evaluating the work of centres for treatment and prevention at the level
of municipal formations and subjects of the Russian Federation.

78. The resolution of problems of national security in the sphere of healthcare and the health of
the nation in the medium and long term is achieved by the following means:
formulating national programmes (projects) for the treatment of socially significant diseases
(oncological, cardiac-arterial, diabetic and phtisiological [respiratory?] illnesses, drug addiction,
alcoholism), alongside the development of uniform approaches to the diagnosis, treatment and
rehabilitation of patients;
developing an administrative system overseeing the quality and accessibility of medical
assistsance, and the training of healthcare specialists;
providing for the qualitative transformation of the structure of infections and for the liquidation of
the preconditions of epidemics, including epidemics caused by particularly dangerous infectious
pathogens, by developing and implementing promising technologies and national programmes of
state support for disease prevention.

7. Culture

79. Strategic objectives ensuring national security in the cultural sphere are as follows:
broadening access of large sections of the population to the best examples of national and
foreign culture and art by creating modern territorially distributed information banks;
creating conditions for the stimulation of creative self-realisation within the population, by
improving systems of cultural enlightenment, the organisation of leisure activities and mass
extracurricular artistic education;
assisting the development of the cultural potential of Russia's regions and supporting regional
cultural initiatives.

80. The main threats to national security in the cultural sphere are the dominance of production
of mass culture oriented towards the spiritual needs of marginalised groups, and likewise
unlawful infringements against cultural objects.

81. Negative influences on the state of national security in the cultural sphere are intensified by
attempts to revise perspectives on Russia's history, its role and place in world history; and by
the propagandizing of a lifestyle based on permissiveness and violence, or racial, national and
religious intolerance.

82. In order to counteract threats in the cultural sphere, the forces of national security together
with civil society institutions ensure the effectiveness of state regulation intended to support and
develop national cultures, tolerance and self-respect, and likewise the development of
international [in the sense of interethnic] and interregional cultural ties.

83. The strengthening of national security in the cultural sphere will be served by preserving and
developing indigenous cultures within Russia's multinational population, and the citizenry's
spiritual values; by improving the material-technical basis of cultural and leisure establishments;
by perfecting the system of training of cadres and providing for their social welfare; by supporting
the production and distribution of domestic cinematography; developing cultural tourism;
establishing government contracts for the creation of cinematographic and printed works,
television and radio programmes and internet resources; and likwise by using Russia's cultural
potential in the service of multilateral international cooperation.


-----

, y g p y p p

Russian Federation and the international image of Russia as a country with a very rich traditional
and dynamically developing contemporary culture, by creating a system of spiritual and patriotic
education for Russian citizens, and finally by developing

8. The ecology of living systems and environmental management

85. Strategic objectives relating to ecological security and environmental management are:
preserving of the environment and ensuring its protection;
redressing the environmental consequences of economic activity in the context of a growing
economy and global climate changes.

86. The state of national security in the ecological sphere is negatively affected by the depletion
of world reserves of mineral, water and biological resources, and likewise by the presence in the
Russian Federation of ecologically disadvantaged regions.

87. The state of national security in the ecological sphere is worsened by the maintenance of a
significant number of dangerous production processes, whose activity leads to the destruction of
the ecological balance, including the disruption of sanitary-epidemiological and/or sanitaryhygienic standards of drinking water used by the general population; disposal of radioactive
waste from the non-nuclear [sic] fuel cycle is not subject to normative legal regulation and
oversight. The strategic risk of exhaustion of the country's most important mineral and raw
material resources is growing, as the rate of extraction of many mineral resources declines.

88. In order to counteract threats in the sphere of ecological security and environmental
management, the forces of national security together with civil society institutions create the
conditions for the introduction of ecologically safe production; the search for promising energy
sources; the creation and implementation of a state programme for the establishment of strategic
reserves of mineral and raw material resources sufficient to supply Russia's mobilisation
requirements; and the guaranteed provision of water and biological resources to meet the needs
of the population and the economy.

9. Strategic stability and equitable strategic partnership

89. The achievement of the Russian Federation's priorities for stable development is supported by
an active foreign policy, whose efforts are focused on seeking agreement and common interests
with other states, on the basis of a system of bilateral and multilateral mutually beneficial
partnership relations.

90. The creation of favourable conditions for Russia's stable development in the long term is
achieved by ensuring strategic stability, including by means of consistent movement towards a
world free from nuclear weapons, and by creating conditions of equal security for all.

91. Russia bases its relations with the international community on the principle of maintaining
stability and predictability in the area of strategic offensive arms, and attributes particular
significance to the achievement of new full-scale bilateral agreements on the continued reduction
and limitation of strategic offensive arms.

92. Russia will assist with engaging other states, first of all those possessing nuclear weapons,
but also those interested in joint action to ensure mutual security, in a process of establishing
strategic stability.

93. Russia believes that the maintenance of strategic stability and equitable strategic partnership
can be supported by the presence of contingents of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation
in conflict zones, on the basis of norms of international law, with the goal of resolving political,
economic and other challenges by non-military means.

94. On the world stage, Russia will act from a position founded on an unchanging course towards
joint participation with other states in the reinforcement of international mechanisms for
nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, means of their
delivery and related goods and technologies; on the unacceptability of use of military force in
contravention of the United Nations Charter; and likewise from a position of adherence to arms
control and rational sufficiency in military construction.

95. In order to preserve strategic stability and equitable strategic partnership, the Russian
Federation:
will fulfill existing treaties and agreements pertaining to the limitation and reduction of arms, will
participate in the development and conclusion of new agreements corresponding to Russia's


-----

p g,

creating appropriate conditions, allowing for the reduction of nuclear armaments without
detracting from international security or strategic stability;
intends to continue assisting the reinforcement of regional stability by means of participation in
processes of reduction and limitation of ordinary armed forces, and likewise the development and
application of confidence building measures in the military domain;
considers international peacekeeping to be a viable instrument for the resolution of armed
conflicts, stands for strengthening this institution in strict accordance with the principles of the
United Nations Charter, and will continue its participation therein;
will participate in efforts led by the UN and other international organisations to relieve natural and
man-made catastrophes and crisis situations, and likewise in the provision of humanitarian
assistance to affected countries.

96. In the interests of strategic stability and equitable multilateral interaction on the international
stage, during the period of realisation of this Strategy Russia will undertake all necessary efforts,
with minimum expenditure, to maintain parity with the United States of America in the area of
strategic offensive arms, given a situation in which the USA is unfolding a global missile defense
system and implementing a global "lightning strike" concept using nuclear- and non-nuclearequipped strategic bombers.

V. Organisational, legal-normative and informational foundations of the realisation fo the given
Strategy

97. The state policy of the Russian Federation in the area of national security is the result of the
concerted effort of all elements of the system providing national security, with a coordinating role
being played by the Security Council of the Russian Federation with respect to the realisation of
a range of measures of an organisational, legal-normative and informational nature.

98. The realisation of the given Strategy is ensured by the consolidation of the energies and
resources of state bodies and civil society insitutions, directed towards the defense of Russisa's
national interests by means of political, organisational, socio-economic, legal, special and other
measures, developed within the framework of strategic planning in the Russian Federation.

99. Periodic amendments to the given Strategy are realised under the aegis of the Security
Council of the Russian Federation — in accordance with the results of the constant monitoring of
the realisation of the given Strategy, and in view of developments that would have a substantial
influence on the state of national security.

100. Organisational support for the realisation of the given Strategy consists of the improvement
of the public administration of the Russian Federation, and likewise the development of a system
of national security on the basis of improvements to strategic planning mechanisms geared at
the stable development of the Russian Federation and at the provision of national security under
the direction of the President of the Russian Federation.

101. The system of documents of strategic planning (including the Concept of long-term socioeconomic development of the Russian Federation; the Programme of short-term socio-economic
development of the Russian Federation; the strategies (programmes) of development of separate
economic sectors; the strategies (concepts) of development of the federal regions; the strategies
and comprehensive programmes of socio-economic development of subjects of the Russian
Federation; interstate programmes in which Russia participates; federal (departmental) special
programmes; state defense contracting; conceptions, doctrines and foundations (fundamental
directions) of state policy with regards to ensuring national security and with regards to the
domestic and foreign policy of the state) is formulated by the Government of the Russian
Federation and relevant federal organs of executive power, with the participation of state bodies of
the subjects of the Russian Federation, on the basis of the Constitution of the Russian
Federation, federal laws and other normative legal acts of the Russian Federation.

102. By resolution of the President of the Russian Federation, documents regarding issues of
domestic and foreign policy can be brought up for review before the Security Council of the
Russian Federation.

103. The development of strategic planning documents is executed in agreement with the order
of business [parliamentary procedure] of the Government of the Russian Federation, and in
accordance with the system of document preparation of the Presidential Administration of the
Russian Federation.

104. State policy relating to the fight against terrorism and drug-related crimes is formulated by
the State Antinarcotics Committee and the National Antiterrorism Committee


-----

105. Comprehensive questions pertaining to national security may be examined at joint sessions
of the Security Council of the Russian Federation, the State Council of the Russian Federation,
and the Civic Chamber of the Russian Federation, with the participation of other advisory and
consultative bodies, created to guarantee the constitutional powers of the President of the
Russian Federation.

106. Normative legal measures supporting the realisation of the given Strategy are determined on
the basis of the Constitution of the Russian Federation, federal constitutional laws, federal laws,
decrees and orders of the President of the Russian Federation, resolutions and acts of the
Parliament of the Russian Federation, and likewise normative legal acts of the federal organs of
executive power.

107. The informational and informational-analytical support for the realisation of the given
Strategy is performed under the coordinating aegis of the Security Council of the Russian
Federation, by attracting the information resources of relevant state bodies and state scientific
institutions, with the use of a system of "distributed Situation Centres" working in coordination
with one another.

108. For the development of a system of Situation Centres in the medium term, it will be
necessary to overcome technological lag in the most important areas of IT, telecommunications,
and interconnectivity, which determine the state of national security; to develop and introduce
technologies of information security into systems of government and military administration,
systems of management of ecologically dangerous products and critically important sites; and
likewise to create conditions for the harmonisation of the national information infrastructure with
global information networks and systems.

109. Threats to information security in the course of realising the given Strategy are prevented by
improving the security of the information and telecommunications systems of critically important
infrastructure and high-risk facilities in the Russian Federation; by increasing the level of
protection of corporate and individual information systems; and by creating a unified system of
information-telecommunication support for the system of national security.

110. The development and realisation of a range of efficient and prolonged measures for the
prevention of threats to national security in the federal regions is performed by the federal organs
of executive power in cooperation with the state bodies of the subjects of the Russian
Federation, under the coordinating aegis of the Government of the Russian Federation.

111. Monitoring of the realisation of the given Strategy is conducted within the framework of the
annual report of the Secretary of the Security Council of the Russian Federation to the President
of the Russian Federation, regarding the state of national security and measures for its
reinforcement.

VI. The main indicators of the state of national security

112. The main indicators of the state of national security are designated in order to evaluate the
level of national security, and include:
the level of unemployment (as a proportion of the economically active population);
the decile coefficient (the correlation between the incomes of the top and bottom 10% of the
population);
the rate of growth of consumer prices;
the level of the internal and external state debt as a percentage of GDP;
the level of fiscal support for health, culture, education and science as a percentage of GDP;
the level of annual renewal of armaments, military and specialist equipment;
the level of supply of military and engineering-technical cadres.
The list of basic indicators of national security can be made more precise in accordance with the
results of monitoring of the state of national security.

     - *

The realisation of the National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation to 2020 is expected
to become a motivating factor in the development of the national economy; the improvement of
the population's quality of life; the assurance of political stability within society; the reinforcement
of national defense, state security and law and order; and the enhancement of the
competitiveness and international status of the Russian Federation.

page revision: 2, last edited: 17 Sep 2012, 09:48 (57 days ago)

[Edit](javascript:;) [Tags](javascript:;) [History](javascript:;) [Files](javascript:;) [Print](javascript:;) [Site tools](javascript:;) [+ Options](javascript:;)


-----

[Unless otherwise stated, the content of this page is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)

#### Other interesting sites


**[Chrysalis](http://chrysaliswiki.com/)**

A Final Fantasy Wiki


**[X5](http://www.xitami.com/)**

Your web server


**Archives des résultats de**

**Velo-manager.com**


**[Writing 111 Fall 2010](http://oneeleventwentyten.wikidot.com/)**


**[Chrysalis](http://chrysaliswiki.com/)**


**Archives des résultats de**


-----

