###### GOVERNMENT OF SAMOA

## SAMOA NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY

###### BUILDING A SECURE AND RESILIENT NATION


-----

###### Contents
PRIME MINISTER'S MESSAGE ...................................................................................................... 2

MINISTRY OF PRIME MINISTER AND CABINET CEO'S MESSAGE ....................................... 3

A. INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................... 4

(I) Purpose of the National Security Policy ........................................................................................ .4

(2) What is Security? ............................................................................................................................ 4

(3) Guiding principles .......................................................................................................................... 5

(4) The NSP document ......................................................................................................................... 5

B. SECURITY ENVIRONMENT ....................................................................................................... 6

(I) Samoa - an active and responsible international player ................................................................. 6

(2) Samoa - a leading contributor to the region ................................................................................... 7

(3) Samoa - vulnerable but resilient.. ................................................................................................... 8

C. THE POLICY .................................................................................................................................. 9

(I) GOVERNMENT DIRECTIONS ................................................................................................... 9

(a) Border Security ............................................................................................................................. 10

(b) Natural Disasters and Climate Change ......................................................................................... I I

( c) Cyber Security .............................................................................................................................. 12

( d) Human Security ............................................................................................................................ 12

(2) GOVERNMENT COMMITMENTS ON CAPABILITIES ........................................................ 14

D. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY .......................................... 14

E. CONCLUSION ............................................................................................................................. 15

ANNEXES:

ANNEX I :MAJOR SECURITY ISSUES AND THE ENABLING ENVIRONMENT-
BACKGROUND AND ANALYSIS ................................................................................................. 17

ANNEX 2: KEY GOVERNMENT MINISTRIES AND AGENCIES ............................................ .40

ANNEX 3:LIST OF CONSULTATIONS ......................................................................................... 45

ANNEX 4:ACRONYMS ............................................................ _. ................................................. ,._::.:.48

**Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

###### FOREWORD FROI\J TH HONOURAB E PRIME IM ST .::R

We are fortunate to live in a country that is peaceful and
stable, where extreme hardship is rare, and where we
can continue to draw strength and cohesion from our
Christian values and traditional ways. Our people enjoy
basic freedoms, with strong observance of the rule of
law and human rights. Literacy is high and most
Samoans have access to a good education. We are a
responsible and active player in our region and beyond,
and have a close and productive relationship with our
development partners.

But at the same time we are vulnerable. Climate change, cyber attacks,
transnational crime and other border threats all bring their challenges to our
shores. Within our own country we also face the challenges of a small economy, a
changing lifestyle, and a need to provide employment for our youth and protect the
vulnerable members of our society.

I am delighted that with this first-ever National Security Policy for Samoa we now
have a comprehensive plan to provide for the security and well-being of our
country.

The overriding vision of the Policy is for a secure and resilient Samoa which:

               - safeguards its independence, sovereignty and border integrity;

               - is respected internationally, and has productive relationships with trusted
partners;

               - is peaceful, harmonious and stable, promotes the rights of all, and provides
good governance and respect for the rule of law; and

               - fosters economic and social development which allows all citizens to enjoy a
better quality of life and to reach their full potential.

I welcome the input of so many Samoans to the development of this policy, and
encourage all to play their part in making sure our nation is truly safe and resilient.

ailele Malielegaoi

Prime Minister

Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister & Cabinet


-----

###### 222222222222222222 > ⇒ :F :F :F :F > :::
#### --------------.............. ------------

###### > ⇒ :F
#### --------------.............. -------------

###### JHlt=F E EC -:-IVE OFF cr-·R'S /IES AG-

Samoa over these last 56 years of
independence has traversed boldly through the
trials and tests of being a sovereign country.
Our survival is attributed to the adoption of
good governance principles • through
legislation, policies and government strategic
plans, our political stability, solid community
integration, peace and harmony and ultimately
our faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. These unique
characteristics have shaped our journey as a
nation however, the realities of globalization and unfolding of securities issues in
this age and time, makes its increasingly crucial for Samoa to adopt a broad
strategic approach to address issues that affect its national security. This is what
the National Security Policy **(NSP) is designed to do.**

Central to the formulation of the NSP has been the wide range of consultations
conducted throughout the country. In these consultations many areas of security
concerns were raised. These included climate change, natural disasters, cyber
security, border security, and contagious diseases. These key messages are
linked to the existential threats that Samoa, the region, and the world are exposed
to, and have helped shape this document.

The NSP calls for shared and collective responsibility of the whole country to work
together to ensure our national security. The NSP echoes regional security
priorities encapsulated in the narrative of the Blue Pacific Identity and the Pacific
Island Leaders commitment to achieving a region of peace, harmony and security,
social inclusion and prosperity so that all pacific people can live free, healthy and
productive lives.

The most important decisions on national security will continue to be taken by the
Prime Minister and Cabinet. They will be advised and supported by a National
Security Committee (NSC). The emphasis will be on achieving a robust whole-of-
government focus on the most pressing security issues. This National Security
Policy provides the platform for a more integrated and comprehensive approach to
dealing with issues that are significant to the future of this country. I look forward
to contributing, alongside those within and outside government, to the most
effective implementation of this important initiative.

God bless Samoa.

Agafili Tomaimano Shem Leo

Chief Executive Officer

Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister & Cabinet


-----

###### A.iNlRODUCT!ON

 ( 1 )!Purpose of the National Security Policy

1. Security is a fundamental responsibility of any State - to protect the sovereignty of the

nation, and the values, well-being and prosperity of its people. National security

underpins development and national resilience. A secure nation is more likely to be

confident and assured, and better equipped to play a constructive role in its region and

beyond.

2. Until now, Samoa has lacked an overarching strategic policy that identifies and

prioritizes security challenges, and provides a framework for a coordinated, whole-of-

government approach to addressing the most pressing security issues. This National

Security Policy (NSP) is intended to fill that gap.

3. The objectives of the NSP are to assist the Government to:

a) identify and prioritize the national security issues of greatest importance to

Samoa, and to focus attention and resources accordingly;

b) indicate the directions and main steps it will take to safeguard national security;

c) strengthen whole-of-government measures and systems for addressing

national security issues, and to identify the type and quantity of resources that

are needed to underpin the policy and compliance with it; and

d) promote awareness nationally of the NSP, and consultation between the

government and people of Samoa on national security policy issues.

###### (2) What is Security?

4. Traditionally, 'security' has referred to issues such as the protection of national

sovereignty, combating transnational crime and other border and territorial

infringements, and maintaining public safety.

**Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

5. Under the expanded concept of security now widely accepted internationally and

adopted in this NSP, security also includes threats such as climate change and

national disasters, cyber security, and human security issues which, if not properly

addressed, have the potential to cause significant damage to the interests of the nation

and the well-being of its people.

6. The NSP focuses on the national security challenges that are most relevant to Samoa's

circumstances, and is responsive to Samoa's governance and development context.

###### (3) Guiding principles

7. This National Security Policy is fully aligned with Samoa's national, regional and

international goals and commitments.

8. At the national level, the Policy flows from the responsibility of the State, set out in the

Constitution, to uphold the integrity of Samoa, its independence and all of its rights,

and to safeguard the fundamental rights of its people.

9. The Policy complements all the aims of the Strategy for the Development of Samoa

(SOS) 2016/17 -2019/20, which has as its vision "An Improved Quality of Life for All".

10. The Policy creates an overarching framework for, but does not duplicate, other security

policies and strategies in key government areas.

11.At the regional level, the Policy is aligned with Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) policies,

most notably the Framework of Pacific Regionalism, adopted by PIF leaders in 2014. It

also fully reflects efforts underway by the PIF to develop a comprehensive regional

security declaration - "Biketawa Plus".

12.At the global level, the Policy is aligned with the 2015 UN Sustainable Development

Goals (SDGs). The Policy also directly complements the attainment of objectives under

the UN-supported Small Islands Developing States Accelerated Modality of Action

(SAMOA) Pathway, adopted in Samoa in 2014.

###### ( 4) The NSP document

13. The NSP document has four parts.

5 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

a) An introduction and a description of Samoa's international, regional and internal

security environment.

b) A concise statement of the Policy, which outlines the Government's position and

future direction on the key national security issues relevant to Samoa.

c) An annex which provides background and context to the major security issues

and to the enabling environment and Samoa's capabilities.

d) Appendices which include a brief outline of the key government ministries and

agencies most relevant to the NSP, and a list of those consulted during the

development of the NSP.

14. The Implementation Strategy for the NSP is set out in a separate document and is for

official use.

###### B. SECURITY ENVIRONMENT

 (1) Samoa - an active andl responsible international player.

15. Samoa faces a complex and uncertain global strategic environment characterized by

change that is unprecedented in recent decades in its pace, scale and unpredictability.

This environment brings risks and opportunities. While the intense state rivalries of the

Cold War have receded, the world of the twenty-first century is experiencing growing

threats to the rules-based international order and increasing tensions between major

powers. All countries need to be aware of, and be able to respond as best they can, to

this fluid and dynamic security environment.

16. The Asia Pacific is undergoing a profound strategic and economic transition. A key

interest for countries like Samoa is that the region evolves in an orderly and peaceful

fashion.

17.0ther trends which are shaping the world are rapid technological developments that

are changing the way we work, socialize, communicate, and consume goods and

services. Terrorism has become a constant reality in many countries. Climate change,

environmental degradation and the increased demand for food, water and energy bring

the risk of future political, economic and security disruption.

6 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

18. Small Pacific Island countries are no longer protected by their isolation. Samoa is not a

part of any military alliance, but it has a strong interest in acting with others to support a

rules-based international order. It sees regional and global partnerships and

cooperation with trusted friends as essential in this increasingly interconnected world.

19. Samoa has a strong commitment to the United Nations, where it speaks up clearly in

support of the rules-based order, peace and disarmament. It is an active supporter of

the UN Security Council and its decisions. It has backed this with practical actions.

Prominent amongst them has been its leadership of efforts to eliminate the illicit arms

trade which has been achieved through its strong support for effective implementation

in the region of the 2014 global Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). It has also shown strong

support for UN Peacekeeping work, underscored by 17 years of uninterrupted police

deployments in missions in Liberia, Sudan, Timor-Leste, South Sudan, and Darfur. And

it has been active in the enforcement of sanctions against North Korean-flagged ships.

20. Samoa has gained international influence by establishing a record for successfully

hosting major events. In 2014 it hosted the landmark Third International Conference on

Small Island States (SIDS), the largest international event ever hosted by a small

island nation. It hosted the Commonwealth Youth Games in 2017, and will host the

Pacific Islands Games in 2019. In 2022 it will host the 53-member Commonwealth

Heads of Government Meeting, one of the largest regular gatherings of leaders from

around the world.

###### (2) Samoa - a leading contributor to the region

21. Samoa has a strong interest in a secure, stable and prosperous Pacific Islands region.

The small-island states in this .large but sparsely populated part of the world, including

Samoa, are attracting greater interest from a number of countries outside the region.

This seems likely to result in greater competition between them for regional influence.

22. Countries of the region have a number of major challenges in common. These include

small formal economies, great distance from major markets and high costs, slow

economic growth, resource constraints, climate change and natural disasters, and

transnational crime and illegal fishing.

7 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

23. Samoa makes a major contribution to the collaborative efforts of the PI Cs to address

shared challenges and to strengthen regional security. It is a leader, and current chair,

of the Pacific Islands Forum, the pre-eminent regional body through which leaders set

and address regional priorities.

24. Samoa has a particularly strong voice on climate change, and on the special needs of

small island states. It has been a leader in advocating an integrated approach to

tackling climate change, conservation, sustainable development, protection of oceans,

and peace and security. This was embodied in the theme of the 2017 Pacific Islands

Forum, hosted in Apia, of "the Blue Pacific - Our Sea of Islands: Our Security Through

Sustainable Development, Management and Conservation".

25. Samoa is a supporter of collective regional efforts to assist regional countries recovers

from national crises, and was a strong contributor to the Regional Assistance Mission

to Solomon Islands (RAMSI).

26. Samoa hosts five regional bodies in Apia, and was instrumental in establishing the

Polynesian Leaders Group in 2011, with the aim of improving cooperation among

Polynesian countries.

###### (3) Samoa - vulnerable but resilient

27.Since independence in 1962, Samoa has been a peaceful country, with no threats to

its territorial integrity, and only infrequent major disturbances to law and order. Overall,

citizens' rights are well protected and government institutions are transparent and

accountable. It has been politically stable for several decades.

28. Serious crime rates are low by global standards, and armed violence is rare. Domestic

and gender-based violence however is a continuing major concern, and certain crimes

such as drug possession and production - mainly marijuana and "ice" - are on the rise.

Recently, there has been an increase in housebreaking and some petty crimes,

sometimes fuelled by alcohol. High youth unemployment, accompanied by urban drift,

presents a range of growing problems, including the activities of lawless gangs of

youths, which is a cause of considerable community concern. Correctional services are

addressing problems that include sub-standard prison conditions and crowding, and

8 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

recurring escapes by prisoners. Significant improvements are underway, including the

construction of a modern prison at Tanumalala.

29. Following two decades of reforms, Samoa's economy is modern and open. Samoa

graduated from "Least Developed Country" status to "Developing Country" status in

2014, and is now classified by the World Bank as an "upper-middle income" economy.

The IMF recognized in June 2018 that "Samoa's economy shows resilience and

continues to perform well." However, Samoa's economy is narrowly-based and in

highly susceptible to external shocks. The cost of natural disasters, vulnerability to the

global economy, geographic remoteness and the narrow fiscal base, all limit the

country's ability to live within its means.

30. Human development and service delivery in key areas such as health and education

have improved over the years, with high literacy rates and relatively good access to

schooling and health care. In the UNDP's Human Development Index (HDI), Samoa is

categorized as a "High Human Development" nation, ranking 105 out of 188 nations (in

2016). However, income inequality levels in Samoa are relatively high by regional

standards. While the incidence of extreme hardship is well below small Pacific Islands

Country averages and food poverty has declined significantly, around a quarter of the

population experiences basic needs poverty, with the incidence highest in Apia.

31. Traditional Samoan values have been preserved, and continue to make a vital

contribution to national stability and cohesion. As is to be expected in an increasingly

globalised world, striking the right balance between those values, and the requirements

of the formal justice sector and of economic development and land use will continue to

present challenges.

###### C. THE POLICY

**(1) GOVERNMENT DIRECTIONS**

15. The main categories of threat considered most critical to Samoa's contemporary

situation are: border security, natural disasters and climate change; cyber security; and

two aspects of human security - gender-based violence (GBV) and health security.A

9 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

detailed analysis of these threats is presented in the Annex.

16. The following sets out the directions government proposes to take on these issues:

###### (a) Border Security

Border security is a fundamental responsibility of

the state. Current and emerging threats are

growing in complexity. Vulnerabilities need to be

identified and eliminated or reduced. One of the

principal challenges for Samoa is the availability of

resources and their effective use.

17. The Government shall: Pictured: Nafanua Police Patrol Boat

Resource key agencies, first an adequate number of well-trained officers, and,

second, with sufficient modern equipment to manage the increasingly technical

demands of border documentation processes, surveillance, and interoperability with

domestic agencies and external partners, and the rapid sharing of information.

              - Strengthen the oversight and management of border issues, with emphasis on

strong whole-of-government coordination.

Identify and progressively eliminate any gaps in the institutional framework for

border agencies, encompassing policy, legislation, management plans, MoUs with

other agencies and operating procedures. Maximize efficiency and effectiveness

and minimize duplication between agencies.

Further strengthen Samoa's already close engagement with regional and

international organizations on trans-national crime and other border security issues.

               - Strengthen collaboration with American Samoa on trans-national crime and border

management more generally.

               - Work closely with partners to minimize the risks to Samoa of narcotics trafficking,

arms smuggling, money laundering, organized crime and overseas criminal gangs

in particular.

Upgrade the policing of illegal activity in Samoan waters by ships, fishing vessels

10 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

and private yachts, maximizing the use of the Patrol Boat and other assets.

Prioritize completion of maritime boundary negotiations with American Samoa,

Tonga, New Zealand and Tokelau.

              - Strengthen point-of entry health security and quarantine procedures, including by

taking advantage of the facilities at the new terminal of the international airport.

              - Seek closer collaboration with sending countries, particularly the USA, on the

question of criminal deportees. Work closely with domestic and external

stakeholders including regional institutions to achieve better outcomes for Samoa's

security, the interests of communities, and the welfare of the deportees.

              - Continue to give strong support to international efforts to combat terrorism.

###### (b)Natural Disasters and Climate Change

18. Samoa is highly vulnerable to natural

disasters and to climate change more

generally. The economic as well as human

consequences can be devastating.

19. The Government shall:

Pacific Island Forum Leaders Mealing held in Samoa 2017

Prioritize resilience to natural disasters

in the government's reform agenda, with emphasis on key infrastructure and health

and education facilities.

Provide robust, well~resourced and well-managed responses to natural disasters,

under the updated National Disaster Management Plan 2017-2020.

               - Continue to provide strong regional and global leadership on climate change.

               - Actively pursue funding from international sources for climate change adaptation

and mitigation.

Require that climate and disaster resilience be mainstreamed and integrated into

strategic planning by government agencies and sectors.

11 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

### ............................ (c) Cyber Security -------------

20. Cyber security is a high priority in all countries. In Samoa the arrival of the Tui Samoa

submarine cable brings great benefits, but also heightens vulnerabilities.

21. The Government shall:

                - Fully support, including through the allocation of adequate resources and the

development of a skilled workforce, the timely and effective implementation of the

Cyber Security Strategy 2016-2021.

                - Provide effective safeguards in the National Broadband Highway to protect

government information, and in the proposed electronic National ID System to

protect private information.

                - Prioritize the rapid establishment of a cyber emergency response team (CERT),

and accession to the Budapest Convention on Cyber Crime.

                - Strengthen collaboration with regional and international partners to improve cyber

security and combat cyber crime.

###### ( d) Human Security

**(1) Gender-based violence (GBV)**

22. The problem of domestic and gender-based violence more generally has a severe

human toll in the Pacific region, including Samoa. It also has a serious impact on

development. Despite concerted efforts by government and a range of stakeholders,

family violence has reached unacceptable levels.

23.A major study - the National Public Inquiry into Family Violence conducted by the

Ombudsman's Office - is due to report to Parliament

in 2018.

24. The Government shall:

Use the Ombudsman's report as a catalyst for a

high-level whole-of-government examination, led

by the Ministry of Women, Community and

_______________________ source: Samoa Planet-Ongoing Awareness Programs

12 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Minon Gender based Violence**


-----

Social Development, of the roles that government agencies, communities, the

churches, NGOs and development partners could play together to tackle the issue

of GBV.

Prioritize the establishment of a government agency or mechanism to support the

victims of GBV.

               - Continue to work closely with regional and development partners to share relevant

experiences on enforcement, prosecution, deterrence, public education and

victims welfare strategies.

**(2) Health Security**

25 The incidence of non-communicable diseases

(NCDs) has reached crisis point in a number of

Pacific Islands nations, including in Samoa,

where the incidence of diabetes is particularly

high. If not addressed urgently, this problem

could, in addition to the high human, financial and

productivity costs, significantly impact on living Source: WHO - collective responsibility in combating
standards and life expectancy in Samoa over the Ncos

long term. In addition Samoa faces significant challenges to human security from

infectious diseases.

26 The Government:

               - Recognizes that responding to the NCO crisis requires a multi-sectoral approach,

consistent with that set out in the regional NCO Roadmap which highlights reducing

consumption of food and drink directly linked to obesity, diabetes and heart disease;

improving the efficiency and impact of the health sector for prevention and early

treatment; and strengthening monitoring and evaluation of progress.

              - Shall give full whole-of-government support to the new policy on NCDs being

developed by government, with the Ministry of Health as the lead agency.

               - Recognizes the need for public health vigilance and multi-sectoral partnerships to

combat communicable and infectious diseases, and will give strong support to the

International Health Regulations 2005 (WHO) framework for preventing the

13 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

international spread of disease.

**(2) GOVERNMENT COMMITMENTS ON CAPABILITIES**

27 The Government recognizes that dealing with national security issues requires a

range of capabilities and a conducive enabling environment.

28 The Government shall:

                - Review front-line security agencies to ensure they are highly-trained, and well-

resourced with a robust and modern technological capacity

                - Strengthen collaboration between front-line security agencies through joint

exercises and training, improved inter-agency communications systems, and by

fostering a strong culture of sharing information.

                - Require all agencies to improve the collection, analysis and sharing of data, to

assist policy-making and implementation.

                - Undertake an audit of relevant policy, plans and legislation with a view to closing

any gaps that might hinder the protection of national security.

Maintain responsible management of the economy, prioritizing income and

employment generation, fiscal responsibility and debt management.

                - Pursue an active, strong foreign policy in support of Samoa's regional and

international interests, and a close and productive relationship with development

partners.

                - Work closely with communities, churches, civil society, the private sector, and the

media, with a view to enhancing the dissemination of timely information on

national security issues and the implementation of the NSP.

                - Promote good governance and the observance of human rights, recognizing their

importance in underpinning national security.

###### D. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY

1-l Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister & Cabinet


-----

29 In the past Samoa has dealt with national security issues through normal cabinet

and other government committees and processes. Given the need for a high-level,

strategic whole-of-government approach to these important issues, the Government

has decided to take a number of steps to upgrade the management of national

security issues.

30 These measures are set out in a separate document, the NSP Implementation

Strategy (the Strategy).

31 In summary, the Strategy includes:

a) Upgraded government machinery - major decisions on national security will

continue to be taken by Cabinet. A new body at CEO level, the National Security

Committee, will advise and support Cabinet, and will be the key body at officials' level

to identify and manage national security issues;

b)Upgraded reporting by agencies on national security issues, focusing on emerging

threats and trends as well as performance of agencies, plus the preparation of a

regular public security statement by Government;

c) Measures to improve coordination and lines of communication between front-line

agencies in addressing security issues that require an immediate response;

d) A suggested work plan for the first year of operation of the National Security

Committee.

###### E. CONCLUSION

**15** **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

32 In this volatile world, security threats can develop rapidly. We need to be well-

equipped and flexible to respond to current and emerging risks. The NSP provides

a solid base for this task, and is a living document which will be updated as

circumstances change.

33 The Government will give priority to safeguarding the nation and building public

awareness of major security issues, and looks forward to working collaboratively

with the community and the private sector in this endeavour.

###### ANNEX:

 APPENDIX 1:

16 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

###### MAJOR SECURITY ISSUIES AND THE ENABLING ENVIRONMENT-

 BACKGROUND AND ANAL YS!S

 Contents

A. MAJOR SECURITY ISSUES

1. Border Security

(i) Transnational Crime and Other Emerging Risks

(ii) Loss of Revenue

(iii) Biosecurity Issues

(iv) Health Risks

(v) Government actions on border security - background

2. Natural Disasters and Climate Change

Government Responses

3. Cyber Security

Government Responses

4. Human Security

A. Gender-based Violence (GBV)

Government Responses

B. Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs)

Government Responses

B. ENABLING ENVIRONMENT AND CAPABILITIES

1. A highly trained and well-resourced workforce

2. A robust and modern technological capability

3. Strong inter-agency collaboration

4. Effective collection and use of data

5. Up-to-date legal and other frameworks

6. A resilient and stable economy

7. An effective and independent foreign policy

8. Strong collaboration between government and the community

**17** **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

9. Good governance, transparency and accountability and observance of human

rights

###### A. MAJOR SECURITY ISSUES

1. Threats to national security are both external and internal, and are often

interconnected. Some are short term requiring an immediate response. Others such as

climate change are enduring and call for long-term, well-resourced and coordinated

strategic management. The rapidly changing world calls for flexibility in national

security policy and planning, with once unknown risks such as cyber-crime growing in

importance.

2. With Samoa highly unlikely to face conventional military threats, the types of external

issues raised during the consultations in developing this policy tended to focus on other

risks such as border integrity and threats linked to global change, such as climate

change and cyber security. In addition wide spectrums of issues more specific to

Samoa's internal condition were raised, such as domestic violence, non-communicable

diseases, youth unemployment, and drug and alcohol abuse.

3. The emphases of the Policy reflect both expert and community concerns about

security, and take account of different perspectives.

4. The Policy does not address every conceivable security threat. The threats identified,

and set out below, are those considered to be the most relevant and most critical to

Samoa's contemporary situation. The main categories of threat are:

             - Border security;

         - Natural disasters and climate change;

         - Cyber security; and

        - Human security.

5. The discussion under each of these headings establishes the importance of each of

these general threats; outlines manifestations in Samoa; and summarizes steps being

taken to address them. The National Security Policy document sets out the direction

and parameters that government proposes for action on each of these issues.

**18** **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

###### 1. BORDER SECURITY

6. The fundamental responsibilities of any state are to secure its borders, and to

safeguard national land, air, sea and cyberspace against current and emerging threats

that can arise from transnational crime and illegal fishing, the introduction of diseases

and exotic pests, and smuggling and other attempts to evade the payment of taxes and

excise. A well-managed border connects a country to the world, and enables it to

manage risks while benefitting from the flow of people and goods that are essential to

economic and social exchange and prosperity. Security and prosperity depend on

robust border policies.

7. Samoa has had relatively open border controls until now. However, significant world-

wide increases in the movement of people and goods and the rapid increase in the

number and reach of new and more sophisticated external threats mean that border

protection will require closer attention than it has received in the past. Vulnerabilities

will have to be identified and eliminated or reduced. With increases in tourism and the

hosting of further major international events, along with the now completed major

upgrade of the international airport and ongoing upgrade of the main port, Samoa will

need more resources and skilled personnel on the borders.

8. Managing border security involves a number of government agencies - often in

cooperation with commercial aviation and shipping operators - including: Immigration,

Customs, Police including its Maritime Wing, Quarantine, Agriculture and Fisheries,

Health, the Airport Authority and the Ports Authority. Moreover, most border threats are

transnational, and can only be adequately addressed by members of the region

working closely together and sharing information, including through regional and

international organizations.

9. There is useful collaboration with American Samoa, but given its geographic proximity

and risks associated with drug trafficking and other illegal cross-border activities, a

stronger relationship would be of mutual benefit.

###### (i) Transnational Crime and Other Emerging Risks

19 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

10. Experience in many countries around the world demonstrates that transnational crime

has the potential to undermine political processes, weaken security, harm communities,

fuel corruption, inhibit economic development, and impede good governance. With

crime becoming increasingly complex and global, there is a need for increased

cooperation with partners, to share information and intelligence and to respond

collaboratively. Timely intelligence and other advance information are critical to

minimize the entry into Samoa of criminals and other unauthorized visitors. A current

vulnerability is the paucity of information on incoming aircraft passenger lists.

11. Organized crime is on the increase in the Pacific Islands, as criminals seek to exploit

the region's vulnerabilities - long and porous maritime borders, patchy law enforcement

capabilities, and a geographic location between major sources and destinations of illicit

materials, principally narcotics. This growth has taken place despite improved

awareness, cooperation and operational responses by law enforcement agencies in

the region. Regionally, the main transnational criminal activity has involved narcotics

smuggling, illegal fishing, arms smuggling, money laundering, human trafficking, and

cyber-crime, increasingly with criminals from outside the region seeking to develop

partnerships with Pacific Islanders. Emerging issues are commercial espionage and

threats to intellectual property rights.

12. Narcotics smuggling - In recent years the Pacific region has increasingly been used for

the _ transshipment of narcotics such as cocaine, heroin and, more recently,

methamphetamine ("ice") destined for larger countries in the region, particularly

Australia and New Zealand. Samoa, while not a prime target, needs to be vigilant as

criminals seek out more vulnerable jurisdictions. Seizures of illicit drugs highlight the

risks of "spillover effects" into local markets. While locally-grown cannabis dominates

local markets, a number of nations, including Samoa, are reporting a substantial

increase in the local availability of "ice", now arguably the highest risk illicit drug in the

Pacific Islands nations.

13. Illegal fishing - The Pacific is the world's largest tuna fishery, and illegal, unreported

and unregulated (IUU) fishing represents a major threat to the fish stocks of Pacific

Island nations. While recorded instances of such illegal activity in Samoa's Exclusive

Economic Zone (EEZ) are few, Samoa nevertheless faces a significant challenge in

monitoring IUU fishing, as well as other illegal activity in its waters by ships, fishing

20 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

vessels, and private yachts.

14. Motorcycle gangs         - The infiltration of outlaw motorcycle gangs (OMCG), mainly from

New Zealand and Australia, is already a concern in several Pacific Islands countries.

These gangs are known to be involved in or to have links to organized crime. While still

only an emerging threat in Samoa, vigilance will be needed to prevent this problem

taking root locally.

**15.Arms smuggling** has been a significant problem in parts of the Pacific, particularly

where it has fuelled local conflicts, or in countries where levels of armed violent crime

are high. Weapons smuggling into Samoa has been a relatively frequent occurrence,

often by Samoans returning from abroad. However it appears that to date these

weapons generally have been for personal use only, and the criminal use of firearms

remains rare, but firm control over illegal weapons will need to be a priority.

16. Terrorists have not established a foothold in the Pacific, but Samoa along with other

countries needs to be alert to this possibility, particularly if in the future terrorist groups

perceive the region to be a "soft" target. In addition, the hosting of major international

events involving world leaders brings special security responsibilities for host

governments.

**17.Human trafficking and people smuggling - The quality and quantity of data on the**

extent of human trafficking in the Pacific Islands region are limited. Even so, there are

sufficient data to indicate that instances of sexual exploitation and the provision of

cheap labour in the fishing, logging, and mining sectors are on the rise. There have

been relatively few cases of human trafficking and people smuggling in Samoa, but

trends in the region indicate this is likely to be an emerging challenge.

18. Deportees          - There is concern both in government and in communities about criminal

deportees sent back to Samoa - some with virtually no advance notice - mainly from

the USA, but also from New Zealand and Australia. Many of these deportees have

serious criminal records and some have a history of communicable diseases. Arising

from this, there is understandable concern in Samoa about the disruptive and

damaging effects such returnees could have on Samoan society. Risks and problems

of assimilation are exacerbated by language difficulties and limited family or community

links.

**21** **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

(ii) loss **of Revenue**

19. Evasion of excise and other government duties through smuggling and over- and

under-invoicing by importers is a problem in Samoa. While difficult to quantify, it

constitutes one of the larger sources of lost government revenue, and is symptomatic

of a wider national challenge of compliance in meeting taxation obligations. In addition

transfer pricing, already a major problem in parts of the Pacific Islands region, is an

emerging risk.

(iii) Biosecurity Issues

20. Samoa's experience with taro leaf blight in 1993, which destroyed its US$4 million taro

export business, and with American Fowl Brood which harmed the local honey industry

two years ago, has illustrated the importance of robust quarantine controls. More

generally, over the years, invasive species have had devastating consequences for

agriculture, biodiversity, and the protection of native species. There is also a large

impact on disaster resilience and agriculture when, for example, invasive species block

waterways and exacerbate flooding, or when invasive species outgrow native species

after cyclone damage.

**(iv) Health Risks**

21. Health issues also present border security risks, with international travel and weak

health systems in many countries contributing to the spread of pathogens and vector-

borne diseases around the globe. Improved air links, and the prospect of direct flights

from new points of origin, particularly in Asia, underline the need for strong health and

quarantine security including Point-of-Entry screening, and a strong commitment to

comply with International Health Regulations.

22. Pandemics have been a rising security threat world-wide, particularly Ebola, Zika,

influenza and H1 N1. Although there are a few to no detected cases of these diseases

in Samoa, the attack rate and impact of an outbreak in the country would be

catastrophic in the small population. This severity was observed in the 1918 influenza

pandemic where there were 8,500 deaths (22 per cent of the population) attributable to

influenza. A case in 2015 of an individual arriving in Samoa from a declared Ebola

22 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

zone demonstrated the need to have border management procedures to handle

contingencies, with close coordination required both between agencies in-country, and

with relevant international partners.

###### (v) Government actions on border security - ba~rounol

23. Samoa has taken a number of steps in recent years to strengthen the handling of

border issues. The National Border Committee, which brings together relevant

agencies at CEO level, has been rejuvenated, and meets regularly to oversee and

address border management issues. Further coordination is provided at the

operational level by a number of interagency groups, several of which include

representatives of airlines and of shipping companies. Day-to-day collaboration

between agencies including the sharing of information is generally good, although on

occasions key information does not reach front-line offices quickly enough.

24. Elements of the institutional framework for relevant agencies have undergone review

in recent years, encompassing legislation, management plans, and operating

procedures. Recent developments have included, for example, the updating of the

Immigration Act, as well as the introduction of procedures for managing human

trafficking. However there are significant gaps in other areas, and further work remains

to be done. Securing sufficient funding for a suitable staffing structure in some

agencies can be a challenge, meaning the retention of good staff can be a problem.

Several agencies are currently undertaking staffing reviews.

25. Samoa works very closely with regional organizations on border security issues,

facilitating exchanges of information and assessments, access to capacity building

programs and other professional development opportunities, and the building of

regional networks. These include the Pacific Transnational Crime Coordination Centre

(PTCCC), the Pacific Immigration Directors Conference (PIDC), the Pacific Islands

Legal Officers Network (PILON) - all of which are headquartered in Apia - the Forum

Fisheries Agency (FAA) based in Honiara, the Oceania Customs Organization (OCO),

based in Suva, and the Pacific Islands Chiefs of Police organization.

26. Samoa has some maritime surveillance capacity stemming from its membership of the

**23** **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

Forum Fisheries Agency and Australia's Pacific Maritime Security Program. The main

components of the latter are provision of a Guardian-class patrol boat (the "Nafanua"),

integrated aerial surveillance, and enhanced regional cooperation. The Nafanua is

scheduled to be replaced soon by a new, upgraded vessel - part of Australia's

program to provide 19 replacement patrol vessels regionally. This could provide a

good opportunity to examine how to get maximize value from the patrol boat, Samoa's

most significant border security asset, in performing security functions in Samoan

waters.

27. Terrorism around the world demands concerted international responses, as well as

effective and timely sharing of information. Samoa strongly supports relevant UN

Security Council resolutions that aim to suppress terrorist activities, including their

training, international movement, and financing. Samoan policy and legislation

underpin its international obligations to help combat terrorism, as does its participation

in relevant Pacific-region security initiatives.

28. Samoa is a committed and active member of a number of international standards

bodies associated with tax, money laundering, and terrorism financing, and continues

to modernize its legislation, incorporating appropriate protection to meet international

standards. Samoa does not appear on any OECD or Financial Action Task Force

(FATF) blacklists. Samoa was disappointed to be included in the EU's list of non-

cooperative tax jurisdictions. Samoa has maintained an open dialogue with the EU

and hopes to find a constructive way forward on this issue.

29. Effective inter-sectoral collaboration between the Ministry of Health, police,

quarantine, customs and immigration and other partners responsible for point of entry

screening is essential. The completion of the new terminal at the international airport,

which includes for the first time a designated area where passengers can be assessed

for health risks, provides a good opportunity to strengthen point-of-entry health

security procedures. The new terminal has also provided Immigration and Customs

with more space, facilitating more efficient screening of passengers and baggage. On

infectious diseases, Samoa has adopted the International Health Regulations 2005

(WHO) framework and authority in its port health security procedures.

30. Revenue collection at the border is improving, even though more needs to be done to

boost the compliance capacity at points of entry. In 2017/18 better border

24 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

management and compliance checks led to a 15% increase in collections by

Quarantine Services in 2017/18. A 5% increase was also anticipated in the collection

of non-tax revenues by the Ministry of Revenue as a result of stricter enforcement of

border compliance monitoring. However improved scanning equipment is important for

revenue collection and scanning for illegal goods more generally - the planned new

equipment to scan containers at Apia port, will be a significant step forward, while the

new scanners at the international airport are already proving valuable.

31. On deportees, Samoa has engaged bilaterally with sending countries and has

participated in regional discussions and initiatives, including through PILON. In

addition it has developed its own policy for handling deportees, and is developing new

legislation addressing the issue. An NGO, the Samoa Returnees Charitable Trust,

assists deportees to settle-in on return to Samoa and to start afresh. In addition

Samoa is finding it useful to share experiences with other countries on deportee

policy, particularly New Zealand. However concerns about deportees are yet to be

resolved, and continued efforts are needed with the support of external and domestic

stakeholders.

###### 2. NATURAL DISASTERS AND CLIMATE CHANGE

32. Like much of the Pacific Islands region, Samoa is highly prone to repeated natural

disasters such as cyclones, floods and tsunamis. In addition to the human toll and

widespread damage, natural disasters historically have increased public debt. The

statistics are stark. Samoa was hit by seven Category Four or Five cyclones between

1981 and 2016. Tropical Cyclones Ofa in 1990 and Val in 1991 between them caused

estimated losses equivalent to four times GDP (World Bank 2015). More recently, in

2012 Tropical Cyclone Evan caused losses of US$210 million, or 30 per cent of GDP,

and in 2009 the tsunami which followed a 8.1 magnitude earthquake caused 189

fatalities and destroyed over 20 villages. Expected average annual losses from

cyclones and tsunamis are just over one per cent of Samoa's GDP (World Bank's

2016 "Pacific Possible" report). In addition to catastrophic events, Samoa is also

affected by smaller-scale natural hazards, including seasonal king tides, and periodic

droughts. Indications are that the situation could get worse, with a number of studies

**25** **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

predicting an increase in the intensity of cyclones.

33. The changing weather patterns giving rise to these increases in natural disasters are

widely attributed to climate change, which is of grave global and regional concern.

Pacific Island leaders recognize climate change as the biggest threat facing the

region, with serious implications for sustainable development and the environment".

Notably, the Pacific Islands Forum now has a single, integrated regional framework for

climate change and disaster relief management - a global first - the 2016 Framework

for the Resilient Development of the Pacific.

34. Samoa is highly vulnerable to the impact of climate change, with nearly 80 per cent of

the population and much of the nation's infrastructure within a kilometer of the coast,

often on very low-lying land. The effects of climate change on the environment and

livelihoods can be far-reaching, including dislocation of coastal communities,

increasing pressure on available cultivable land, impact on port facilities and tourism

and other commercial enterprises. Food security increasingly is being compromised.

Fishing and tourism-related livelihoods are vulnerable to the effects of coral bleaching,

which can affect lagoon ecology, local fish stocks, and tourist attractions.

**_Government Responses_**

35. Samoa speaks up strongly in global and regional forums on climate change,

particularly as a champion of small island states. At the 2014 UN Climate Change

Summit, the Prime Minister spoke forcefully of the political, social and economic

implications that climate change has for peace and security. The implementation of

the SAMOA Pathway - agreed during the Small Island Developing States summit

(SIDS) in Samoa in 2015 - provides for an integrated approach among member

countries to meeting the Paris Agreement commitments on climate change and the

2030 Agenda Sustainable Development Goals.

36. Samoa has also played an important role internationally in highlighting the nexus

between oceans and climate change, partly through its sponsorship of the "Blue

Pacific" identity, which was endorsed by leaders at the Pacific Islands Forum hosted

by Samoa in 2017.

37. Samoa hosts the pre-eminent regional organization on environmental matters, the

Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environmental program (SPREP). And it is a

26 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

partner in the Pacific Climate Change Centre - now under construction at the SPREP

complex in Apia - which is likely to play an important role in enhancing awareness of

the complexities of climate change.

38. The strengthening of disaster management and climate change resilience are given

particular emphasis in the SOS. With the support of development partners, and within

an overarching National Policy on Climate Change and the National Environment and

Development Sector Plan, Samoa is implementing a solid program of infrastructure

and other measures to mitigate and adapt to climate change. These include an

increased use of renewable energy and reduction in its dependence on fossil fuel.

Samoa has a multi-pronged strategy for building resilience, which includes rebuilding

reserves and fiscal policy buffers. Samoa has also been successful in accessing

global funds made available under the Paris Agreement, - for example, US$57 million

from the Green Climate Fund for flood management.

39. Samoa's national disaster management response capability has developed

substantially since the 1990s, and is well-coordinated, rapid and effective, guided by

the comprehensive and up-to-date National Disaster Management Plan 2017-2020.

40. Based on the most reliable forecasts of long-term climate change trends, the future

investment by Samoa in resilient infrastructure and other measures to mitigate and

adapt to climate change will need to be substantial, as envisaged in current plans.

Designs for new buildings, bridges, roads and other public infrastructure will need to

take into account not just previous flood levels, but anticipate future levels.

Mainstreaming adaptation and resilience across all ministerial planning and building

codes is important. There is much to be done with limited funds. Government budgets

are tight and will remain so. Accordingly, careful strategic planning and access to

international climate finance will be critical if the cost of climate change projects are

not to crowd out human development and other infrastructure funding.

###### 3. CYIBER SECURITY

41. The exponential growth in the use of ICT technology globally and the associated risks

mean that all countries now need to give high priority to cyber security - to protect

critical infrastructure, to combat cybercrime, and to guard against the inappropriate

27 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

use of social media. Global networking information systems make it easier for state

and non-state actors to compromise national security and to target individuals and

businesses.

42. The importance of cyber security is widely recognized, as shown most recently by the

agreement by Commonwealth leaders at the London CHOGM in April 2018 to

undertake national cyber risk assessments by 2020, to strengthen national cyber

security strategies, and implement plans.

43. In the Pacific Islands region, with the rapid increase in digital connectivity and access

to mobile phones, the cyber security challenge is heightened by the relatively limited

capacity of small countries to respond to cyber threats.

44. Awareness of these issues is growing steadily in Samoa. There is increasing

recognition of the need to safeguard major IT systems in government and the private

sector, and to protect the community more broadly. There is a need to protect the

National Broadband Highway, the government network linking offices throughout the

country. Similarly, it will be important to protect personal information with the proposed

electronic national ID system.

45. The needs are exemplified by instances of ATM fraud, or 'card skimming'; online fraud

by overseas-based criminals soliciting large sums of cash fr~m members of the public;

and the lure of instant fortunes from highly unstable and often dubious crypto-

currencies. The Central Bank has had to issue a number of warnings to the public to

avoid various get-rich-quick scams.

46. Misuse of social media has also become a major concern, particularly at community

level, with youth vulnerable to on-line pornography arid cyber bullying. Another danger

of social media is the spreading of anonymous, false and malicious information, which

not only harms individuals but in extreme cases can have the potential to undermine

confidence in government institutions. A further issue is the security of sensitive

information, including border control documentation such as passports, and also

personal data such as credit records and employment history.

47. The recent arrival of the Tui-Samoa submarine cable will undoubtedly bring great

benefits to Samoa through substantially enhanced IT capability. Along with the

benefits, however, the increased capacity brings with it greater vulnerability to cyber-

28 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

attacks, and a more urgent need for robust cyber security.

**_Government Responses_**

48. Samoa's Cyber Security Strategy 2016-2021 provides the framework for the future

safeguarding of the nation against cyber threats. The implementation of the strategy is

underway, a lengthy and resource-intensive task which includes the review of

legislation, upgrading of capacity and safeguards, skills training and public awareness

campaigns, and close coordination with the private sector. Important objectives are

the establishment of a Cyber Emergency Response Team (CERT), and accession to

the Budapest Convention on Cybercrime.

49. Given the globalised nature of cyber threats, cooperation internationally and regionally

is particularly important. Samoa increasingly is participating in these efforts to address

cyber challenges, and is benefitting from capacity development opportunities provided

by bilateral and multilateral development partners. At the regional level, Samoa

participates in several programs including PacSON (the Pacific Cyber Security

Operational Network), which is developing a network of cyber security experts across

the region; the Pacific Islands Law Officers' Network (PILON)'s Cybercrime Working

Group; and Cyber Safety Pasifika, a cybercrime awareness and education program.

Future membership of the Budapest Convention, once Samoa is able to meet the

Convention requirements, will also bring with it significant capacity development

opportunities.

50. Until key elements of the Cyber Security Strategy are put in place, Samoa's

vulnerabilities on cyber issues will increase - timely and effective implementation of

the strategy therefore is a high priority.

###### 4. HUMAN SECURITY

51. Pacific Island Forum leaders have long recognized the importance of human security

for communities, families and individuals. A principal objective of the 2104 Framework

for Pacific Regionalism is "security that ensures stable and safe human, environmental

and political conditions for all".

29 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

52. Human security is a broad concept, potentially covering many issues, but two stand

out in Samoa as serious risks that, if not properly addressed, have the potential to

have major national social and economic impact. They are gender-based violence and

non-communicable diseases.

**_A. Gender-Based Violence (GBV)_**

53. In addition to the psychological toll on individual lives, insecurity from fear of crime,

conflict and violence - particularly domestic violence - has a serious impact on

development. The problem is severe in the Pacific region generally, and in Samoa.

According to a 2017 UN Women report, the level of violence against women and girls

in the region is amongst the highest in the world, with two thirds of women and girls

affected.

54. While the data are insufficient and somewhat unreliable, there is no doubt about the

scale of the problem and the trends in Samoa. The 2006 Family Health and Safety

Study found that nearly half of all women surveyed between the ages of 15 and 49

reported experiencing physical and/or emotional and/or sexual violence from their

intimate partner. As that report noted, apart from the effects of domestic abuse on

women's health, there are multiple other effects, which can include financial cost,

irregular attendance at work, low productivity, unwanted pregnancies, vulnerability to

diseases, and acute and chronic mental illness. A more recent survey, The Family

Safety Survey 2017, found that violence against women had risen from 46% in 2000

to 60% in 2017.

55. As in many other countries, gender-based violence has its roots in deeper social

attitudes and traditions. As outlined in the 2015 Ombudsman's 'State of Human Rights

Report', the current near-epidemic rate of violence against women is a form of

discrimination caused by the systemic low status of women in Samoan society and

their exclusion from decision-making processes.

**_Government Responses_**

56. Samoa has taken a number of steps to address GBV, with government agencies,

communities and churches, and the Samoan Victims Support Group and other NGOs

all contributing.

30 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

57. At the international and regional level, Samoa has ratified the Convention on the

Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women and Girls (CEDAW) in 1992,

and is part of the Pacific Partnership to End Violence against Women and Girls, which

runs from 2018 to 2022. The Samoan Attorney General chairs a Working Group in the

Pacific Islands Legal Officers' Network (PILON) to improve the witness protection

system in domestic violence cases.

58. National initiatives have included the Domestic Violence/Family Safety Act (FSA)

2013, updated in 2017, which provides for greater protection for families. The Crimes

Ordinance 1961 Act was updated in 2009 to include new offences and stronger

penalties for sexual and gender-based violence offences against women and children.

The Domestic Violence Unit of the Police works closely with NGOs, focusing on

abuse. The National Task Force to End Domestic Violence, established under the Law

and Justice Sector with the Ministry of Women, Community and Social Development

as the lead agency, takes anintegrated approach to addressing the issue, while

Samoa's Gender Policy and National Plan for the Advancement of Women underlines

a commitment to combat gender-based violence, specifically a more proactive

government role in GBV prevention and victim protection and treatment.

59. Despite these efforts, family violence has reached unacceptable levels. A major study

           - the National Public Inquiry into Family Violence conducted by the Ombudsman's

Office - was commissioned in 2016, and is due to report to Parliament in 2018.

_B. Health Security_

60. The World Bank's "Pacific Possible" report in 2017 identified two key risks that could

significantly impact on growth and living standards in the Pacific over the medium to

long term. The first risk identified was the non-communicable disease (NCO) crisis,

which is affecting the lives of many Pacific Islanders (the second was climate change

and natural disasters). The report identified unhealthy diets as the greatest risk factor

for cardio vascular disease and diabetes-induced deaths, the two leading NCDs, and

noted that the top seven most obese countries in the world are in the Pacific.

61. In Samoa, over 40% of deaths are attributable to NCDs, principally diabetes, coronary

heart disease and strokes. While it is difficult to pinpoint statistics which have general

acceptance, the overall picture for Samoa on diabetes is particularly alarming. The

**31** **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

"Pacific Possible" report estimates that as many as one in four Samoans may now

suffer from some form of diabetes, which accounts for around fifteen percent of all

deaths. It also reported that, even though physical activity of Samoans has increased

in recent years, obesity continues to rise - with an estimated 54 % of the total

population affected - that is more than four times the global average of 13%.

62. Apart from the cost to individuals in terms of suffering and life expectancy, and other

social costs, there is a considerable cost to productivity and to the public purse. As a

2017 World Health Organization/Institute of Health Policy study found, NCDs,

particularly diabetes and cardiovascular disease, account for 55% of total medical

spending in Samoa (and are a major driver of costly overseas medical referrals, which

benefits only a small proportion of the population). As the study identified, Samoa

needs to substantially increase spending on essential NCO interventions.

63. The "Pacific Possible" report noted that the economic burden of NCDs is expected to

increase significantly. Based on current trends, projections indicate that GDP in Pacific

Islands countries could be between 5 and 9 per cent less by 2040 if the NCO crisis

continues unabated. In addition NCO mortality will potentially reduce the labour force

in the region by 9 to 30% in the same period.

64. In addition to NCDs, Samoa faces significant challenges to human security from

communicable infectious diseases. Epidemics of re-emerging infectious diseases are

on the rise (including lymphatic filiarsis, Chlamydia, syphilis, tuberculosis and

leptospirosis) due to lapses in primary care and lack of prioritization of these diseases.

_Government Responses_

65. Responding to the NCO crisis requires urgent action, and, with many factors driving

the rise in NCDs, a multi sectoral approach to prevention is essential. At the regional

level, there is a comprehensive set of measures outlined in the NCO Road Map, jointly

prepared by the Secretariat of the Pacific Community and several other development

partners in 2014.

66. In Samoa, the Ministry of Health has led a comprehensive approach involving different

arms of government together with communities, and government has legislated to

discourage harmful habits - for example, by increasing excise on sugary drinks. In his

budget speech in May 2018 the Minister of Finance said the Government's review of

32 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

the health sector had identified the growing incidence of NCDs as the most significant

threat to the health of the people of Samoa, which was a critical issue now and into

the future. He said the Government would continue to address this, including through

an increased focus on making primary health care more accessible.

67. A new policy on NCDs is being developed by government, with the Ministry of Health

as the lead agency. Given the human and economic consequences at stake, this

initiative merits strong whole-of-government support.

68. On infectious and communicable diseases, Samoa has a multi-pronged approach

which includes public health information campaigns and vaccination strategies, and

works closely with development partners.

###### C. !ENABLING ENVIRONMENT ANO CAPABILITIES

69. National security threats are constantly evolving and will present an increasingly

complex set of challenges. The task of preparing for and dealing with these challenges

requires a coherent set of enabling conditions. The Government is committed to

maintaining and further developing the following capabilities in relation to the

management of national security risks:

**_(1) A highly trained and well-resourced workforce_**

70. A frequently heard comment in Samoa is that, to the extent there are shortcomings in

government service delivery, the cause is not so much a lack of strategic and other

plans, but rather poor implementation, a major cause of which is resource constraints.

71. The 2016 UNODC report on transnational crime in the Pacific found that a large

number of states and their personnel lacked adequate knowledge, skills and capacity

to carry out their duties effectively. Strong capacities are important both to identify and

counter transnational criminal activities, and to engage in cross-border cooperation

efforts at the regional and international levels, especially at maritime borders, seaports

and airports. To do their jobs, Samoa's frontline agencies, which are responsible for

dealing with multiple security challenges, must be equipped with the requisite training,

skills and qualifications.

_33_ **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

72. Adequate and fair remuneration levels and coherent career paths provide a strong

incentive for trained and qualified personnel to update their skills and to perform at a

professional level. They also make personnel less susceptible to temptations such as

bribery that allow organized crime to infiltrate and gain a grip on front-line agencies, as

seen in many countries.

**_(2) A robust and modem technological capacity_**

73. Staff of frontline services including immigration, quarantine, police, and customs

needs access to up-to-date technological surveillance and preventative systems such

as X-Ray machines, anti-cybercrime protection software and technology, as well as

health diagnostic and quarantine facilities to perform their roles. Protecting Samoa's

financial sector and public and private online data will also require up-to-date systems

that will help them to keep ahead of rapidly evolving threats.

**_(3) Strong inter-agency collaboration and sharing of information_**

7 4. The changing and complex nature of many security threats and multiple crosscutting

issues require a whole of government response, with more fluid inter-agency

collaboration. Combating drug trafficking, for example, usually involves cooperation

between police, customs, immigration, health and quarantine agencies, and potentially

others - for example the police maritime wing, or the postal service which may

encounter attempts at concealment through the mail. Collaboration with other

stakeholders is also vital, including for example the development of MOUs between

government bodies and the private sector to enhance information sharing for national

security purposes.

75. There are various ways to strengthening this collaboration, such as joint exercises and

training, and improved communications systems between personnel from different

agencies. Most importantly, leaders should foster and reward a culture of sharing

information and working closely with other agencies.

**_(4) Effective collection and use of data_**

76. As many potential threats are often gradual or emerging, such as NCDs and crime

levels, there is a need for regular monitoring and surveillance, involving longitudinal

data and cyclical surveys and reporting. Data can support policymaking, help relevant

34 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

agencies adopt appropriate strategies and know where to allocate adequate resources

to make early, effective, interventions.

77. The lack of good quality data is a widespread problem in the Pacific Islands region,

whether it relates to crime, socio-economic issues and livelihoods, the economy, or to

climate change. UNODC has noted that the significant gaps in data and information

are a fundamental problem in developing effective and evidence-based responses to

trans-national organized crime in the Pacific. In a similar vein, the Forum Economic

Ministers Meeting (FEMM) in April 2018 underlined the need for member countries to

devote more resources to build statistical and reporting capacity for evidence-based

economic policy and analysis.

78. In Samoa, the police and some other government agencies are making good progress

in upgrading data, but overall there are major shortcomings. The challenge in the

socioeconomic sphere was outlined in the landmark 2015 State of Human Rights

Report by the Ombudsman's Office which said that the collection, analysis and

dissemination of comprehensive data disaggregated by sex, age, village, disability,

socio-economic background etc. must become regular practice in Samoa. Samoa is

doing relatively well however in the quality of its economic data, with the IMF noting in

June 2018 that Samoa is one of the most advanced nations in the Pacific in this

regard.

**_(5) Up-to-date legal and other frameworks_**

79. The unpredictable, evolving and multi-level nature of many issues necessitates a

robust and responsive legal framework. New or emerging trends in trans-national

organized crime, such as drug trafficking or cybercrime, require new legal responses

to close any potential loopholes - weak or outdated legislation limits the ability of the

police and legal system to prosecute and deter future offending. For effective common

responses to security challenges in the region, Samoa's legal codes should conform

to international norms and standards and be consistent with other countries in the

region.

80. Much good work has been done in Samoa to update national pans, policies, and

legislation. However, and significant gaps remain. Government will therefore

undertake an audit of policy and legislation.

35 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

**_(6) A resilient and stable economy._**

_ 81. A healthy economy is pivotal to maintaining social cohesion by providing equitable

economic and employment opportunities as well as providing quality social services to

all citizens. A strong economy provides the means for building resilience to

unpredictable external shocks, such as natural disasters or global financial crises, and

for recovery. It is also essential to the provision of adequate resources to agencies

that have major responsibilities for national security, such as border agencies.

82. Prudent fiscal management is essential to this. Deficits must be manageable,

transparent, and low enough to create fiscal space to respond to shocks, while leaving

adequate funding for development priorities. The Samoa Development Strategy (SOS)

aims to restrict the fiscal deficit to no more than 2% of GDP and the public debt level

to no more than 55%. The Government is committed to fiscal responsibility, and has

made strengthening of debt management a priority, with the debt management

strategy anchored on a target of 50% of GDP (which is just above the current level). It

has also implemented a fiscal rule that any new financing must at a minimum have a

concessional component of 35%. Nevertheless the IMF (Article iv consultations in the

first half of 2018) considers Samoa remains at high risk of external debt distress, and

has called for reduction of public debt to a more sustainable level.

**_(7) An effective and independent foreign policy and strong engagement with key external_**

**_partners._**

83. In many different ways, Samoa has punched above its weight, and continues to do so

               - in terms of its voice in regional and international affairs; and in terms of the

leadership it has shown on a number of issues central to its interests. A network of

diplomatic missions abroad (New York, Brussels, Canberra, Wellington, Auckland,

Beijing, Tokyo) amplifies that voice and plays an important role in defending and

promoting Samoa's interest internationally.

84. Samoa's relationship with its development partners is critical, with development

cooperation accounting for a significant proportion of Samoa's GDP. In addition to

project aid and loans, Samoa also receives regular budget support. Principal bilateral

development partners are Australia, New Zealand, China, Japan, the European Union

and the United States. Multilateral development partners include the World Bank, the

36 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

ADB, and UNDP and a range of other United Nations organizations such as the WHO,

the FAO, the ILO and UNESCO.

85. Government works hard to put development assistance to the best possible uses so

as to build a more sustainable and resilient economy in line with national and regional

priorities. It therefore targets assistance carefully and does everything it can to

optimize its effectiveness and efficiency.

86. Under the Framework for Pacific Regionalism, Samoa has committed to a set of

legally binding common rules, standards and institutions to foster regional integration

and cooperation on common objectives of economic growth, sustainable development,

governance and security.

87. Samoa is a strong supporter of efforts underway by the PIF to develop a

comprehensive regional security declaration - "Biketawa Plus" - that is likely to be put

to the Forum Leaders Meeting in Nauru later in 2018. The proposed declaration will

embrace an expanded concept of security including human and environmental

security. Among other things, "Biketawa Plus" is likely to recognize that Forum

members are the principal security partners in determining the region's security

priorities and action, and to commit to greater and more frequent consultation between

members on regional security issues. It is also likely to support development by

members of national security strategies and aligning them across the region,

recognizing that strengthened national security makes a significant contribution to

broader security and stability in the Pacific.

88. Samoa has committed to a number of international treaties and conventions to make

the world safer, more secure, and better-governed. These obligations are reflected in

national policy and legislation.

**_(8) Strong collaboration between government and the community_**

89. The erosion of traditional values is a widespread concern in Pacific Island countries. In

Samoa, however, the fa'asamoa continues to be a fundamental national strength, and

debate focuses more on the balance between traditional ways, and the requirements

of a modern economy and system of justice. There have been instances, for example,

of courts ruling against certain types of punishment meted out to individuals by village

councils. As noted in the Ombudsman's report on human rights, 'over the decades the

37 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

authority of village councils has played a vital role in maintaining and preserving

peace, harmony, security and stability through customary law and traditions .. the

weaving together of fa'asamoa and human rights principles will make a stronger and

more harmonious society.'

90. Pacific Island Forum members have consistently placed high value on cooperation

between government, civil society, faith-based organizations, the private sector, and

communities to address the threats to human security. Frequent and open

communication between these groups and government is vital, and enables citizens,

vulnerable groups and their organizations to participate in the preparation of reforms,

laws and processes that directly affect their lives and security. In Samoa, communities

including village councils, church and youth groups, and women's committees

contribute to matters of national and local importance. Village councils are empowered

by the Village Fono Act (1990) to make and administer by-laws for the regulation of

village activities and to punish those who break them.

91. The number of NGOs in Samoa has increased in recent years, with most focusing on

issues such health, environment, domestic violence, poverty and livelihood.

92. Awareness campaigns through social media, television and radio and in schools and

universities als-9 perform a vital role in tackling issues such as public safety, drug and

alcohol abuse, domestic violence, public health risks, and disaster management

_(9) Good governance, transparency and accountability, and observance of human rights_

93. National security and good governance are interdependent. Essential ingredients of

good governance include a culture of accountability and transparency, separation of

powers and the observance of fundamental human rights. To a large degree, Samoa's

international reputation hinges on the ways in which it deals with human rights and

human development, as well as issues such as terrorism financing, money laundering,

and the probity of off-shore finance centres:

94. Samoa has relatively robust governance systems in place, with an independent

judiciary, parliament, and strong accountability institutions such as the Auditor

General's office and the Ombudsman's office, which now includes the National Human

Rights Institute.

38 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & **Cabinet**


-----

95. Samoa is committed to the protection of human rights. Following the Second Universal

Periodic Review of Samoa in 2017 under the auspices of the UN Human Rights

Council, Samoa will strengthen internal mechanisms and institutions to allow it to meet

its obligations under human rights treaties and obligations. In 2017, a Human Rights

Council expert group visited Samoa to examine the state of women's rights, the first

time a Pacific Islands country had opened its doors to this body.

96. The media and civil society have important roles to play in educating the community

and policy makers on issues of concern, maintaining policy scrutiny, and promoting

responsible and responsive government. Samoa ranks relatively highly in global

surveys of press freedom.

39 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & **Cabinet**


-----

###### APPIENDIX2

 KIEV GOVERNMENT MIN!STR!IES ANID AGIENCIIES

Below are the key Government ministries and agencies most relevant to the NSP, with a

brief description of their role in relation to national security.

_Ministry of Prime Minister and Cabinet (MPMC)_

Provides overall coordination of policy development and plays a key role in shaping

Samoa's responses to emerging issues. Chairs the National Border Committee (NBC), a

CEO-level mechanism which coordinates all matters relating to Samoa's borders. Will

chair the new National Security Committee, which will replace the NBC. The Ministry also

supervises the Immigration Service and the Transnational Crime Unit (see below).

_Police Service_

The Police Service's key role in enforcement, crime prevention, investigation and

intelligence gathering and putting together briefs of evidence for prosecutions means that

it is involved in a wide range of matters relating to national security, whether they relate to

infringements at the border or security incidents more generally.

The Maritime Wing of the Police Service is responsible for the operation of Samoa's patrol

boat, the Nafanua, which is tasked with patrolling Samoa's waters.

**_Transnational Crime Unit (TCU)_**

The Transnational Crime Unit, which administratively is part of MPMC, is a composite

body drawing personnel from the Police Service and border agencies including

Immigration and Customs. It plays the central role in gathering and disseminating

intelligence relating to all forms of transnational crime.

The TCU is one of 19 TCUs in Pacific Islands Countries which work closely with the Pacific

Transnational Crime Coordination Centre (PTCCC).

_-W_ **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

**_Immigration Service_**

The Immigration Service, under the oversight of the Ministry of Prime Minister and

Cabinet, is the key agency for managing Samoa's borders and determining the status of

non-citizens in Samoa, including screening arrivals to and from Samoa for potential

criminal or health risks. It also has the primary role in managing issues such as the

repatriation and removal of non-citizens.

**_Attorney General's Office_**

The Attorney General's Office is responsible for the provision of legal advice to the

government, the administration of the justice system, and for upholding Samoa's human

rights laws and commitments. It is responsible for the prosecution service, which works

with the Central Investigation Department (CID) of the police. It also reviews and drafts

legislation.

The Attorney General's Office works closely with the Pacific Islands Law Officers Network

(PILON), which provides a forum for addressing law and justice issues common to the

Pacific Islands countries. The PILON Secretariat is located in Apia in the Attorney

General's Office.

_Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFA T)_

MFAT is responsible for Samoa's bilateral and multilateral relationships, engagements and

commitments, as well as its relationship with the United National and other international

organizations.

In the case of border or other crimes and incidents involving foreign nationals, MFAT has a

role in liaison with the country or countries involved. It also has responsibilities in relation

to Samoa's reporting and compliance obligations for international treaties, conventions

and other commitments.

**_Samoan Customs Service_**

The Customs Service has a front-line presence at Samoa's airports, seaports and national

post office, and plays a key role in detecting the arrival of illegal goods at the border, such

as narcotics and weapons, as well as smuggled goods. The Customs Service is part of the

Ministry of Revenue, and is responsible for collection of revenue at the border on dutiable

goods.

**Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

**_Samoan Quarantine Service (SQS)_**

The Quarantine Service, under the oversight of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries

(MAF), plays a key role in preventing the introduction and spread of unwanted agricultural

pests and diseases. It is also responsible for regulating the importation and use of

pesticides. The Quarantine Service has a full-time presence at key entry points for people

and cargo, as well as the national post office.

**_The Samoa Airport Authority (SAA)_**

This government corporation is a key parts of Samoa's border security architecture, and is

responsible for security of the facilities at Samoa's airports. The Ministry of Works,

Transport and Infrastructure (MWTI) is the regulator of SAA.

**_The Samoa Ports Authority (SPA)_**

This government corporation is a key parts of Samoa's border security architecture, and is

responsible for security of the facilities at Samoa's ports. The Ministry of Works, Transport

and Infrastructure (MWTI) is the regulator of SPA.

**_Ministry of Health (MoH)_**

The Ministry of Health has responsibility for regulating the health sector, and providing the

government with advice on strategy, administration, and policy and planning for health

services. The National Surveillance and International Health Regulations Division provides

public health surveillance services both on a national and international level, and is

responsible for global disease outbreaks and for overseeing the response to imminent

outbreaks of infectious diseases.

**_National Health Service (NHS)_**

The NHS is the main government provider of health services for Samoa, and operates all

the hospitals and health centres.

**_Ministry of Communication and Information Technology (MCIT)_**

MCIT is the key agency responsible for cyber security, and convenes the National ICT

Steering Committee (NICT). The NICT is tasked with leading the coordination and the

implementation of the cyber security strategy and its implementation. MCIT works closely

with the Samoan Police Service and the Transnational Crime Unit, as well as the Central

Bank and International Finance Authority. The key Sectoral Policies are the National

-t2 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

Cybersecurity Strategy 2016-2021 and the Communications Sector Plan 2017/18.

**_Ministry of Women, Community and Social Development (MWCSD)_**

MWCSD is the lead ministry for combating gender based violence (GBV). The task of

preventing and dealing with GBV entails a multi-sectoral approach, with the Ministry of

Justice and the National Police Service also key agencies. The Crime Prevention Task

Force and the PILON Sexual Gender Based Violence Working Group, which operate

within the Law and Justice Sector, have also been tasked with combating GBV. Key

sectoral policies are the National Policy for Gender Equality 2016-2020, the Law and

Justice Sector Plan 2016-2020, and the Crime Prevention Operating Strategy 2016-2020.

More generally, MWCSD plays a key role on community security issues within the

framework of the Law and Justice Sector, along with the Ministry of Justice and Courts

Administration, the Attorney General's Office, the Police Service, and the Prisons and

Corrections Service.

_The Ministry of Natural Resources_ & Environment (MNRE)

The MNRE is the lead agency on combating climate change, environmental protection and

conservation, although responsibility is spread across all sectors. Key Sectoral Policies are

the Environment and Development Sector Plan 2013-2016 and the Biodiversity Strategy

and Action Plan 2015 - 2020.

###### NATURAL DISASTERS AND EMERGENCIES

The key roles, responsibilities and reporting lines in the case of an emergency are set out

in the National Disaster Management Plan 2017-2020, in accordance with section 9 of the

Disaster and Emergency Management Act 2007.

The power of the Prime Minister to declare a state of emergency in the case of war,

external aggression, internal disturbance or natural catastrophe is set out in Part X, section

105 the Samoan Constitution. The key bodies are as follows:

_National Disaster Council (NDC)_

The National Disaster Council is the key body responsible for national disasters and

emergencies such as floods, cyclones or chemical spills. The Prime Minister, as

Chairperson of the NDC, has control of the disaster situation. The role of the NDC during

-B **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & **Cabinet**


-----

disaster response is to provide strategic direction and decision-making as required.

The operational decision making and co-ordination of response activities remains the

responsibility of the response agencies, under the leadership and co-ordination of the

Chairperson of the Disaster Advisory Committee, DAC, with technical support from the

Disaster Management Office. The lead agency is the Ministry of Natural Resources and

Environment (MNRE).

**Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

###### APPEND!X3

 list of consultations

1. Asian Development Bank

2. Attorney General

3. Audit Office of Samoa

4. Central Bank of Samoa

5. Community Consultations Savaii (Village Mayors, Community representatives)

6. Community Consultations Upolu (Village Mayors, Community representatives)

7. Customs (Ministry for Revenue)

8. Development Bank of Samoa

9. Electric Power Corporation

10. Food and Agriculture Organization

11. Immigration (Ministry of the Prime Minister & Cabinet)

12.lnternational Labor Organization

13. Land Transport Authority

14. Legislative Assembly

15. Ministry for Public Enterprises

16. Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries

17. Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Labour

18. Ministry of Communication, Information and Technology

19. Ministry of Education, Sports and Culture

20. Ministry of Finance

21. Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade

22. Ministry of Health

23. Ministry of Justice & Courts Administration

24. Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment

25. Ministry of Women and Social Development

26. Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure

27. National Border Committee Members

28. National Disaster Management Office

29. National Health Service

Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister & Cabinet


-----

30. National University of Samoa

31. Oceania Customs Organization

32. Pacific Immigration Directors Conference

33. Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat

34. Pacific Islands Law Officers Network

35. Pacific Transnational Crime Co-ordination Centre

36. Police Commissioner (Ministry of Police)

37. Public Service Commission

38.Quarantine (Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries)

39. Samoa Airport Authority

40. Samoa Airways

41. Samoa Australia Police Partnership

42. Samoa Chamber of Commerce

43. Samoa Council of Churches

44. Samoa Farmers Association

45. Samoa Fire and Emergency Services Authority

46. Samoa Housing Corporation

4 7. Samoa International Finance Authority

48. Samoa Land Corporation

49. Samoa Maritime Security Advisor

50. Samoa Police Service

51. Samoa Ports Authority

52. Samoa Post Office

53. Samoa Prisons and Corrections Services

54. Samoa Qualifications Authority

55. Samoa Shipping Corporation

56. Samoa Shipping Service

57.Samoa Umbrella of Non-Government Organizations

58. Samoa Victim Support Group

59. Samoa Water Authority

60. Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Program

61. Transnational Crime Unit, ICA & Immigration Samoa

62. United Nations Development Program

-t6 Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister & Cabinet


-----

63. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime

64. Unit Trust of Samoa

65. University of the South Pacific

66. World Bank Office in Samoa

67. World Health Organization

...J.7 Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister & Cabinet


-----

|Acronyms|Namei n Full|
|---|---|
|ADB|Asian Development Bank|
|AG|Attorney General's Office|
|CEDAW|Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women|
|CERT|Computer Emergency Response Team|
|DAC|The Disaster Advisory Committee|
|DFAT|(Australian) Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade|
|OMO|Disaster Management Office|
|FAO|Food and Agricultural Organisation|
|FFA|Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency|
|GBV|Gender Based Violence|
|GDP|Gross Domestic Product|
|ILO|International Labour Organisation|
|MAF|Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries|
|MCIL|Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Labour|
|MCIT|Ministry of Communication, Information and Technology|
|MFAT|Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade|
|MFR|Ministry for Revenue|
|MJCA|Ministry of Justice and Courts Administration|
|MNRE|Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment|
|MOF|Ministry of Finance|
|MOH|Ministry of Health|
|MOP|Ministry of Police|
|MPMC|Ministry of the Prime Minister and Cabinet|
|MWCSD|Ministry of Women, Community and Social Development|
|MWTI|Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure|
|NBC|National Border Committee|
|NDC|National Disaster Council|
|NHS|National Health Services|
|NSC|National Security Committee|
|NUS|National University of Samoa|


###### APPEND!X4

 Acronyms

**Acronyms** **Name in Full**

###### ADB Asian Development Bank

 AG Attorney General's Office

 CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women

 CERT Computer Emergency Response Team DAC The Disaster Advisory Committee

 DFAT (Australian) Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
 OMO Disaster Management Office

 FAO Food and Agricultural Organisation

 FFA Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency

 GBV Gender Based Violence

 GDP Gross Domestic Product ILO International Labour Organisation

 MAF Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries

 MCIL Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Labour MCIT Ministry of Communication, Information and Technology

 MFAT Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade MFR Ministry for Revenue

 MJCA Ministry of Justice and Courts Administration

 MNRE Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment MOF Ministry of Finance

 MOH Ministry of Health

 MOP Ministry of Police

 MPMC Ministry of the Prime Minister and Cabinet

 MWCSD Ministry of Women, Community and Social Development

 MWTI Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure

 NBC National Border Committee

NDC National Disaster Council

###### NHS National Health Services

 NSC National Security Committee
 NUS National University of Samoa

48 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|oco|Oceania Customs Organisation|
|OMCG|Outlaw Motorcycle Gangs|
|OOTR|Office of the Regulator|
|PaCSON|Pacific Cyber Security Operational Network|
|PICs|Pacific Islands Countries|
|PICP|Pacific Island Chiefs of Police|
|PIDC|Pacific Immigration Directors' Conference|
|PIF|Pacific Islands Forum|
|PILON|Pacific Islands Law Officers' Network.|
|PSC|Public Service Commission|
|PTCCC|Pacific Transnational Crime Coordination Centre|
|SBS|Samoa Bureau of Statistics|
|SDG|Sustainable Development Goals|
|SDS|Strategy for the Development of Samoa|
|SFESA|Samoa Fire and Emergency Services Authority|
|SLRC|Samoa Law Reform Commission|
|SPA|Samoa Ports Authority|
|SPREP|Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme|
|TCU|Transnational Crime Unit|
|TOC|Transnational Organised Crime|
|UNDP|United Nations Development Programme|
|UNODC|United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime|
|WHO|World Health Organisation|



###### - - - oco Oceania Customs Organisation - - - -

OMCG Outlaw Motorcycle Gangs

OOTR Office of the Regulator

PaCSON Pacific Cyber Security Operational Network

PICs Pacific Islands Countries

PICP Pacific Island Chiefs of Police

PIDC Pacific Immigration Directors' Conference

PIF Pacific Islands Forum

PILON Pacific Islands Law Officers' Network.

PSC Public Service Commission

PTCCC Pacific Transnational Crime Coordination Centre

SBS Samoa Bureau of Statistics

SDG Sustainable Development Goals

SDS Strategy for the Development of Samoa

SFESA Samoa Fire and Emergency Services Authority

SLRC Samoa Law Reform Commission

SPA Samoa Ports Authority

SPREP Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme

TCU Transnational Crime Unit

TOC Transnational Organised Crime

UNDP United Nations Development Programme

UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime

WHO World Health Organisation

-49 **Property of the Government of Samoa: Ministry of the Prime Minister** & Cabinet


-----

