# Contents

Preface 2

Defence Challenges in the 21st Century 4

Promoting Peace and Stability 16

The SAF Today 26

Securing Our Future 44

Turning Constraints into Opportunities 50

Sharpening the Technological Edge 62

Ready and Vigilant for the Future 72


-----

# Preface

Defending Singapore in the 21[st] Century outlines Singapore’s defence
policies and charts the strategies Singapore will take to ensure its security
in the new millennium.

The 21[st] Century will bring with it new challenges for the defence of
Singapore. The end of the Cold War did not bring about an end to conflicts.
The strategic landscape in the 21[st] Century will remain dynamic and
uncertain, as countries continue to adjust to the strategic realities of a
post-Cold War world. Tensions and conflicts may erupt over existing as
well as new disputes. At the same time, the security and well-being of
nations will become even more closely intertwined in a globalised world.
A small state like Singapore is vulnerable to the vagaries of the international
environment. We will face a more diverse range of security challenges,
as we plug ourselves into the global economy.

Singapore will continue to pursue diplomacy and invest in a strong defence
to safeguard its survival and success into the 21[st] Century. The Ministry of
Defence and the Singapore Armed Forces will further strengthen
Singapore’s defence capability to ensure that Singapore is well positioned
to meet any future challenges. But the task of defending the country cannot
rest solely on a corps of well-trained and well-equipped soldiers. There
must be unstinting support from each and every citizen. “Defending
Singapore in the 21[st] Century” thus serves as a reminder to Singaporeans
to continue to be steadfast in building a strong and credible defence
capability. It also aims to share with Singaporeans the rationale behind
our country’s defence policies and how the government will shape defence
strategies in a fluid geopolitical environment.

Defending Singapore in the 21[st] Century serves another purpose. The Asian
economic crisis at the end of the last century has driven home the
importance of closer international co-operation to deal with common


challenges. As it is in economics, so it should be in security. Singapore
firmly believes that stronger international co-operation is needed to tackle
the wide-ranging and complex security challenges that the international
community will face in the 21[st] century. By making transparent its own
defence posture, Singapore hopes to contribute to the process of
confidence and trust building among members of the international
community. Defending Singapore in the 21[st] Century serves as an
affirmation to the rest of the world that Singapore is committed to play its
part to contribute to global peace and stability.

**Dr Tony Tan Keng Yam**

Minister for Defence


-----

# g in the 21[st] Century

## Protecting Our Future

From a small fishing village, Singapore has developed
into the thriving global city-state of today. In the 21[st]

Century, we hope to build for our children and
ourselves a First World Economy and a World-Class
Home. This vision can only be realised if Singapore
is safe and secure, in a region that is peaceful
and stable.


A World-Class Home


“We have to transform ourselves –
from a regional economy to a first
world economy… We must build a
world-class home for ourselves, where
Singaporeans want to stay, and talent
from around the world want to come.”

Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong

at the National Day Rally, 1999

Security therefore remains a key
national priority in the 21[st] Century.
Our experiences in the past and events
in the region are reminders that our
security environment can and will change, sometimes suddenly. Our
physical and resource constraints as a small country also remind us of
our dependence on trade and communication with the outside world,
and our vulnerability to external events and changes.


-----

Singapore may be small, but we have developed a distinct identity, values
and way of life. No matter where we go and what we do, this is a place
Singaporeans want to come back to. This is the place we call home. Our
investment in a defence capability is a small premium to pay to safeguard
our home and all that we have achieved.

“In the economic sphere if things fall apart, you will still have opportunities
to rebuild, and to prosper again. We will not get a second chance if we
cannot defend ourselves. A security threat could mean the loss of lives
and the end of Singapore.”

**Dr Tony Tan Keng Yam,**

Deputy Prime Minister & Minister for Defence,

Committee of Supply Debate, 1998.

## Our Interests in an Interdependent World

In the 21[st] Century, Singapore’s peace and prosperity will be more
inextricably linked to that of the region. A stable and prosperous Singapore
contributes to the economy of the region. Conversely, an unstable regional
environment will not only set back our efforts to be a regional and global
hub, but will also drive away investors.

The Asian economic crisis has demonstrated how closely intertwined the
interests of nations have become in a “borderless” world. A small and
open country like Singapore is especially susceptible to unpredictable
shifts in the international environment. This vulnerability will increase as
we become more integrated with the global economy. What happens in
another part of the world can have immediate and great spillover effects
on our economy and security. But we cannot turn back from globalisation.
We depend on the world economy for a living. We will have to work
more actively with others to safeguard peace and stability in the region
and beyond, to promote a peaceful environment conducive to socioeconomic development.


## Future Challenges

In the 21[st] Century, globalisation and information technology will
dramatically change the societies and economies of all nations, big and
small. The security environment will change in tandem, as states adjust
to the new competitions and threats of the post-Cold War era and the
security challenges that arise from them.

#### An Uncertain Security Landscape

In the Asia-Pacific region, the triangular relationship among the United
States, China and Japan will continue to be the key factor determining
the regional security climate. How this relationship will evolve
is uncertain.

The US presence in the region has contributed significantly to peace and
stability in Southeast Asia. However, the balance of power will shift as
China gains economic strength. There will be a growing need for these
two countries and Japan to manage their relations with one another and
with the rest of the region more sensitively. Regional security and stability
require a stable triangular relationship among the US, China and Japan,
with all three powers focused on the larger goals of regional and
international peace.

It may take some time before the Asia-Pacific region recovers fully from
the economic crisis. Full economic recovery in some parts of the region
could be derailed by internal instability brought about by political and
socio-economic difficulties. The economic crisis has shown clearly the
strong linkage between economics and security. There can be no security
without economic stability, just as there can be no sustained economic
development without security.

The end of the Cold War may have reduced the risk of a superpower
conflict, but regional and sub-regional conflicts remain a real possibility.


-----

Without the ideological divides of the Cold War, old disputes and separatist
forces have resurfaced. Intra-state conflicts along ethnic and religious
lines have broken out with horrific consequences, as in Bosnia and
Rwanda. And then there are the upheavals and unrest that come with
political transitions, such as in Cambodia and East Timor. The impact of
intra-state political and social unrest is not always contained within
national borders; they sometimes spill over to affect the security of
neighbouring states.

There are also many unresolved territorial and boundary issues in the
Asia-Pacific region that could lead to conflict. The situation in the Korean
Peninsula continues to be a source of concern. Another potential area of
conflict is the Spratly Islands, which are claimed wholly or in part by six
parties. Cross-Taiwan Straits relations have not settled down, and continue
to be a major impediment to any significant improvement in US-China
relations. Any one of these issues, if not managed well, could escalate
and have adverse consequences for regional stability.

Other types of conflicts can also emerge in the new century. For instance,
the competition for resources is likely to grow sharper as Asia-Pacific
economic growth regains momentum. Resource scarcities could trigger
future conflicts over access to or ownership of vital resources such as oil,
energy, water and maritime resources.

The growing proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and
their delivery systems also poses a grave security threat. The spread of
nuclear, biological and chemical weapons has an adverse impact on the
non-proliferation regime and could unleash an arms race. If they become
more widely available, the risk that they may be used in unstable, tensionridden areas will increase.

Unconventional threats in the form of terrorist acts and subversion will
continue to be a potential danger. Some of these threats may be targeted at
third countries or parties, but the SAF may be called upon to deal with them
because they take place in Singapore or Singaporean assets are involved.
The SAF may also have to deal with low intensity conflicts and attacks aimed


at disrupting our social or economic life, or aimed at intimidating us and
destroying our national will. Such threats can come in different forms –
physical attack, chemical sabotage and even cyber-attacks aimed at our critical
economic and social infrastructures.


#### Cyber-Attack: Chernobyl Virus

The destructive Chernobyl or CIH virus – which first struck on 26 April 1998, the
12th anniversary of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster – tries to erase computer’s
hard drive and write gibberish into its system settings to prevent the machine
from being restarted.

The virus soon infected thousands of computers in the US, Asia, Europe and the
Middle East. Turkey and South Korea each reported 300,000 computers infected
with Chernobyl.


#### Terrorist Attack: SQ117

On 26 Mar 1991, Singapore Airlines flight SQ 117 took off from Subang Airport
in Kuala Lumpur with 129 passengers and crew on board. En route to Singapore,
four passengers claiming to be members of the Pakistan People’s Party (PPP) took
control of the plane, demanding the release of PPP leader Benazir Bhutto’s
husband and other PPP members detained in Pakistani jails.

A crisis team was immediately activated. The aeroplane landed at Singapore’s
Changi Airport. The next day, the hijackers issued a five-minute deadline, after
which they would harm the passengers. They also threatened to kill one passenger
every ten minutes if their demands were not met.

At three minutes to the deadline, a team of SAF Commandos was given the order
to storm the plane. The team killed the four hijackers and freed all the passengers
and crew members unharmed.


-----

#### Changing Nature of Warfare

We are witnessing a revolution in military affairs or RMA. Previous
revolutions have included the introduction of tanks and aircraft, and
nuclear weapons. Advances in weapons technology that are equipped
with electronic information systems drive the current revolution. The
impact of new technology is seen, for instance, in the dramatic
improvements in sensor technology and information systems that are
enabling military forces to achieve a significantly higher level of
“battlespace awareness” than before. This means that they can see the
battlefield situation much better, arrive at more accurate assessments of
friendly and enemy operations, and make better informed decisions in a
timely manner.

At the same time, precision strike technologies are enabling military
forces to strike where and when it matters, with much more deadly
accuracy, from greater distances than ever before. The world saw how
effective these weapons are in the dramatic television images of US
smart bombs and missiles hitting Iraqi targets with pinpoint accuracy
during the Gulf War.

The revolution in military affairs will change the nature of warfare. Superior
numbers in platforms such as tanks, new planes and ships will become
less of an advantage unless all these platforms can be integrated into a
unified, flexible and effective fighting system using advanced information
technologies. At the same time, the ever-increasing reliance on information
technology means that protecting one’s own information systems and
disrupting the enemy’s will become a major aspect of warfare in the
Information Age.

In this rapidly evolving battlefield, the challenge for the SAF is not simply
to continue to keep pace with rapid technological changes. To stay ahead,
we need to keep on building up and maintaining a technological
capability. Then we will be able to buy what we need, adapt it to suit our
unique requirements and, where necessary, build from scratch. The SAF
must also have quality people able to master the new technologies and


weapon systems, and to use them to fight smart. The SAF can draw upon
the strengths of the rising education profile of our National Servicemen
and position itself to exploit these new developments in warfare.

#### Resource Constraints

The continuing challenge Singapore faces as a small and resource-scarce
nation is this: How can we translate our limited resources into an effective
defence capability? This is a challenge for which new and creative solutions
need to be found continuously.

We can expect our future economic and social development to place a
greater strain on the resources that can be channelled to enhance our
defence efforts. For instance, economic development and population
growth will increase the demand for the limited amount of land that can
be committed to SAF training. As more industrial complexes, offices,
homes and recreational facilities are built, areas suitable for SAF training
and military exercises will diminish. We will have to make better use of
SAF training areas to train our personnel, keep them fighting fit and hone
their fighting skills. We will also have to continue to look for new training
areas overseas and use technology to fulfil a growing variety of training
requirements. Equally challenging is the problem of manpower. Our small
population will limit the pool of manpower available to our armed forces,
defence science establishments and defence industries. We shall have to
find innovative ways around these constraints, so that we can effectively
enhance our defence capabilities with our limited resources.

In a nutshell, we will have to deal with a more difficult environment in
the 21[st] Century. As a sovereign nation, we are responsible for our own
security and defence. We have to plan ahead to meet the new challenges
that may come our way, and be flexible and nimble so as to take full
advantage of new opportunities to further enhance the effectiveness of
our defences.


-----

## Singapore’s Defence Policy

The aim of our defence policy is to ensure that Singapore enjoys peace
and stability, and that Singapore’s sovereignty and territorial integrity are
protected. We also want to do our part to contribute to regional peace
and security. Diplomacy and deterrence form the twin pillars of our
defence policy. We develop and maintain good relations with other
countries through diplomacy. These diplomatic efforts are wide-ranging
and span many fields, not just in defence. At the same time, we try to
deter threats from emerging by contributing to regional resilience and
through our concept of Total Defence.


Our defence policy has served us well. In the 21[st] Century, diplomacy
and deterrence will continue to be the fundamental tenets of our defence
policy. But we will have to define our security in wider terms to include
not only traditional security challenges but also new ones that may arise
to threaten our interests in the globalised era. The SAF will have to develop
a broader range of capabilities and prepare itself to work with others to
tackle some of these challenges. This means that the SAF will have to
enhance its efforts in diplomacy and deterrence.

Our two key thrusts in the coming years will be to:

##### • Strengthen dialogue, confidence-building and co-operation in the region and beyond. Increasingly, countries in the region
recognise the value of efforts to promote confidence-building,
co-operation and dialogue on issues of common security concern.
Through the years, the SAF has developed extensive and expanding
links with armed forces in the region and beyond. The SAF can help
promote greater understanding and trust among regional and extraregional armed forces by leveraging on these links to help strengthen
bilateral and multilateral defence co-operation and dialogue, and
participating in confidence-building efforts.

##### • Strengthen Total Defence. In the new security environment,
Singapore could face a diverse range of new and unconventional
threats. To tackle these challenges, we will need to strengthen all five
components of Total Defence. The SAF will maintain its conventional
capabilities to ensure that the military component of Total Defence
remains strong. At the same time, it will work more closely with other
government agencies to develop an effective defence against new
security challenges, especially the non-traditional threats that may arise.

Singapore has been able to overcome past challenges because Singaporeans
are not afraid to adapt and change. Likewise, we must also adapt our defence
policy to the changes in the security environment. This will ensure that it
continues to be relevant in the 21[st] Century and that our future will be protected.


#### Total Defence

In a complex security environment, the SAF alone – while crucial to the defence
of Singapore – is not enough. What will ensure Singapore’s survival is an
all-round deterrence effort in which every citizen plays a part.

The concept of Total Defence aims to achieve a seamless and integrated
all-round capability to defend our national interests. Consisting of five elements
– Psychological Defence, Social Defence, Economic Defence, Civil Defence
and Military Defence – it unites and commits all sectors of society to the defence
of Singapore.

Over the years, steps have been taken to strengthen Total Defence. There are
public emergency exercises, training of civil defence volunteers, and setting up
of civil defence grassroots organisations. A more
recent initiative was the National Education
programme. Launched in September 1996,
National Education aims to enhance the
commitment of Singaporeans to our nation, i.e.,
the nation’s “heartware” and social cohesion, so
that Singaporeans stand united amidst the diversity

An emergency water-rationing
exercise of a multi-cultural and multi-ethnic nation.


-----

“The 21[st] Century will bring new uncertainties and challenges.
Asia is in a historic period of change. Peace, stability and
economic growth are not assured…… Whether Singapore can
be a good home will depend on our will to overcome
constraints and succeed.”

Prime Minister **Goh Chok Tong at the**

National Day Rally, 1996


-----

# Promoting Peace and Stability

st
The security challenges in the 21 Century will become more diverse
and multi-faceted, and affect more countries and be transnational in
nature. Greater regional and global co-operation will be vital to meet the
new challenges. This includes strengthening bilateral relationships and
multilateral arrangements through dialogue, confidence-building activities
and co-operation among countries.

A stable international environment is necessary for Singapore’s future
security and progress, and we will have to play our part to build a peaceful
regional and global order in the new century. The SAF will do more in the
area of defence diplomacy. It will develop the capability to inter-operate
with friendly forces and work with other armed forces to strengthen
multilateral defence co-operation.

## Bilateral Relations

Singapore attaches great importance to the development of bilateral
defence relations with friendly countries. As a result of our ongoing efforts
to foster new defence relationships and strengthen existing ones, the SAF
today enjoys close bilateral ties with its counterparts in many parts of
the world.

To strengthen defence ties, the SAF has been developing and conducting
a wide range of bilateral interactions and activities with a number of
armed forces. Such interactions and activities include joint exercises and
training programmes, the exchange of high level visits, exchanges of
views and seminars, and cross-attachments and cross-attendance of
military courses.


-----

The opening of Ex Cope Tiger,
an exercise between the
RSAF, USAF and the Royal
Thai Air Force

RSAF and Royal Brunei Air
Force troops in Ex Air Guard

Bilateral exercises such as the
SAF-TNI SAFKAR INDOPURA
help forge friendships


The SAF enjoys close and friendly ties with many
of the armed forces of ASEAN countries. These
bilateral relationships have been steadily growing
in scope and depth. For the future, it will remain a
priority for Singapore to develop and strengthen its
defence ties with all ASEAN members to realise the
common vision of a cohesive and strong ASEAN.

Singapore has also developed good bilateral
defence relations with many other countries in the
wider Asia-Pacific region, including the US, China,
Japan, South Korea, Australia, New Zealand, India
and Bangladesh.

US Defence
Secretary Mr
William Cohen
calls on Deputy
Prime Minister and
Defence Minister
Dr Tony Tan

Beyond the Asia-Pacific, the SAF enjoys warm and
friendly ties with armed forces in Europe, Africa,
and the Middle East. The interactions with armed
forces around the globe allow the SAF to benchmark
itself against highly professional counterparts.

The SAF will continue to enhance its interoperability with other defence forces, in various
areas of professional interest. Singapore’s efforts to
strengthen bilateral defence ties and security
co-operation will help to consolidate the foundation
for an Asia-Pacific community enjoying prosperity
and peace in the 21st Century.


#### The Growing Web of Bilateral Relationships

The US-Singapore defence relationship is an important one. Exercises with the US
Armed Forces have been steadily growing in scope and complexity, with more
US assets being deployed for the bilateral exercises. In 1998, the Singapore and US
governments signed an Addendum to the 1990 Memorandum of Understanding
which will allow US Navy ships and aircraft carriers to berth at Changi Naval Base
when the base is ready.


New overseas training programmes have been initiated. In 1998, a Status of Forces
Agreement was signed to cover SAF training in South Africa. This paved the way for
the conduct of the SAF’s first Unmanned Aerial Vehicles deployment in late 1998.

Singapore also concluded a Defence Co-operation
and Status of Forces Agreement with France in
1998. The RSAF now has an Advanced Jet Training
unit in Cazaux, and the first biennial exercise with
the French Air Force was conducted in Singapore
in 1998.

French Chief of Army Staff, General
Phillipe Mercier, reviews the SAF
Guard-of-Honour


General Chi Haotian, Chinese Defence
Minister and Vice Chairman of China Central
Military Commission, and State Councillor,
calls on Deputy Prime Minister and Defence
Minister Dr Tony Tan


The SAF has also developed new ties.
Defence relations with the People’s
Republic of China were established in
1997/98 with an exchange of visits by
the Vice-Chairman of the Central
Military Commission and PRC Defence
Minister General Chi Haotian and
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Defence Dr Tony Tan. Singapore-Japan
defence relations were enhanced with
the inauguration of policy talks between
the Japan Defence Agency and MINDEF
in 1997.


-----

## Multilateral Defence Relations

However, bilateral arrangements
alone are not adequate to enhance
regional peace. Just as the Asian
financial crisis highlighted the need
for international co-operation to
enhance stability in the global
financial system, greater security
co-operation is vital for regional

FPDA members conduct regular air defence
exercises as part of the Integrated Air Defence and global peace and stability in
System the 21st Century. Multilateral

arrangements are likely to become more important, as security challenges
become more diverse and transborder in nature. The promotion of
security co-operation will strengthen regional resilience to deal with these
new challenges.


At the multilateral level we welcome the strengthening of existing
multilateral security arrangements, such as the Five Power Defence
Arrangements (FPDA). Singapore is fully committed to the FPDA, which
is the longest standing multilateral arrangement in the region. This
arrangement provides for the defence of Malaysia and Singapore, which
is indivisible. Since its formation in 1971, the FPDA has become a unique
component of the region’s security architecture and contributes to regional
peace and stability. Its importance and relevance remain undiminished
despite the many changes in the geopolitical landscape over the years.


promoting confidence-building measures. Such measures include the
promotion of mutual understanding and adherence to international norms
of behaviour and to international treaty regimes, such as those prohibiting
the acquisition of Weapons of Mass Destruction and governing safe
passage through international straits and seas, like the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). The ARF could also play
an important role in fostering multilateral responses to transnational
security challenges such as terrorism and piracy.

In addition, Singapore will play its part to foster and support other
arrangements to enhance regional peace and stability. In particular,
multilateral security dialogue and co-operation among defence
establishments in the region remain relatively undeveloped. Singapore
believes that regional defence co-operation, in areas such as maritime
security, disaster relief, humanitarian assistance and transnational
problems, will directly contribute to the enhancement of regional peace
and security. Military co-operation and dialogue in these areas will also
contribute to conflict prevention by enhancing trust and confidence among
regional armed forces.


In the years ahead, the SAF will aim to build up its capability to contribute
to fostering multilateral defence co-operation. It will partner regional
armed forces to develop more channels of dialogue, exercises and other
forms of co-operation among Asia-Pacific defence professionals in areas
of common professional and security concern.


ARF in session


Singapore will also continue to
play its part in strengthening the
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) as a
vehicle to promote regional peace
and stability. In the future we hope
to see the ARF play a bigger role in
the prevention of new disputes and
conflicts in the region through


-----

#### The SAF’s Recent Multilateral Initiatives

The SAF is committed to working with other armed forces to realise the vision of
an Asia-Pacific Century characterised by stability and prosperity. As part of the
process to position itself for the new century, the SAF will enhance its capabilities
to play a role in the development of multilateral programmes designed to promote
understanding and trust among regional forces. All three Services of the SAF
have actively supported and participated in activities directed at raising multilateral
defence co-operation at the professional level.

Since 1988, the RSN has been an active participant of the Western Pacific Naval
Symposium (WPNS). It hosted the 8th WPNS Workshop in July 1999 in Singapore.
The RSN has also regularly participated in various multilateral exercises, such as
the Meeting of the Eastern Littoral Navies, and the multilateral Search and Rescue
Exercise with the navies of Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Indonesia and India.
In July 1999, the RSN hosted a trilateral Mine Countermeasure Exercise in which
the Australian and US navies participated, and the navies of Indonesia, Japan,
Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand sent observers.

In September 1999, Singapore and the US co-hosted the inaugural Pacific Armies
Chiefs Conference in Singapore. This provided a forum for army chiefs of the
region, spanning India in the west to the US in the east, to discuss professional
matters. In the same month, Singapore also hosted the 23rd Pacific Armies
Management Seminar, a forum started in 1978 for senior ground force officers in
the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean states to meet and discuss professional
military subjects.

In February 2000, the RSAF hosted the Millennium Air Power Conference in
Singapore. The conference provided a platform for air force chiefs from around
the world to discuss developments in air power concepts and technology in this
new millennium.

Singapore and the US co-host the
1st PACC


## Contributing to International Peace

Singapore’s well-being and survival are best
served by a world order based on the
principles of co-operation and consultation,
rather than the use of force. We therefore
regard the United Nations as a key institution
for maintaining the international law and order
necessary for a global climate of stability. The
SAF will continue our efforts to support the
United Nations’ work.

An SAF medical orderly attending

Singapore’s efforts to strengthen regional to a baby after the 1990

Phillippines earthquake

confidence and co-operation are a part of our
contribution to the UN’s efforts in dispute and conflict prevention
worldwide. For instance, the SAF’s efforts to promote naval co-operation
will complement international instruments such as UNCLOS in ensuring
a secure maritime environment critical for the safe passage of international
shipping and global trade in regional waters.

Singapore first participated in UN peacekeeping operations in 1989 and
has contributed small contingents over the years. Over a decade, we
have contributed a cumulative total of over 800 personnel to UN missions,
including peacekeeping, peacemaking and arms inspection missions.
Although the SAF is constrained by being a largely conscript armed forces
with a small pool of regulars, it will continue to play its part by supporting
peacekeeping operations to the best of its ability.

SAF military observers in
UNIKOM (Kuwait)


-----

#### The SAF in UN Missions

Since 1991, the SAF has been sending officers to participate in UNIKOM as
military observers. SAF officers have also held senior appointments in UNIKOM,
including Deputy Force Commander, Chief of Staff, Chief Military Personnel
Officer, Deputy Chief Operations Officer and Sector Commander (South)
of UNIKOM.

In May 1993, the UN requested
Singapore’s support for UNTAC, the UN
mission overseeing the electoral process
in Cambodia. The SAF responded by
sending four Super Puma helicopters
and 65 servicemen to Cambodia for a
one-month tour of duty. The helicopter
detachment provided transport for the
election officials, ballot boxes and medical
casualties, besides conducting aerial
policing for UNTAC.

In February 1997, the SAF sent a 5-man
medical team to provide medical support
to the UN military observers in
MINUGUA, the UN mission in Guatemala
which re-integrated the guerrillas into
society after they were granted amnesty.

From May 1997 to May 1998, the SAF sent

LTC Lo Yong Poo to take up the
appointment of Military Adviser to
UNSMA, the UN mission to facilitate
national reconciliation and reconstruction
in Afghanistan. In September 1997, heavy
fighting broke out in the city of Mazar-iSharif and the safety of UN and
humanitarian aid staff was at risk. Despite


the intense aerial and artillery bombardment, the rapid advance of the opposition
forces and their threats to kill UN personnel, and even after arranging for the
land and air evacuation of the UN personnel, LTC Lo turned down several
opportunities to extricate himself. He chose to remain in Mazar-i-Sharif to
accompany the sole UN personnel, a civilian, who had been asked to stay behind.

Singapore has contributed a medical
detachment, military observers,
logistics support and two LSTs to the
UN-sanctioned INTERFET mission to
restore peace and stability to East
Timor. A total of about 250 personnel
are involved in the mission to provide
medical relief and logistics support.


-----

# The SAF Today

The SAF is a national institution that brings Singaporeans from all walks
of life and different backgrounds together in the defence of Singapore.
Almost every Singaporean family has sent sons and husbands to undertake
National Service, to be prepared for the task of defending family and
country. This cohesive, strong SAF is the bedrock on which the peace and
prosperity of Singapore have been built.

The SAF’s key mission is to deter aggression. When we started 35 years
ago, the SAF was just a two-ship navy and two-battalion army. Today, it is
a tri-service defence force with a 50,000 strong standing armed forces
made up of regulars and full-time National Servicemen and another
300,000 Operationally Ready National Servicemen (NSmen).

Through the years, the SAF’s development has focused on two key areas:
Operational Readiness and Capability. These are the core attributes that
make the SAF a well-integrated fighting force.

## An Integrated Fighting Force

The SAF integrates its three Services to fight as one single fighting system.
It combines the capabilities and resources of the Army, Republic of
Singapore Navy (RSN) and Republic of Singapore Air Force (RSAF)
whenever and wherever needed. When an aircraft, a ship, a tank or an
individual soldier fights, it is as part of a total system. The operational end
result is combat power out of proportion to the size of the SAF. Tri-Service
integration makes the SAF stronger than the sum of its three Services.


-----

#### Joint

In the 1970s and 1980s, the SAF concentrated on building up the
individual Services – Army, Air Force and Navy. By the mid-1980s,
the three Services were well established. A phase of consolidation
followed, during which tri-Service integration was emphasised. This
led to the creation of a Joint Staff, which the SAF recognised was
key to building a fully integrated SAF.

Today, the Joint Staff drives the integration of the SAF and brings the
Services together to meet the goal of enhancing the SAF’s capabilities
as a whole. The Joint Staff sets priorities and apportions limited
manpower and financial resources. When new capabilities are
developed, the Joint Staff ensures that these capabilities fit well into
the overall fighting system. In operations planning, it optimises the
combination of capabilities and resources from the three Services
to achieve the mission. The Joint Staff plays the pivotal role to facilitate
the Services working together and to provide the direction for new
initiatives for the SAF.

Fighting as one


The Army comprises the following:

 - three Combined Arms Divisions (CADs),

 - two People’s Defence Force (PDF) Commands,

 - two Army Operational Reserve (AOR) Divisions, and

  - several non-Divisional units, such as Artillery Units, Armoured
**Brigades, Commando Battalions, Engineer Units, Logistics**
**Battalions and Signals Battalions.**

The manoeuvre forces of the Army are organised and operate as Combined
Arms Divisions. Each Division commands a composite force made up of
Infantry troops and other Army elements such as Armour and Artillery.
The basic idea is that each Division will have all the necessary men, plus
armour, artillery, engineer and other arms it needs to defeat an
opposing force.

Capable as they are, the Divisions do not operate with just their own
resources. They can also draw on the RSAF and the RSN’s extensive
capabilities, whenever and wherever needed on the battlefield. This
concept gives the SAF a more powerful punch.


-----

The Army’s combat power is organised around three key capabilities:


With all three capabilities in hand, the Army is well positioned to
outmanoeuvre the aggressor, strike hard at its vulnerable areas and
defeat it.

The Army takes part in joint exercises regularly with other armies. Some
exercises are conducted in Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia and Australia.
Jungle training takes place in Brunei. The Army also carries out artillery
training in New Zealand. Training overseas not only enables the Army to
overcome the shortage of training space in Singapore, but also allows it
to benchmark itself against some of the best forces in the Asia-Pacific
region during joint exercises.


BIONIX IFV – better speed, firepower
and protection

AH-64 Apache attack helicopter



##### •  Manoeuvre. The Army can project
force rapidly. On land, the new
Singapore-made Bionix Infantry Fighting
Vehicles (IFVs) together with the
upgraded M-113 Armoured Personnel
Carriers enable the Army to concentrate
forces swiftly where required, with
armour protection and substantial
firepower. The helicopters operated by
the RSAF, and Fast Craft operated by the
RSN, allow the Army to exploit both the
air and sea dimensions, to deploy, insert
and re-deploy forces rapidly.

##### • Firepower. The Army can also deliver
heavy and accurate firepower to every
part of the battlefield. Potent weapons
like the FH-2000 155mm gun and the
Spike anti-tank missile can deliver hardhitting power at long distances. In the
near future the AH-64 Apache attack
helicopter will give a quantum increase
to the Army’s capability.

##### • Information. The integration of
command, control, communications and
sensor systems enables the Army to
achieve dominant battlefield awareness.
This allows the Army to target its units
and weapons precisely and at the
decisive time.


#### Armour Training in Shoalwater Bay, Australia

SAF Armoured units carry out training exercises in Australia every year. The nature
of the terrain and vegetation and the size of the Shoalwater Bay training area
offer realistic conditions and a challenging environment for training. It also allows
the SAF’s Armour units to fully operationalise their fighting doctrines
and capabilities.


-----

These fighter aircraft are all capable of performing multiple roles, ranging
from air defence and air superiority to providing firepower to support
land and sea battles. In addition, the RSAF will soon be operating Apache
attack helicopters to support land battles.

For air defence operations, the RSAF is also equipped with a wide range
of surface-to-air weapons of various types:

                 - The Improved Hawk missile
deals with air threats at an
effective range of up to 40 km.

                     - The Rapier, Mistral, RBS-70 and
Igla missiles are for use at
shorter ranges.



- 35mm Oerlikon guns provide
a third line of defence.


The Air Force is structured to protect the integrity of Singapore’s airspace
and defend against any air threats, and to protect Singapore’s access to
air and sea lanes. It provides continuous air surveillance and early warning
of air threats through a sophisticated sensor system that includes E2C
Hawkeye early warning aircraft and air defence radars. The multi-layered
air defence umbrella employs air defence fighter aircraft, surface-to-air
missiles and anti-aircraft guns. In battle, the RSAF’s objective is to achieve
air superiority quickly and dominate our skies. The RSAF is also structured
to participate with the Army and Navy in land and sea campaigns.

The RSAF operates seven squadrons of multi-role fighter aircraft.
They are:

  - one squadron of F-16 Fighting Falcons. (A second squadron is
training overseas.)

  - three squadrons of F-5S/T Tiger aircraft, which have been recently
upgraded with advanced electronics and avionics.

  - three squadrons of T/A4-SU Super Skyhawk aircraft, which have
also been upgraded.


Air defence weapons


The RSAF also has other roles. It transports Army troops with its Chinook,
Super Puma and UH-1H helicopters, and C-130 Hercules transport
aircraft. And it performs surveillance missions on behalf of the Navy and
Army using the Fokker 50 Maritime Patrol Aircraft and Unmanned Air
Vehicles (UAVs).

Like the Army, the RSAF does not have sufficient space in Singapore for
training. To overcome this problem, the RSAF has training detachments
overseas in friendly countries. Two fighter detachments, one transport
detachment and one helicopter detachment are based in the United States.
There are training detachments in France and Australia, and helicopter
detachments in Brunei and Australia. Periodically, detachments also go
to regional countries like Indonesia and Thailand for short-term training.


-----

Air-to-air refuelling


Training in such far-away places
puts a strain on logistics support.
The acquisition of the KC-135 jettanker facilitates the RSAF’s
deployments overseas, and enables
flying operations to be sustained for
long periods of time.


The RSAF participates regularly in bilateral and multilateral exercises with
other air forces, both locally and overseas, and also in multi-service
exercises such as the FPDA air defence and maritime exercises. The RSAF
has also participated in and won numerous awards in international
competitions. Such experiences and training opportunities enhance
interoperability and allow the RSAF to benchmark itself against the best
in the world.


#### “Black Widow” Squadron

th
The RSAF 425 Black Widow Fighter Squadron chalked up several achievements
in Luke Air Force Base, Arizona, only months after going operational in May
1997. These achievements reflected the high level of operational readiness and
professionalism of RSAF personnel:

 - Won the Fighter Wing’s five-star gold award for best air crew chief in
October 1997.

 - Hit the normal flying hour target within two months, four months ahead of
schedule.

 - Successfully executed its first live bombing exercise after only two months.

 - Mounted its first deployment by shifting lock, stock and barrel 4,800km
non-stop to Fairbanks, Alaska for a 3-week exercise after just 3 months.


Since its humble beginnings, the RSN has strived to become “the best
little Navy in the world.” Its two-fold mission is to protect Singapore’s
territorial waters and to keep access to our vital Sea Lines of
Communications (SLOCs) open. To do this, the RSN is organised into
four Commands:

##### • The Fleet, which is made up of two Flotillas and a submarine
squadron.

st
1 Flotilla has three squadrons operating six Missile Corvettes, six
Missile Gunboats, and six anti-submarine capable Patrol Craft. Their
sophisticated weapon-mix includes the Harpoon missile, the Barak
missile, the Mistral surface-to-air missile and the Whitehead torpedo.
These ships are augmented by Fokker 50 maritime surveillance
aircraft, and air-to-surface firepower from the RSAF’s A4-SUs. These
st
capabilities enable the 1 Flotilla to deter and counter surface,
sub-surface and air threats to vital SLOCs in the South China Sea
and the Malacca Strait. It can also provide long-range escort to
merchant vessels sailing to and from Singapore.


-----

rd
3 Flotilla is the supply and
transportation arm. It operates a range
of specialised vessels, including LSTs,
Fast Craft for Equipment and
Personnel (FCEPs), and Ramp Power
Launches (RPL). These provide fast
and efficient movement of troops to

Endurance class LSTs and from training areas in Singapore

and overseas. Some of them have also
been used for UN missions and disaster relief work, and to deliver
humanitarian aid and support medical aid teams.

The Submarine Squadron is being formed. The Navy has acquired
four submarines. The boats and crews are now training in Sweden,
and will return over the next few years.



##### • The Coastal Command (COSCOM) is equipped with Patrol
Vessels, Inshore Fast Boats, and Mine Counter-Measure Vessels
(MCMVs). Its task is to counter surface, sub-surface and mine threats.
It relies on a comprehensive shore-based coastal radar system. And
it works closely with the Police Coast Guard, Maritime & Port
Authority, and Port of Singapore Authority, keeping a reassuring
presence in Singapore waters to deter seaward threats and piracy.

##### • The Naval Logistics Command maintains the Navy’s strike and
support ships at the highest state of readiness and sustains the RSN’s
sea deployments for prolonged periods.

##### • The Training Command trains and nurtures the RSN’s officers
and specialists in both combat and technical support roles.

The RSN has sailed far and wide to
exercise with friendly navies. Such
exercises enhance friendship and
understanding, and also allow the
RSN to benchmark itself against
some of the most advanced navies
of the world. The RSN participates
in the FPDA’s annual maritime
exercise in the South China Sea with
its four FPDA partners. Bilateral
anti-submarine exercises are

Harpoon live firing

conducted with the Indian Navy’s
submarines in the Indian Ocean, and
with Australian and US submarines off local waters. The RSN also carries
th
out regular Harpoon missile live-firing exercises with the US 7 Fleet in
the Pacific Ocean to hone its surface strike capability.


#### New Submarines

The four RSN submarines are originally of the Sjöormen class. Extensively
refurbished, they were renamed the Challenger class, and added a new capability
to the Navy. A crew of about 25 men operates each submarine.

On 21 March 1998, the RSN’s first
submarine, RSS Challenger, conducted her
first successful dive off Karlskrona Naval
Base in Sweden. Shortly thereafter, RSS
Challenger scored a direct torpedo hit on
a target ship in Swedish waters. RSS
Conqueror will enter Singapore waters,
ready for deployment by mid 2000.


-----

## Operational Readiness

Singapore’s small size means that the SAF lacks strategic depth to
manoeuvre in, or to fall back on. We depend on airborne early warning
systems to alert us to any threat. The SAF must also be in a high state of
combat readiness at all times, to repel any surprise military attack. This
ability to mount an immediate and massive response is a cornerstone of
the SAF’s operational and development strategies.

Operational readiness has three main components:

##### Immediate Response. The SAF can respond immediately to any
military threat. A vital core of land, sea and air forces is on standby
round-the-clock, fully armed and equipped, ready to go into action at
a moment’s notice. The initial level of response can be rapidly upgraded
through the activation of additional battalions and squadrons, and even
divisions, if the threat develops further. This immediate response
capability is central to Singapore’s policy of deterrence.


##### Rapid Mobilisation. All three
Services are structured and
organised so that they can
mobilise their manpower,
weapons and logistics supply
at very short notice.
Organisational structures and Operationally Ready
systems are continually fine-tuned and tested through regular
mobilisation exercises. Many of these involve calling up Operationally
Ready NSmen who form the bulk of the SAF’s manpower, and
requisitioning civilian resources which are made available to the SAF
in emergency or crisis situations.

##### Organising and Training Just as in War. The SAF organises
and trains exactly as it would
fight in an operational scenario.
Operationally Ready NSmen
responding to mobilisation calls
are sometimes thrown into
battle exercises immediately Training as in war
after being issued weapons and ammunition. Training is not confined
to small unit exercises. Full troop exercises (FTXs) are conducted up to
division level.

Operational readiness is not just about getting combat troops ready. The
hidden strength of the SAF lies in its systems and logistics support. Tightly
integrated computer systems administer a myriad of logistics functions
needed to keep the military units humming along. These systems monitor
unit readiness and ensure that units are fully equipped and stocked for
operations at any time. Our logistics capability sustains the fighting units
by ensuring that spares and supplies are available throughout the duration
of the operations.


#### The SAF in Cambodia

“In July 1997, the SAF mounted
an operation to evacuate
Singaporeans from Cambodia. The
Singaporeans had organised
themselves, worked out
emergency procedures, set up
communications, gathered at
designated places, and calmly evacuated from Phnom Penh. Their SAF
training showed. The RSAF flew out 450 people from Phnom Penh on six
flights in four C-130s. The operation went smoothly.”

Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong,

Straits Times 21 July, 1997


-----

## Our People

#### Quality personnel

The quality of the SAF’s fighting units and support systems reflects the
quality of its personnel, both regulars and NSmen. The SAF benefits from
having a large part of Singapore’s talent pool. For example, some of
Singapore’s top school leavers join our ranks each year as recipients of
the SAF Overseas Scholarship, Defence Technology Training Award, and
other MINDEF and SAF scholarships.

Quality is not confined just to the top ranks. Across the board, our soldiers
are increasingly better educated, especially in technical fields. This makes
it possible for the SAF to deploy new and sophisticated weapons, and to
leverage on powerful but technically complex systems. At all levels, our
officers and men have proven themselves to be among the very best in
the world.


#### Winning Awards the World Over

CPT Low Chung Guan became only the second international student and the
first Singaporean to top his class in the US Air Force Academy in 1995. He beat
1,004 other graduates to emerge as top gun of the academy.

SAF Commando 2WO Punniya Moorthy topped the US Army Special Forces
Weapons Sergeant Course at Fort Bragg in 1998. With single-mindedness, he
out-performed much younger servicemen, some of whom had seen action in
Bosnia and Panama.

SAF Diver SSG Chia Meng Kwan topped the Diver First Class Course conducted
in the USN Naval Diving and Salvage Training Centre at Panama City in 1997.
The course was so tough that half the class, comprising experienced US and
foreign naval divers, did not complete it.


A proud moment for 2WO Punniya Moorthy
CPT Low Chung Guan topped US Special
Forces Course


SSG Chia Meng Kwan - rigours of
combat diving training in the US


#### Our Citizen Soldiers

The SAF is predominantly a National Service armed forces. Given
Singapore’s small population, National Service remains the only viable
option for building up a defence force capable and formidable enough to
deter an external attack. An equivalent standing force of regulars would
place an unbearable strain on Singapore’s scarce manpower resources.
The support and commitment given by our citizens to National Service
and the defence of the nation have therefore been crucial not only for the
security of Singapore but also for our economic development.


-----

Today, NSmen make up over 80% of the strength of the SAF. For the SAF,
there is no clear distinction between the roles of the regulars and NSmen.
The NSmen bring with them knowledge and expertise from their civilian
jobs. They also contribute a wealth of worldly-wise experience.

National Service contributes to making Singapore stronger in yet another
way. It brings together Singaporeans of different racial, religious, linguistic
and educational backgrounds, to train and live together. These common
life-shaping experiences have helped to foster greater cohesiveness among
our people and a strong national identity.


The capability of an NS unit is no different from that of an active unit.
Since the early 1990s, the SAF has been pitting NS units against active
units that were at their peak of training and physical fitness. In a series of
exercises, the opposing units are required to plan and execute complex
and strenuous battles. The NS units performed as well as, and in some
cases better than, the active units.


#### Courage Under Fire

In November 1997, CPT (NS)
Kok Yin Khong was serving as a
military observer with UNIKOM.
During a routine patrol, a fellow
military observer was hit after
armed men fired at their Patrol
Observation Base. Risking his
life, CPT(NS) Kok approached his
injured colleague during a brief
lull in the firing to administer first
aid and stop the bleeding.
It saved the man’s life. CPT (NS) Kok’s courage and selfless action reflected
the instincts developed during his National Service training. For his act of
bravery, CPT (NS) Kok was awarded the SAF Medal for Distinguished Act on
30 May 1998.


#### “Whatever you can’t defend, doesn’t belong to you”

Third Sergeant Chong Yu Meng, 30, wrote to The New Paper in February 1999
about his National Service experience. He described his national service as a
rite of passage. “It’s a different world. You are not coddled by family and school,
and you learn about your strengths and limitations. I cannot explain it, you have
to go through it to know what it is like.” Coming from a comfortable family
background, NS was an eye-opener for him, as he met people from all walks of
life. “I met people who came from broken homes and some who were thrown
out by their families.” But he most clearly remembered them as loyal, faithful
and honourable men who could be counted on to fight if the need ever arises. In
stressing the importance of a strong defence, Third Sergeant Chong used a
homespun analogy: “If you have a lot of money but are weak, a robber is not
going to listen to your plea for mercy. You have to be strong to stand up to him .
. . whatever you can’t defend, doesn’t belong to you.”


Singapore’s NSmen have been thoroughly tested over the years, through
a multitude of mobilisation exercises and in exercises on the field. In
open mobilisations, in which pre-arranged codewords are broadcast over
the mass media, a response rate of 95% within the first few hours is the
norm. When called upon, our NSmen can be rapidly mobilised, equipped
and deployed to carry out their missions.


The SAF has developed into a well integrated and capable force, ready
at a moment’s notice to go into action, with the three Services able at
all times to support one another in joint operations. The SAF will have
to keep pace with changes in the nature of warfare and changes in the
threats that may arise. The SAF will have to strive continually to make
the best use of its personnel, leverage on new technologies, and
collaborate even more closely with supporting MINDEF agencies to
develop the new capabilities that will allow it to fulfil its roles in
st
the 21 Century.


-----

# Securing Our Future

To stay ahead, the SAF must continually adapt to changes in its operating
st
environment. The SAF’s strategy for success in the 21 Century is to build
on the right basics that have made it the potent force it is today, and to
position itself to take full advantage of new opportunities.

## Right Basics

The SAF will continue to deter potential aggressors by maintaining a
capable and operationally ready armed forces. Should deterrence fail,
the SAF will fight to win swiftly and decisively. This requires that the SAF
continue to be a well-integrated force that is trim, balanced and potent. It
means that the SAF will have to continue to leverage on technology while
building up the fighting skills, the fighting spirit and the will of its people
to resist aggression. The SAF’s systems, force structure and training will
be organised to ensure this.

## Positioning for the Future

#### Key Military Capabilities

Strong capabilities are at the centre of the SAF’s defence strategy. In this era
of rapid technological change, the SAF’s future capabilities will depend on
its ability to exploit the technological changes for military advantage. The
SAF looks at the new technologies that may impact on military forces and
the nature of warfare, and invests resources to develop those that will enhance
its capabilities to handle the range of threats it may have to deal with.


-----

##### Stand-off Precision Technology. The Gulf War and Kosovo conflict
demonstrated the increasing use and impact of stand-off precision weapons
in modern warfare. As with other armed forces, the SAF will exploit
developments in the field of stand-off precision technology, such as high
energy technology and global positioning systems to name a few, to strengthen
its operational capabilities.

##### Protection Technology. The SAF has been able to provide better protection
for our soldiers in land operations by harnessing improvements in armour
technology. With the increasing mechanisation of infantry forces, our soldiers
will be able to manoeuvre faster in their operations and with better protection.

##### Stealth Technology. The SAF can use stealth technology and advances in
low observable technology to reduce the signature of its forces and the
likelihood of detection. Our new platforms – ships, aircraft and land vehicles
– will incorporate more stealth technology to enhance their protection.

##### Unmanned Technology. The SAF
is unlikely to be able to increase its
size significantly despite the need to
cope with the expanding demands
of modern warfare. It will therefore

Leveraging on unmanned technology leverage on the use of unmanned

technologies, such as Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), robotics and automation, to enhance its capabilities
without having more soldiers.

##### Superiority through Information Technology. The world is moving
towards better, faster and more timely flow of information for decision-making
using information technology (IT). Dominance in information, commonly
known as dominant battlefield awareness, will dramatically change the way
armed forces operate in the future. Although the fog of war will not be
completely eliminated, commanders will have more information to make
better and faster decisions. Having superior information will be as potent or
even more potent than having an advantage in firepower. Superior information
can reduce risks and improve the chances of success in battle.


The SAF will be transformed into a highly digitised armed force to capitalise
on the quality of our human resources and new IT developments. However,
the increased use of information technology in Singapore and the SAF
also means that we need better protection for our IT systems. Research
will therefore go into how the SAF can better secure its IT systems.

##### Enhanced Lift and Endurance. As training areas on the Singapore
mainland continue to shrink, the SAF will have to optimise every training
area available including offshore islands and international airspace and
seas. The SAF will also seek more training facilities from friendly nations
to meet its needs. To make full use of these possibilities, the SAF will
continue to invest in transportation capabilities such as LSTs and jet
tankers. These capabilities are also useful when the SAF has to inter-operate
with friendly armed forces in peacekeeping and humanitarian missions,
which may be far from the SAF’s home bases in Singapore.

In our continual renewal and modernisation programme, one of the criteria
in our selection of new platforms will be higher endurance, or range. This
will allow us access to more distant training areas and to spend longer training
time there, such as in the South China Sea and other overseas training areas
open to the SAF. It will also allow the SAF to better sustain a reassuring
presence in peacetime, or to support its operations in conflict if this is required.

##### Advanced Computer Modelling and Simulators. The SAF expects to
make greater use of advanced computer models to develop a system approach
to resource optimisation, so that we get the most from our limited budget
and manpower and the maximum returns from each budget dollar. Advanced


Over the next decade, the SAF will
invest much effort to achieve higher
levels of battlefield awareness. It will
focus on building up sensor and early
warning capabilities that will enable the
SAF to detect threats and have adequate
time for response despite our lack of
strategic depth.


Battlefield awareness


-----

computer modelling will enable the SAF to experiment with different mixes
of platforms, weapons and new technologies to arrive at the most cost-effective
combination. Advancements in simulation have also given us the means to
overcome our limitation in training space. Requirements that cannot be met
physically may be met in cyberspace. For example, an infantry section can
go through several battle scenarios, ranging from jungle ambushes to fighting
in built-up areas, all within the walls of a simulation room. Simulators also
allow the SAF to make more effective and efficient use of valuable training
time for NSmen within each In-Camp Training period.

#### Meeting other Contingencies

The threat of terrorist and other forms of subversion cannot be ignored in the
years ahead. Terrorist groups, whether acting for their own specific objectives
or to serve the interests of states, will increasingly have better access to modern
technology and weapons, including unconventional means.


illegal immigrants and piracy. Our Commandos are trained and equipped to
deal with terrorists and hijackers. These capabilities of the SAF, together with
those of other Singapore agencies, can be employed to swiftly and decisively
eliminate such low-intensity threats to Singapore’s security.

Having at hand a wide range of
capabilities and options for
mounting different responses to lowintensity threats provides only part
of the solution. The other part lies in
the SAF working seamlessly with
agencies from other Ministries to Building-up capability for chemical defence
deal effectively with such threats. A key priority for the SAF in the future will
therefore be to strengthen its linkages with the other Ministries. This is yet
another dimension of Total Defence, which will take on greater significance
in the years ahead.

## The SAF and the Future

The SAF is the national institution that will ensure Singapore’s security and
st
defend Singapore’s national interests in the 21 Century. What types of threat
to our national interests may arise, at what level of intensity, cannot always
be predicted. However, the SAF, working closely with other agencies, will
be ready to meet all of these challenges through the careful and systematic
build-up of its capabilities and the exploitation of new technologies.

However, technological advances in themselves can never be enough to
ensure the security of Singapore. Ultimately, we will have to rely on the
courage, fighting spirit, tenacity and strength of our soldiers to ensure that
the SAF is an effective deterrent in peacetime, and that the SAF will win
decisively in any conflict.


Dealing with terrorist threats


We will need to prepare ourselves to better
handle such unconventional threats to our
national interests. Today, the Police, the
Singapore Civil Defence Force, and other
agencies handle many of these
contingencies. In the future, we may need
different and stronger security responses
to deal with such threats, which fall short
of the conventional definition of war.


Over the years, the SAF has developed a wide range of capabilities that can
be used to reinforce the efforts of other Singapore agencies to counter terrorist
and subversive threats should they arise. For example, the Information
Technology Defence that the SAF has built up will have spin-off benefits for
the protection of the national information infrastructure. Our research work
and the capability we have built up in Chemical Defence will be useful
should an incident similar to the Sarin gas attack in a Tokyo subway occur in
Singapore. The Navy’s COSCOM has capabilities to tackle the smuggling of


-----

# u g Co s s o Opportunities

MINDEF and the SAF face tough constraints arising mainly from severe
limitations in land, air and sea space in Singapore and a small population.
But rather than limiting the growth of the SAF, these constraints have
compelled the SAF to look for new ways and new opportunities to do
things better.

## Maximising Our Defence Dollar

A capable and operationally ready SAF is critical to Singapore’s survival
and prosperity. Hence, the Singapore Government is committed to
spending up to 6% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) on defence
every year. We adopt a careful and prudent approach, with many stringent
safeguards, to ensure that we get good value for our defence spending.

We look for the most cost-effective way to meet our operational
requirements. Where it makes sense, the SAF purchases and refurbishes
second-hand weapon systems. However, this approach is not always viable
as technological advances produce new systems that offer better value.
Today the SAF is more likely to buy new systems and customise them to
suit our specific needs. But sometimes what we need is either not available
or not for sale. When that happens, and if we have sufficient capability,
we will specially design and develop platforms or systems on our own,
or in collaboration with other parties such as the Singapore
defence industry.

Facing page: The Air Combat Simulator in action


-----

MINDEF manages its budget pro-actively on the basis of long-term
planning. Our goals are both to get value for money and to maintain a
sustainable budget. Capital acquisitions are never undertaken on a
piecemeal basis. Each proposed acquisition is carefully examined from
the entire system viewpoint. Factors such as capability gaps, projected
changes in technology, life-cycle costs, and operational priorities are
carefully considered before a decision is made.

#### Upgrade of MGBs

The Missile Gunboats (MGBs) acquired in the 1970s have played an important
role in protecting our Sea Lines of Communications (SLOCs). When the RSN
reviewed the MGBs’ role as part of the total naval capability build-up in the
1980s, these ships were identified for a mid-life upgrade. Detailed studies had
shown that the MGBs’ operational lifespan could be lengthened, cost-effectively,
by upgrading them with better weapons and sensor suites. The upgraded MGBs
have served us well in keeping our SLOCs free and open for the past three decades.

## Overcoming Land Constraints

Competing demands for limited land put pressure on the SAF to look
for better approaches to meet its infrastructure and training needs.
The SAF overcomes the land constraint by optimising land use, training
overseas, and using simulation technology.


#### Optimising Land Use

The SAF works closely with other national
agencies to identify commercially less valuable
areas to locate its military camps. Often, this
puts the camps closer to training areas, thereby
reducing transportation time for troops to move
from camp to training ground. The development
of the Basic Military Training Centre (BMTC) and
the School of Infantry Specialists (SISPEC)
complexes in Pulau Tekong is a good example

The new BMTC at Tekong

of this. New camp designs also make more
intensive use of land. Offices and sleeping quarters are housed in multistorey buildings. Units in the same command are co-located in camp
complexes for better operational efficiency. This allows common facilities
and services to be shared, resulting in more savings.

MINDEF also continually seeks out new construction technology to optimise
land use. In 1999, we launched a plan to excavate a large cavern for an
underground ammunition dump out of solid granite. This innovative solution
will free more than 300 hectares of surface land area, which is large enough
to build half a New Town.


#### Underground Ammunition Dump at Mandai

Deep below ground level at Mandai, MINDEF is constructing its first underground
rock cavern ammunition facility. To be completed in 2003, this underground
ammunition dump project is pioneering the development
of leading edge technology in rock cavern engineering.
A significant saving in land is possible because large tracts
of land do not need to be sterilised to meet safety standards.
Advanced features in the design, such as sophisticated fire
and smoke detection devices and specially designed blast
doors, cater for safety. The design also makes use of water
mitigation and ground shock technologies to further
enhance safety.


-----

#### Training Overseas

The SAF has been looking for
opportunities for training in friendly
countries since the 1970s. Today, the
SAF trains in many countries, including
Thailand, Brunei, Indonesia, Australia,
New Zealand, France, Sweden, South

Training in Australia Africa, Canada, and the United States.

Such training facilities have helped to
meet a big portion of the SAF’s requirements for large scale and complex
exercises. They also promote closer relations with our overseas
counterparts and raise the professionalism of our soldiers. An excellent
example is our RSAF fighter pilots who train alongside the United States
Air Force. Their outstanding performance during friendly competitions
affirms the quality of our men, machines and systems.

#### Use of Simulation Technology

The SAF has invested heavily in
simulation technology to overcome
land constraints. Today’s simulators
render a high degree of realism. Army
tank crews using the Integrated
Armour Tactical Trainer can roam
realistic landscapes hunting down
enemy forces. The benefits are numerous. Besides substituting for field
training, simulators also allow for some types of training that would
not be possible in as realistic a manner in real life. For example, in a
simulator a pilot can be safely taught difficult manoeuvres like
emergency handling. And air traffic controller trainees can be drilled
in various emergency procedures without endangering any lives
or property.


#### SIMLAB – Realism in Virtual Training

The SIMulation system for LAnd Battles (SIMLAB) trains commanders and their
staff in making decisions and co-ordinating combat units in the battlefield. The
system is capable of simulating military exercises up to division level.

SIMLAB injects realism into such exercises by pitting commanders of opposing
forces against each other in two-sided exercises. It provides accurate simulation
of land, sea and air movements in situations that arise during actual warfare and
allows live communications with exercise units. For example, if a simulated
battalion comes to a large river and its commander has forgotten to bring along
the necessary crossing means, it will not be allowed to cross. The commander
will have to modify his course of action and his plans. SIMLAB records every
event and decision in an exercise and the information can be played back later
to assess the performance of the
trainees and to draw lessons from.
SIMLAB also allows the SAF to
conduct force development and
deployment experiments that
will help to enhance our
force capability.


## Optimising Manpower

Given our small population, Singapore cannot maintain an adequate
standing force of SAF regulars without draining the national manpower
pool and impeding our economic growth. The solution to this is National
Service. Instead of relying solely on career soldiers for our defence,
every able-bodied male Singaporean is conscripted for two or two and
a half years of full-time National Service. Thereafter, he returns for
operational training every year for 13 years. He remains liable for
National Service until the age of 40 for warrant officers and specialists,
and the age of 50 for officers.


-----

The men of Singapore have to make a substantial commitment of their
time for National Service. Even then, this is just enough to develop the
defence capability we require. It works only because we optimise the
time spent by every National Serviceman in the SAF. We maximise the
contribution of National Servicemen by increasing the combat
effectiveness of each and every serviceman, including optimising their
deployment and training time.

#### Increasing Individual Combat Effectiveness


#### Every Soldier Counts

To the SAF, every soldier counts. We therefore try to optimise the
deployment of our servicemen without compromising their safety.
Towards this end, we continually fine-tune our medical classification
system to ensure that everyone can be deployed to the maximum of
his ability. For example, prior to 1995, servicemen medically classified
PES C were not deployed in operational appointments. In 1995, the
PES C medical grading was sub-divided. The refinement allowed
personnel with medical conditions that precluded them from certain
physical or field activities to be safely deployed in other operational
roles. We also review our medical guidelines regularly, taking into account
medical trends and advances in medical science. The result is a reduction
in deployment mismatches, which means better safety, less training
injuries, and maximum use of manpower.


#### Endurance Class LST

The SAF is replacing its ex-County
Class LSTs with the new Endurance
Class LSTs. Innovative and modern
technologies have been incorporated
to ensure higher system reliability and
availability, and more automation of
tasks. As a result, although the new
LSTs are larger and more complex,
they require less maintenance and a
smaller crew. The Endurance Class LST
carries a crew of only 65 compared to
130 for the ex-County Class ships.


FH2000 training in New Zealand


The rising educational standards among
our National Servicemen have enabled
the SAF to leverage on technology as a
force multiplier. In other words, we use
technology to do more with fewer people.
One example is the FH-2000 155mm
self-propelled howitzer gun. It delivers
higher firepower and longer range but uses
a crew of 8 instead of the 12 for the gun it
replaced. Similarly, the new Endurance
Class LST is 40% larger and twice as fast as
its predecessor, but operates with only half
the crew of the ex-County Class LST.


At the ground level, we have also combined force restructuring with
technology so that each unit can do more with fewer soldiers. For example,
in the late 1980s, the size of an Infantry Section was reduced from nine
to seven men, and an Infantry Battalion was reduced from four to three
Companies. These cuts did not compromise the combat effectiveness of
our Infantry units. On the contrary, our Infantry Battalion today, though
leaner, packs a more lethal punch. At the Section level, our soldiers are
now equipped with grenade launchers, sub-machineguns and anti-tank
missiles. Even the individual rifleman has become more deadly, with the
introduction of the new SAR-21 rifle that has an in-built laser-aiming
device and optical scope.


-----

To further improve deployability, the SAF tailored its training programmes
to the individual fitness level of our National Servicemen. For example,
the Basic Military Training (BMT) programme has been refined. Those
who are physically fit attend a 3-month programme while those who are
less fit go through an additional 2-month preparatory training phase before
BMT. A special 4-month BMT programme helps obese recruits to gradually
improve their physical fitness and prepare them for combat vocations.

Being a conscript defence force, the SAF has only a limited period in
which to train our National Servicemen and prepare them for an
operational role. We must therefore optimise their time spent in the SAF.
This is achieved partly through more effective training programmes and
partly through new weapons and equipment that are easy to operate and
master. The new Bionix Infantry Fighting Vehicle, for instance, requires
only a short period of familiarisation training before the crew can
operate it.

The SAF has also moved some of the training outside formal in-camp
periods, so that NSmen have more flexibility in tailoring their time to
their obligations. For example, instead of a whole battalion being called
up for physical fitness tests, NSmen can choose their own test date and
venue. Internet technology has enabled NS commanders to do self-paced
refresher training in the convenience of their homes prior to their
in-camp call-ups, so that they can have a shorter in-camp duration.

Optimising the contributions of our soldiers does not stop at merely
training them to become competent in the shortest possible time. More
importantly, we actively encourage thinking soldiers, and tap them for
ideas to improve the organisation and the way we operate.


#### Using Non-Military Resources

The SAF has systematically identified areas where non-military resources
can contribute to our defence needs. We tap civil resources for
emergencies. We also use civilian resources by commercialising nonoperational areas. For example, the RSAF has commercialised many of
its non-core functions, channelling the NS manpower to more critical
operational areas. Similarly, with the commercialisation of SAF
cookhouses and improved field rations, field kitchens and NS cooks have
become a thing of the past.


#### Ideas & Suggestions

The SAF Suggestions Scheme was launched in 1976.
Today, a strong culture of continuous improvement
and an active productivity movement are entrenched
in the SAF. Each and every soldier can make an
important contribution to organisational efficiency.
First Sergeant Tan Gak Seng is one such serviceman.
He suggested building a shelter over a rifle range so
that practice lessons could continue even during wet
weather. As a result of First Sergeant Tan’s suggestion,
the Nee Soon 100-metre range today has skylight
roofing and covered link-ways. With these
improvements, soldiers no longer need to sit around
waiting for the rain to stop but can continue their range
practices even when it rains. A simple idea has thus helped to optimise the time
of our servicemen and enhanced our operational readiness.


-----

#### Requisition of Civil Resources

The use of civil resources (CR) is part of
our Total Defence concept, in which all
sectors participate in and contribute to
Singapore’s defence. In peacetime, civil
resources are productively employed for
economic purposes. In an emergency,
these resources will be requisitioned and
committed to the areas of greatest national
need. Currently, about 8,000 CR assets, including aircraft, vessels and vehicles,
are earmarked to support the SAF and other Ministries.


#### Commercialisation of SAF Cookhouses

This initiative has achieved significant
manpower savings and improved morale.
Servicemen now enjoy a wider variety and
better food. The commercialisation
allowed the re-deployment of more than
750 soldiers – enough to form a Battalion
and more – to more critical operational
appointments in MINDEF and the SAF.


#### Commercialisation in the RSAF

Since the 1980s, the RSAF has adopted
a deliberate policy to commercialise
its non-core functions, such as the
maintenance of ground support
equipment, ground logistics support,
warehousing functions, and the
maintenance of trainer aircraft. In the
1990s, the RSAF ventured further to
commercialise some areas that directly support operations, particularly for our
transport aircraft like the F-50 and C-130. In this case, the scope of
commercialisation covered the entire spectrum of maintenance activities, from
depot maintenance to first-line direct maintenance support. This makes the RSAF
one of the few air forces in the world where civilian contractors have been fully
integrated into frontline operations. The RSAF’s commercialisation effort in the
1990s has allowed the re-deployment of some 1,600 servicemen to meet other
operational requirements.


## The Future

Singapore’s limitations in terms of physical space and population size
are constraints that the SAF will always have to work with. However, just
as post-independence Singapore was forced to adopt a new and open
economic model that has brought us the economic success we enjoy

are earmarked to support the SAF and other Ministries.

today, these constraints have also given rise to opportunities. The
challenges they raise force us to come up with creative solutions that
can further enhance our capabilities. In the process, Singapore has and
will continue to develop a credible defence force that will serve us well
st
in the 21 Century.


-----

# p g Technological Edge

## A Strategic Component of the SAF

The SAF recognised the critical importance of technology since its earliest
days. Over the years, we have built up a strong defence technological
capability. Today, technology is integrated into all aspects of the SAF’s
operations. The SAF operates weapon systems and equipment that are
often enhanced or specially tailored to its unique operating requirements.
Some of these are indigenously produced and some purchased off the
shelf. As force multipliers, technology has enhanced the capabilities of
the SAF in many areas.

## Building a Strong Indigenous Technological Capability

We will continue to have a strong indigenous technological capability so
that the SAF can continue to develop its own “silver bullets”, such as
Electronic Warfare, for that extra edge. An indigenous defence
technological capability also allows the SAF to customise and develop
weapon systems to meet its own unique operational requirements. The
SAF operates in an environment that is quite different from many of the
countries that supply our weapon systems, so customising the weapon
systems we buy from others would maximise the SAF’s effectiveness.
Having a technological capability also means that we can develop weapon
systems specially for the SAF, by making use of commercial-off-the-shelf
equipment to reduce cost and development lead-time.


-----

## Strengthening our Defence Technology Linkages

Three complementary technological entities support the SAF: the Defence
Technology Group in MINDEF for programme evaluation and
management, DSO National Laboratories for research and development,
and the Singapore defence industry for engineering, production and
industrial support. They will need to keep up with the rapid pace of
technological changes, so that they can continue to develop the
capabilities that keep the SAF on the cutting edge of technology.

#### Defence Technology Group

The Defence Technology Group (DTG) is responsible for the acquisition
of weapon systems required by the SAF. It also develops command and
control systems and specialised infrastructure to meet the unique
operational requirements of the SAF.

The DTG adopts a total system approach in acquisition, development
and integration of defence systems and facilities. It upgrades existing
weapon systems to extend their useful lives as and when it is economical
to do so.

Advanced weapon systems by themselves cannot win a war. The man
behind the weapon system is always more important. Technology has
been exploited to reduce the load on our soldiers and improve their
performance in battle. New equipment is designed to be easy to use
and ergonomic.


#### SAR 21

The Singapore-built SAR 21 assault rifle is
designed with our soldiers in mind.
Specially sized to fit our soldiers, it requires
no zeroing and can be used by both left
and right-handed soldiers. Stripping and
re-assembly is a breeze. Using the SAR 21,
our soldiers can hit targets at long distances
and accurately.


#### Upgraded E-2C Airborne Early Warning Aircraft

The E-2C aircraft was acquired
from the US in the mid-1980s.
Today, the explosion of advances
in computing has rendered its
military computers obsolete and
increasingly difficult to maintain.
And it could not meet the demands
for better performance.

Together with the Singapore
defence industry, the DTG
upgraded the entire computing
and software systems. State-of-theart equipment was adapted to the
harsh military environment and
millions of lines of code were Before upgrade After upgrade
rewritten. The engineers also made
sure that the system would be easy to upgrade, so that new technologies could
be inserted in the future. The software was entirely rewritten to meet real-time
performance needs while giving a more user-friendly look and feel.


-----

#### DSO National Laboratories

The Defence Science Organisation (DSO), the research and development
arm of MINDEF, started in 1972 when then Minister for Defence, Dr Goh
Keng Swee, assembled a small group of engineers and scientists. DSO
has since grown into a premier R&D organisation, the largest in Singapore,
with a wide range of capabilities. It is the primary vehicle for developing
“silver bullets” for the SAF. DSO is also a major resource in our
acquisitions, upgrading and industry development, as it provides leading
edge scientific expertise and state-of-the-art technology. DSO’s capabilities
are applied in:

  - designing special systems as part of weapon systems development
programmes;

  - integrating weapon platforms with special systems, such as in the
RSAF’s A-4s, F-5s and F-16s;

  - designing high performance sub-systems encapsulating leading
edge technologies, such as the airborne computing engine;

  - developing materials, equipment and methods for effective
protection against chemical and biological weapons;

  - developing electronic warfare solutions that provide shields
around aircraft, ships and fighting vehicles to protect them from
incoming threats; and

  - protecting the military communications and computing
infrastructure from external attack.


The technology environment has changed dramatically in recent years.
Commercial technologies now lead the way in areas such as computing,
communications and software. As the national R&D infrastructure has
also matured considerably, DSO was corporatised on 1 April 1997 to
allow it more flexibility in leveraging on foreign technology and tapping
Singapore’s own technology. Besides delivering advanced technologies
and systems to the SAF, corporatisation also enabled DSO to contribute
more effectively to the technological needs at the national level, such as
the protection of vital information infrastructures.

#### Singapore Defence Industry

The Singapore defence industry is a vital component of our defence
capability. It was started to provide in-country engineering, production
and maintenance capabilities. Today, it supports the needs of the SAF
with high technology weapons and provides essential products and
services to the SAF cost-effectively.

For the past three decades, the Singapore Technologies companies have
undertaken activities ranging from the manufacturing of weapons and
ammunition to the development of advanced weapon systems and
upgrading of major naval, air and land fighting platforms. Upgrading
programmes included the M-113 armoured personnel carrier, and A-4
and F-5 fighter aircraft. Systems integration and development of weapon
systems included the FH-2000 howitzer gun, Bionix Infantry Fighting
Vehicle (IFV), SAR 21 assault rifle and Endurance Class Landing Ship
Tank (LST). The local design and development of military hardware has
broadened and deepened the technological capability of the defence
industry. The SAF has also benefited by having more responsive local
support and better sustainability.

The military officers, programme managers and engineers in the SAF, MINDEF,
and the defence industry work as a team to develop weapon systems for the
SAF. This tripartite relationship has been vital to the development of a strong
indigenous defence technological capability in Singapore.


Anechoic chamber is used to check
the performance of radar systems


“The SAF depends on the ingenuity and
innovativeness of DSO engineers because
electronic warfare is regarded as a secret art
that no country wants to share. At best, overseas
suppliers are prepared to sell us black boxes.”

Deputy Prime Minister & Minister for Defence

**Dr Tony Tan at the opening of the Marina Hill**

complex of DSO National Laboratories in Oct 1998.


-----

The Singapore defence industry’s customers are not limited to the SAF.
Today, Singapore Technologies is a technology-based multi-national
corporation based in Singapore, with operations and customers in many
countries. The larger business base makes it more efficient in supporting
the SAF.


## Key Thrusts

Two key thrusts point the way to the future:

#### Strengthening Technological Collaboration

In the unfolding Revolution in Military Affairs, the digital battlefield of
the future and the need for commercial technology in IT and
communications will influence the approach we take to ensure that we
sustain a technological edge. As a small country with limited resources,
we must collaborate nationally and forge partnerships internationally to
develop the defence and commercial technologies we require. MINDEF
collaborates with universities and research institutes both in Singapore
and abroad, and with defence research establishments and commercial
enterprises in many countries.


#### Bionix Infantry Fighting Vehicle

In 1989, the Army realised that it needed
more armoured vehicles. What was available
on the market did not meet the SAF’s
operational requirements. Thus began the
design and development of Singapore’s own
Infantry Fighting Vehicle.

The SAF, DTG and Singapore Technologies worked together to design and build
a completely new vehicle. Named Bionix, the locally developed IFV packs a
powerful punch, has all-terrain mobility and yet is as easy to drive as a car. A
powerful diesel engine and hydro-pneumatic transmission give it excellent speed
cross-country and a top speed of 70 km/h. Mounted with machine guns and
medium-calibre cannon which can fire at targets on the move, the Bionix adds
firepower to an armoured assault.


#### Upgraded F-5 Fighter Aircraft

The upgraded F-5 features a new radar and
an avionics system that rival those of modern
fighters such as the F-16. The RSAF, DTG
and Singapore Technologies Aerospace
jointly undertook the upgrading work. The
RSAF now has a highly capable modern jet
fighter at a fraction of the cost of new aircraft.
The fleet of upgraded F-5s has been integrated successfully into Singapore’s air
defence system and all the RSAF F-5 squadrons have attained full
operational capability.


#### Local collaboration

Singapore universities and research institutes are valuable sources of
technological know-how that can be tapped for defence. For example, MINDEF
has set up research centres for protective technology with NUS and NTU.
Another example is the successful collaboration between MINDEF and the
Institute of High Performance Computing to develop a 3-dimensional software
which allows naval vessel designers to better appreciate the effects of
underwater explosions. Such an approach economises on national resources
for research.


-----

#### Overseas collaboration

Singapore has built up a strong capability to defend our population against
chemical threats. Today, our DSO Centre for Chemical Defence is among a
small number of laboratories being considered by the Organisation for
Prohibition of Chemical Warfare (OPCW) for international analytical
accreditation. Collaboration projects with Swedish and French defence research
establishments contributed significantly to building up our expertise.

Laboratory tour of DSO Centre for
Chemical Defence during OPCW
Director-General’s visit


As executive agent for MINDEF, DSTA’s roles and functions are to:

  - acquire weapon systems for the SAF;

  - advise MINDEF on all defence science and technology matters;

 - manage defence research and development;

  - develop military infrastructure;

  - provide engineering and related services in defence areas; and

  - promote and facilitate the development of defence science and
technology in Singapore.

Technology is an important force multiplier for the SAF. The SAF will
continue to leverage on technology in every dimension of its operations.
MINDEF will ensure that we continue to attract a fair share of the national
talent and develop a pool of competent and dedicated scientists and
engineers who are committed to Singapore’s defence.


#### Establishment of the Defence Science and Technology Agency

The growing use of technology by the SAF means more demand for DTG’s
services and the need for more scientists and engineers. MINDEF will
have to compete with the rest of the economy for this limited pool of
manpower resources. It would need to make good use of external expertise
wherever possible. MINDEF therefore decided to transform DTG into a
statutory board called the Defence Science and Technology Agency (DSTA)
in April 2000. DSTA will have the operating flexibility to recruit and deploy
talent, and to draw on external resources by collaborating with others. It
would also be better positioned to make use of commercial and dual-use
technologies.

The mission of DSTA is to harness and exploit science and technology to
meet the defence and national security needs of Singapore.


-----

# y g Future

We live in an increasingly inter-dependent world. Small countries like
Singapore, with open economies and few resources, are especially
vulnerable to external shocks. We have no choice but to face up to these
challenges, as we have faced up to other challenges in the past.

One of our greatest challenges is to continue to maintain vigilance and
readiness. We have enjoyed peace and stability and the fruits of such a
positive climate for many years. But we must not forget that the peace
and stability did not come by chance. Nor is there any guarantee that we
will always have peace and stability. As a small and young nation, we
cannot take our future security for granted. Neither can we depend on
others to defend us. We shall have to continue to place a premium on a
strong defence.

## Challenges Ahead

Our security environment remains dynamic and uncertain. The post-Cold
War world is still in the process of transformation. How this transformation
will take shape in the coming years, no one really knows. But we do
know that as Singapore integrates more fully with the rest of the world,
we will be exposed to a broader range of security challenges, some of
which may be unconventional in nature.

Our armed forces must be trained and prepared to contend with these
new challenges and to keep up with a modern battlefield that is fast
being transformed by the developments in information technology. Being
small and nimble is an advantage in keeping up with rapid advances in
weapons technology. It also means that we can adapt faster to changes in
the way wars will be fought.


-----

At the same time, a growing population and greater competition for living
and work space will mean that we have to manage our limited defence
resources even more carefully. Finding innovative ways to overcome our
resource constraints will continue to be a key challenge in the future.

## The Defence of Singapore in the 21[st] Century

MINDEF and the SAF are entrusted with the important task of protecting
Singapore’s sovereignty and interests. We will continue to ensure that
none of these are compromised.

In the 21[st] Century, the fundamental tenets of our defence policy will not
change. Our defence policy will continue to be based on diplomacy and
deterrence. The twin strategies of diplomacy and deterrence have proven
effective in securing our peace and stability since our independence. We
shall enhance our efforts in diplomacy and deterrence in order to safeguard
our interests in a globalised era. The two key thrusts are:

##### • To strengthen dialogue, confidence-building and co- operation in the region and beyond. Singapore will work with
friendly countries to promote dialogue, confidence-building and
co-operation to maintain a peaceful and stable regional and
international environment. MINDEF and the SAF will play our parts
to promote greater bilateral and multilateral defence co-operation
and dialogue among regional and extra-regional armed forces and
defence establishments, so as to foster understanding and trust.

##### • To strengthen our capabilities to deal with a wider range of security challenges. To tackle the diverse range of security
challenges in the new millennium, Singapore will strengthen the
five components of Total Defence. MINDEF and the SAF will work
more closely with other government agencies to develop a multilayered defence against the various security challenges, including
unconventional threats.


The SAF is well-equipped to defend Singapore’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and national interests. But we can always do better. We must
continue to invest in a well-trained, highly motivated and technologically
advanced SAF that will guarantee Singapore’s continued survival and
success. To ensure that the SAF can meet the challenges of a modern and
st
high-tech battlefield in the 21 Century, MINDEF and the SAF will adopt
the following strategies:

##### • Develop new capabilities and doctrines. To stay abreast
of the changing nature of warfare, the SAF will develop new
capabilities and fighting doctrines to complement its existing
capabilities. It will exploit developments in the RMA, such as
the integration of information technology into weapon systems
to achieve superiority in the battlefield.

##### • Develop better skills and talent. More important than having
good hardware is having good people. MINDEF will harness its
well-educated, talented workforce to develop thinking warriors
and a technologically savvy fighting force that will prevail in
tomorrow’s high-tech, information-intensive battlefield. We will
maximise the potential and productivity of our people through
better training systems and by promoting a work environment that
recognises and rewards creativity, innovation and initiative. MINDEF
will also ensure that a career in the SAF remains attractive so that
we continue to get the best.

##### • Develop a stronger technological base. Technology will
remain a powerful force multiplier for the SAF. MINDEF will
continue to deepen its technological base. We will foster a strong
indigenous defence technology capability in Singapore to meet
and support the SAF’s requirements. We will continue to expand
our international linkages and strategic partnerships with foreign
armed forces and research bodies. This ongoing effort to source
key technologies from overseas will help to keep the SAF at the
cutting edge of military technology.


-----

## Everyone has a part to play

The efforts of MINDEF and the SAF by themselves are not sufficient. A
credible defence force does not depend only on hardware and capable
people. It depends ultimately on “heartware”. Our continued survival and
security will continue to rest on the commitment of every Singaporean to
the defence of Singapore.

The SAF draws its strength from every Singaporean . The peace and stability
of the last three and a half decades was built upon the sacrifice and
dedication of our NSmen, together with a core of steady regulars. While
hi-tech capabilities will afford the SAF strategic and tactical advantages, it
is ultimately the courage, fighting spirit and tenacity of its men that will
determine the strength of the SAF. Our security in this new century will
likewise depend on the commitment, motivation and fighting spirit of future
generations of our NSmen.

A strong and technologically advanced SAF will be up to its task with the
backing and support from a united people. At the core of Singapore’s defence
efforts is the will and resolve of each and every Singaporean to come to the
defence of the nation should the need ever arise. Singapore’s future survival,
security and success rest in our hands, and in the hearts and minds of each
and every Singaporean. In unity, vigilance and readiness, we will realise our
vision of a First World Economy and a World Class Home.


-----

Photographs used courtesy of Ministry of Information and the Arts,
The Straits Times, Boeing Corporation, Associated Press and the Colorado
Springs Gazette Telegraph.

ISBN 9971-88-726-6
Copyright © January 2000 by
Ministry of Defence (Singapore)
Design, Colour Separation &
Production by Grace Communications Pte Ltd


-----

