-----

In accordance with Article 38 of the Regulation on the Ministry of Defence Planning (No. 024-34/201121 of 13 September 2012) I hereby issue the

##### ANNUAL REPORT OF THE MINISTRY
 OF DEFENCE FOR 2017


-----

###### TABLE OF CONTENTS

The structure of the report reflects the key working areas of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) which fol­
low the programme structure of the budget. In addition to military defence and protection against nat­
ural and other disasters, a special chapter in the report summarizes the activities which took place
in the administrative field, which carries out steering, managerial, common, supporting and other
administrative assignments for the entire Ministry. This section also includes crisis management.
Finally, the resource plans, key implementation plans of the MoD and their progress and completion,
and the implementation of the risk register are presented at the end of the report.

###### MINISTER’S STATEMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

 MILITARY DEFENCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

1 STRUCTURE AND SIZE OF THE SAF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

2 SAF MILITARY TRAINING AND EXERCISES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

3 DEVELOPMENT AND BUILDING OF SAF CAPABILITIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

4 MAINTAINING A LEVEL OF READINESS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

5 KEY PROJECTS OF THE MODERNIZATION OF THE SAF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

6 SAF OPERATIONS IN SUPPORT OF THE SYSTEM OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL
AND OTHER DISASTERS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

7 SAF CONTRIBUTION TO INTERNATIONAL PEACE, SECURITY AND STABILITY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

###### PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

1 PREVENTIVE ACTIVITIES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

2 PREPAREDNESS OF THE SYSTEM OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER
DISASTERS AND THE PROTECTION, RESCUE AND RELIEF FORCES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

3 DISASTER RESPONSE AND DAMAGE ASSESSMENT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

4 EDUCATION AND TRAINING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49

5 INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53

6 INSPECTION ACTIVITY IN THE FIELD OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND
OTHER DISASTERS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56

###### THE DEFENCE SYSTEM AND CRISIS MANAGEMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58

1 DEFENCE POLICY AND PLANNING. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58

2 SLOVENIA’S CRISIS PREPARATIONS AND RESPONSE MEASURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65


-----

3 DEVELOPMENT OF CIVILIAN CAPABILITIES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68

4 INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY OPERATIONS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70

5 EQUIPPING, REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT, STANDARDIZATION AND CODIFICATION. . . . . . . . . . . . . 71

6 COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SYSTEM (CIS). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74

7 INSPECTION AND INTERNAL AUDIT ACTIVITIES IN THE FIELD OF DEFENCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76

8 INVESTIGATIONS INTO AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS AND MILITARY AIRCRAFT INCIDENTS. . . . . . . . . . . 78

9 STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION AND COOPERATION WITH CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS . . . . . . 79

10 NORMATIVE ACTS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81

11 RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGICAL PROJECTS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85

###### IMPLEMENTATION OF RESOURCE PLANS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86

1 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FINANCIAL PLAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86

2 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PERSONNEL PLAN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92

3 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLAN FOR THE ACQUISITION OF THE STATE’S PHYSICAL ASSETS. . . . 98

4 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE PLAN FOR THE SALE OF
STATE-OWNED TANGIBLE ASSETS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102

5 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EDUCATION, TRAINING AND ADVANCED TRAINING PLAN. . . . . . . . . . 104

6 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION PLAN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106

###### RISK MANAGEMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111


-----

**MINISTRY OF DEFENCE OF THE REPUBLIC**
**OF SLOVENIA**
Address: Vojkova cesta 55, 1000 Ljubljana
Telephone: +386 1 471 22 11
Fax, main administrative office:
+386 1 471 29 78
Email: glavna.pisarna(at)mors.si Internet:
www.mo.gov.si

Internal Organizational Units:

- DEFENCE POLICY DIRECTORATE

- DEFENCE AFFAIRS DIRECTORATE

- LOGISTICS DIRECTORATE

- SECRETARIAT OF THE SECRETARY GENERAL

- INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY SERVICE

- MINISTER’S OFFICE

- PROTOCOL SERVICE

- INTERNAL AUDIT SERVICE

- STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION SERVICE

- SERVICE FOR INVESTIGATION OF AIRCRAFT

ACCIDENTS AND MILITARY AIRCRAFT

INCIDENTS


**BODIES WITHIN THE MINISTRY**

**GENERAL STAFF OF THE SLOVENIAN ARMED**
**FORCES**
Address: Vojkova cesta 55, 1000 Ljubljana
Telephone: +386 1 471 22 11
Fax: +386 1 471 16 50
Email: glavna.pisarna.gssv(at)mors.si Internet:
www.slovenskavojska.si

**ADMINISTRATION OF THE RS FOR CIVIL**
**PROTECTION AND DISASTER RELIEF**
Address: Vojkova cesta 61, 1000 Ljubljana
Telephone: +386 1 471 33 22
Fax: +386 1 431 81 17
Email: urszr(at)urszr.si Internet: www.sos112.si

**INSPECTORATE OF THE RS FOR PROTECTION**
**AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS**
Address: Vojkova cesta 61, 1000 Ljubljana
Telephone: +386 1 230 53 68
Fax: +386 1 471 20 41
Email: irsvndn(at)mors.si

**DEFENCE INSPECTORATE OF THE REPUBLIC OF**
**SLOVENIA**
Address: Vojkova cesta 55, 1000 Ljubljana
Telephone: +386 1 431 80 27, +386 1 471 22 79,
+386 1 471 25 26
Fax: +386 1 431 80 32
E-mail: irso(at)mors.si


-----

##### MINISTER’S STATEMENT

Dear Readers,

This is the Report of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) for 2017. During this time, we did our best to
implement measures to improve Slovenia’s defence capability and resilience, as well as the situation
in the Slovenian Armed Forces, and measures to increase the efficiency of the Ministry. We also
implemented measures which were defined during the strategic defence review of 2016.

One of priority areas was associated with changes in the basic defence legislation, namely the Defence
Act and the Service in the Slovenian Armed Forces Act. I believe that these are high-quality new Acts
which appropriately address the current security challenges. A profound improvement in the status
of the members of the Slovenian Armed Forces, which remains our main goal, can only be achieved
through systemic change. The preparation of the two Acts undoubtedly formed a good basis for further
steps to be taken in the future.

Positive progress towards improving the resilience of the state and society in the event of security
threats was made by the National Assembly’s preparation and adoption of the Critical Infrastructure
Act. With the adoption of this Act, Slovenia took an important step forward in its multifaceted efforts to
enhance the level of resilience of Slovenian society to modern security threats and risks. This was also
a step in the direction of those countries which take special care of their critical infrastructure.

The downward trend in defence spending, which had lasted many years, was halted in 2016. The
Ministry of Defence was allocated additional funds in 2017, in the amount of EUR 24.3 million, in
order to improve the readiness and capabilities of the Slovenian Armed Forces. Higher expenditure on
defence, particularly on areas involving investment in weapons, military equipment and infrastructure,
is essential especially due to the national needs identified in the Strategic Defence Review and NATO
Defence Capability Review, which was also reflected in the negative readiness evaluation of the
Slovenian Armed Forces. These funds enabled the purchase of uniforms and the personal protective
equipment which ensures the personal safety of the members of the Slovenian Armed Forces both in
Slovenia and on international operations and missions.


-----

In June 2017, the Republic of Slovenia adopted a new package of NATO capability targets and thus
assumed, on the basis of the principle of fair burden-sharing, obligations in the development of
certain capabilities and in its contribution to collective security. The assumed obligations and the
conditions for their fulfilment are included in the proposal of the Resolution on the General Long-Term
Development and Equipping Programme of the Slovenian Armed Forces by 2030, and the proposal of
the Medium-Term Defence Programme for 2018-2023.

The provision of capabilities of the Slovenian Armed Forces will be focused on the formation of two
Medium Battalion Battle Groups, which will be capable of operating in all potential NATO operations
and whose chief purpose will be national defence.

After having studied the findings of the Strategic Defence Review 2016, the Ministry of Defence prepared
some projects for the modernization of the Slovenian Armed Forces, in accordance with the decisions
of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia. These projects are the basis for the Republic of Slovenia
to join the multi-national Boxer Programme within the framework of OCCAR, the Organization for Joint
Armament Co-operation, which will enable the procurement of 8 x 8 wheeled fighting vehicles for the
Medium Battalion Battle Groups.

The applicable strategic documents were examined in line with the findings of the Strategic Defence
Review 2016. The examination revealed that the applicable Resolution on National Security Strategy
of the Republic of Slovenia is an appropriate basic development guidance document pertaining to
national security, and a suitable foundation for the preparation and amendment of strategic and other
development and doctrinal documents in the field of defence. A proposal for essential changes in the
Defence Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia was also prepared.

In December 2017, the Republic of Slovenia, together with 24 other member states, became a full
member of the EU’s Permanent Structured Cooperation – PESCO. I believe that participation in PESCO
strengthens the security and defence capabilities of the Republic of Slovenia, while also demonstrating
the willingness of the RS to actively participate in this strategic project to further deepen cooperation
and coordination between EU member states. The criteria and commitments for joining PESCO are
consistent with the findings from the Strategic Defence Review 2016, which stipulate an increase in the
defence capabilities of the Republic of Slovenia and the enhancement of efforts towards the collective
security and defence of the EU. This cooperation will also impact the commitment to use the European
Defence Agency (EDA) as a forum for the development of joint capabilities, and affect the efforts to
increase the competitiveness of the European defence industry.

In 2017, the SAF continued its participation in International Operations and Missions (IOM), taking into
account the national interest, available resources and capabilities, adopted international commitments,
and the increasingly unpredictable dynamics of IOM. In terms of Slovenia’s participation in IOM, the
priority area of operations remains the Western Balkans (KFOR, EUFOR Althea, NATO integration and
counselling structures), and participation in the NATO counselling mission in Afghanistan (RSM), the eFP
structure, the EU operation in the southern part of the Mediterranean Sea (EUNAVFOR MED in Sophia),
the EU mission in Sahel in Africa (EUTM MALI), and UN missions in the Middle East (UNIFIL, UNTSO).
The SAF continued its engagement in the military part of the Global Counter-Terrorism Coalition against
Daesh. In 2017, it also provided capabilities for the NATO and EU rapid response forces.


-----

We continuously strived for the successful participation of the economic sector in the procurement of
military defence equipment. Joint efforts with the Ministry of Economic Development and Technology
for this purpose have been reflected in new defence products for domestic and foreign use, in active
group performances at events and fairs abroad, and in a continued increase in the export of defence
products in recent years.

We implemented the Government’s P7 strategic development project, which is aimed at enabling
the establishment of a comprehensive and modern system of crisis management. Proposals for the
organisation of crisis management at the national level, to upgrade the crisis management mechanisms
and to regulate the field normatively and legally, were prepared. In line with the results of the P7 project,
a proposal for the Act Amending the Government of the Republic of Slovenia Act was prepared and
adopted by the National Assembly during its September session. The Ministry of Defence successfully
settled its issues concerning the Land Register with local communities. In 2016, the MoD and the mayor
of the Municipality of Maribor signed an exchange contract, under which the MoD acquired part of the
land required by the unit of the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief in Pekre. The
MoD also signed a contract with the Municipality of Sežana regarding the Training Centre’s unit in
Sežana, and settled issues with the Municipality of Ig which had been unresolved for many years. At the
end of December 2017, the MoD signed an exchange contract with the Municipality of Ljubljana, which
regulates all land within the Edvard Peperko Military Post in Ljubljana. In February 2018, the MoD, the
mayor of the Municipality of Maribor, and the managing director of Javno podjetje za gospodarjenje s
stavbnimi zemljišči, d.o.o. (the public corporation for the management of construction land) signed an
exchange contract for the attainment of public benefit between the Republic of Slovenia, specifically
the MoD, the Municipality of Maribor, and the public corporation for the management of construction
land. After 27 years, the RS became the owner, and the MoD the manager, of all land within the General
Maister Military Post in Maribor.

In 2017, the Slovenian National Committee for the 100[th] Anniversary of World War I (2014-2018), of which
I am President, was also very active. The main national event commemorating the 100[th] anniversary of
the Isonzo Front was a military orchestra concert on 9 July 2017 in Kobarid, in which orchestras from
Austria, Croatia, Italy, Hungary, Germany and Slovenia performed. Activities for the preparation of
the file required to include the Walk of Peace from the Alps to the Adriatic Sea in the UNESCO World
Heritage List were underway. In 2017, activities to build a memorial commemorating the Slovenian
soldiers who were killed on the Eastern Front in Galicia during the First World War were undertaken.

A new organizational structure of the Administration of the Republic of Slovenia for Civil Protection and
Disaster Relief (ACPDR) was implemented successfully. The MoD thus established a clearer and more
transparent system of management and decision-making during natural and other disasters, and the
relationship between the RS Civil Protection Commander and the ACPDR. Among the most important
purchases were uniforms and the personal protective equipment which ensures the personal safety
of the members of national Civil Protection units in their performance of protection, rescue and relief
tasks.

With the preparation and implementation of the Programme for the Formation of National Material
Reserves for Protection, Rescue and Relief during the period 2017-2022, the MoD began to resupply
materiel and equipment from the state reserves to help the population at risk and affected people
after natural and other disasters, as well as personal and collective equipment for the operation of the
protection, rescue and relief forces, which had been decommissioned, destroyed or used during the
performance of tasks with regard to migrants in the past two years.


-----

The implementation of the infrastructure for the reception of automatic emergency calls from the
e-Call vehicles was completed. The e-Call system, which has been operational in Slovenia since the
end of 2015, was upgraded with an additional node, which will serve as a backup in the event of primary
system failure, and will also enable the introduction of new services.

Under international control, an emergency preparedness review mission for nuclear and radiological
accidents (EPREV) was carried out, which thoroughly examined Slovenia’s entire system of preparedness
for nuclear and radiological accidents. Its draft report commended the prepared plans and the
implemented training.

On the basis of a decision by the Government of the RS, the MoD handed over the locations of reception
centres to the Government Office for the Support and Integration of Migrants in 2017.

I am convinced that our efforts to improve Slovenia’s defence capability and resilience and the situation
in the Slovenian Armed Forces, and to increase the efficiency of the Ministry have already shown some
results. The MoD also strengthened its role as a socially responsible organization, which strives for
optimal cooperation with the civil environment.

Andreja Katič, Minister of Defence


-----

##### MILITARY DEFENCE

###### 1 STRUCTURE AND SIZE OF THE SAF

In the Medium-Term Defence Programme of the Republic of Slovenia (RS) for 2016-2020, the size of
the Slovenian Armed Forces (SAF) for 2017 is set at 8,754 members; specifically, at 7,254 members in
the active component and 1,500 members in the contract reserve component. The number of SAF
members was 7,717; that is, 6,777 members in the active component and 940 members in the contract
reserve component.

_Organizational Structure of the Slovenian Armed Forces 31 December 2017_

Strategic level **SAF**

**MSSVT** **COGB** **VERC** **VVIK** **EPROT** **EZD**

Operational level **Force**

**Command**

Tactical level

|MSSVT|COGB|
|---|---|

|EPROT|EZD|
|---|---|

|Strategic level SAF MSSVT COGB VERC VVIK EPROT EZD|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||||
|Operational level Force Command|||
|Tactical level VL Spec. EPOD EEB CVŠ 1 72 15 Op. 430 POV POV POV POV POV POV POV SEVP KVV SPVIU PMIN SD ECIMIC EKIS SNVIU OPOD 10 20 151 OSPD ZD VNL-11 EVOJ IC CZU OEI ŠČ 132 74 157 152 VCSD HPL-21 ŠPE PŠŠ VM SV T T 670 153 RB RB VNUS ŠPČ KIZC 16.CNKZP EVOJ SLP ŠTJ VC Combat support Batalion Ankaran 107.LEBA RB Flight school VP OI|||


-----

###### 2 SAF MILITARY TRAINING AND EXERCISES

The training of SAF commands and units was conducted according to the Mission Essential Task
List (METL) and the adopted standards for the operation and attainment of operational capabilities
of SAF commands and units in 2017.

_The training of SAF members_

###### 2.1 Overview of Important Training Courses for SAF Members and Units

The process of military training of SAF commands and units is the fundamental process by which
they are qualified to perform their duties in accordance with their missions. In 2017, training of SAF
commands and units was oriented towards the performance of duties in International Operations and
Missions (IOM), and the attainment of the planned operational capabilities of SAF commands and units.

Training of individuals was based on training in individual military skills, and training of commanders
and individuals in the most important duties. The process of military education and training of
individuals in SAF commands and units is the basis for the implementation of group training. The
training of individuals was systematic, which means that it was based on the principle of gradualism,
enabling the continuous training of individuals starting with easier and building up to more difficult
learning content, specifically:

–– Individual training in fundamental skills;
–– Individual training in basic skills;
–– Individual training in specialist skills or topics;
–– Training of commanders and individuals in the most important duties.

Training of personnel in individual military skills was planned and implemented on the basis of their
unit’s mission, the Mission Essential Task List, the unit’s collective tasks, and the conducted training
needs analysis.
The training of SAF commands and units was a planned and controlled graduated training, passing
from the training of individuals to the most demanding forms and content of group training and the
execution of exercises. It was harmonized with the Mission Essential Task List, the unit’s mission, and


-----

the unit’s operational cycle. Training was conducted in line with the times when SAF commands and
units were at various stages of operational readiness.

The main emphasis in the process of military or group training of SAF commands and units was placed
on the implementation of the following activities:

–– Training for IOM (RSM Afghanistan, KFOR, UNIFIL, Bosnia and Herzegovina, NLO Skopje, UNTSO,

Mali) and readiness tasks within NATO and the EU (eFP, which is also classified as IOM);

–– Training and exercises – 87.7% of the planned international military training and exercises in the

RS, and international military training and exercises abroad were implemented in accordance with
the training and exercise plan of the RS Defence System;

–– Training in support of the Readiness Action Plan (RAP);
–– Training to achieve the required operational capabilities;
–– Joint training of SAF commands and units together with the 173[rd] IBCT of the United States Armed

Forces.

_The training of SAF members_

###### 2.2 Training of Aviation Units

The training objectives of the 15th Wing’s commands and units were oriented towards the training of
members in general individual and specialist skills, and group tasks, which supported the performance
of essential tasks for 2017. This was reflected in a larger number of group training courses, which we
organized and carried out, or participated in both in the RS and abroad.

Training of the 15[th] Wing’s commands and units consisted of the continuation of the planned individual
military skills, the determination of readiness for work duties, and hikes. Eight firing week courses were
carried out, in accordance with the order for the organization and conduct of live firing for 2017 and
2018, issued by the SAF General Staff. Additionally, live-fire exercises and personal firing tests were
carried out for flight technicians, using the MAG medium machine gun for Bell 412 and AS 532 Cougar
helicopters. They were supplemented by tactical live-fire exercises for helicopter crews as part of the
international military exercise Fire Blade in Hungary, where Slovenian crews excelled in the combat use
of helicopters under difficult weather conditions and in multinational operations.

The 16[th] Air Space Surveillance and Control Centre carried out two call-ups of members of the contract
reserve component in April and May 2017. As part of their training, members of the contract reserve


-----

component carried out basic weapons handling, the physical fitness test, individual military skills, and
practical training on the man-portable short range radar system.

In group training we, as the SAF main unit, organized and carried out the international military exercise
Adriatic Strike 2017 on 2-10 June 2017. This was the main exercise of the 15[th] Wing’s commands and units,
which, in terms of the number of participating units, was the biggest exercise of the SAF conducted
in the territory of the RS in 2017. The exercise was aimed at training the members in the procedures
of close air support to forces on the battlefield under the leadership of FACs/JTACs. In addition to the
SAF, the exercise was attended by FACs/JTACs from Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Montenegro,
Denmark, France, Greece, Croatia, Italy, Canada, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Macedonia, Germany, the
Netherlands, Romania, Poland, Slovakia and the USA. The following aircraft were used: a JAS-39 from
Hungary, a PC-9 from Croatia, an L-159 from the Czech Republic, a Tornado and an AMX from Italy, an
OH-58 and a PC-7 from Austria, and an SA-341 from Montenegro.

We carried out six live-fire exercises within the AGOS at the SAF Central Firing Range and Training Area
at Postojna, and carried out and supported three courses of air support weeks (AIRWEEK). We also
conducted two airspace surveillance and control exercises in Slovenian airspace – Tango Scramble and
Skunk – and an international electronic warfare exercise: Ramstein Guard 06.

We participated in exercises abroad with our aircraft and support personnel, namely Load Diffusor 17
(PC-9M), Fire Blade (B-412 and AS 532 Cougar) and Black Swan (B-412) in Hungary, and Ample Strike in
the Czech Republic. We participated in the integration exercise Bright Armoured in Italy with the AS 532
Cougar helicopter, which is part of the NRF forces. We supported the participation of the 72[nd] Brigade
light air defence missile battery with two ELM 2106 HEE short-range radars during the Tobruqe Legacy
exercise in Romania.

_Training of SAF aviation unit_


-----

###### 2.3 Important Training Courses of the Naval Unit

In collaboration with the Research and Simulation Unit of the Joint Training Centre, the computerassisted staff exercise Poseidon 2017 was prepared and conducted. Its purpose was to train members
of the Command Centre to plan, implement and manage naval interception operations, and to train
the commanders of the multi-purpose boat Triglav and the high-speed patrol boat to participate in
maritime operations. Members of the Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) Platoon conducted the
tactical training Merjasec (Wild Boar) 2017 within the framework of the Vanguard Proof 2017 exercise.

In June 2017, the crew of the multi-purpose boat Triglav participated in the international naval exercises
Adrion CAX 17 and Livex 17, organized within the framework of the Adriatic-Ionian Initiative (Adrion) by
the Greek Navy.

_Training of the SAF naval unit_

In October 2017, members of the EOD Platoon participated in the international exercise Northern
Challenge 17 in Iceland; members of the Special Underwater Operations Units attended the international
maritime exercise Aegean Seal 2017 in Greece; and the crew of the multi-purpose boat Triglav attended
the international naval exercise Adrian Pool 17 in Montenegro.

###### 2.4 Training of the Contract Reserve Component

The SAF carried out a call-up and training of members of the contract reserve component, the Military
Medical Unit, the 45[th] Tracked Combat Vehicle Centre, and the 16[th] Air Space Surveillance and Control
Centre. Other members of the contract reserve component were called up to fulfil individual annual
obligations.

_Training of members of the contract reserve_
_component_


-----

###### 2.5 Student Camp

Sixty-four adult university and secondary school students attended the military camp, fifty-three of
whom completed it successfully. The MoD and Youth military camp was attended by ninety students,
and was successfully completed by eighty-nine students (thirty-five girls and fifty-four boys).

The Military Camp, which the SAF organized for the 18[th] year in a row, took place in early July 2017. It was
aimed at training university and secondary school students in basic military skills, teaching them about
the profession of soldiers and the Slovenian Armed Forces, and developing their patriotic values. The
Faculty of Social Sciences and the Faculty of Criminal Justice and Security recognize camp attendance
as completed mandatory practical training.

The camp participants and their instructors, candidates at the Officer Candidate School, showed great
knowledge and enthusiasm. They trained in:

–– The movement of soldiers on the battlefield;
–– Overcoming tactical paths;
–– Overcoming water obstacles;
–– Survival in the wild.

_Training of the student camp participants_


-----

###### 3 DEVELOPMENT AND BUILDING OF SAF CAPABILITIES

The Medium-Term Defence Programme of the Republic of Slovenia for 2016-2020 (SOPR 2016-2020)
defines the objectives and key guidelines for the operation and development of the RS defence system in
the medium term. It defines the target organizational structure of the SAF (2020), and the development
of priority capabilities and equipping the SAF with new weapons and military equipment. Projected
defence spending was prepared, including a planned reduction in expenditure on staff and a gradual
increase in the proportion of operational (operational functioning and maintenance) and investment
costs (acquisition and construction), which are expected to increase in 2018 and are tailored to the
financial capabilities of Slovenia. The SAF’s objective in the area of human resources is to maintain its
strength at 9,100 members; specifically, at 7,600 members in the active component and 1,500 members
in the contract reserve component.

In the event of a substantial deterioration in the international security situation, the Doctrine of the
Military Strategic Reserve of the Republic of Slovenia (2012) enables supplementation and increase in
the SAF’s capabilities for the purposes of providing military defence.

The adoption of the new package of NATO capability targets for 2017 for the Republic of Slovenia (in
June 2017) also requires the update of both the Resolution on General Long-Term Development and
Equipping Programme of the Slovenian Armed Forces (ReSDPRO SV), and the Medium-Term Defence
Programme of the RS (SOPR). In the period up to 2023, the development of military capabilities will be
primarily oriented towards an improvement in the combat and combat support capabilities of the SAF.
The SAF will also develop command and control, data fusion and processing, and military education
and training capabilities. The operation of SAF units in national territory and abroad will be supported
by combat service support capabilities (logistic support, air transport, military medical support). The
focus will be on the maintenance of the already developed capabilities and the formation of two
Medium Battalion Battle Groups, which will be capable of operating in all potential Alliance operations,
including high-intensity operations.

Due to limited financial resources, the development of other capabilities has been postponed until the
next medium term (after 2023). There is a lack of sufficient financial resources even for the appropriate
maintenance and modernization of the already developed capabilities.

The Government of the RS has recognized the changed security situation, which requires appropriate
defence capabilities to address the current sources of threats and risks to national and international
security, and to fulfil the commitments assumed within the framework of the Alliance and the common
security and defence policy of the European Union. It has therefore halted the downward trend in
defence spending in nominal terms. The trend of several years of cuts in the defence budget, and thus
the funds for the operation and development of the SAF, has had a substantial impact on the stagnation
of development of the SAF’s capabilities and the reduced capability of Slovenia in the field of defence.


-----

###### 4 MAINTAINING A LEVEL OF READINESS

The operation and readiness of the SAF in 2017 was affected by the dynamics of the widest international
security environment, including the European, Allied and wider regional and national environments.
In 2017, the broadest international security environment was marked by the increased instability
and unpredictability of political and security processes and events. In addition to the traditional
(conventional) military threats and unconventional forms of military operation (including hybrid
operation), the changing international security environment has been affected by climate change,
the scarcity of natural and other strategic resources, the unfavourable global demographic, financial,
economic and social movements, the uncontrolled trade in sensitive materials and services, the
broadening gap between the rich and the poor, and the effects of globalization. All this requires an
enhancement of the deterrent role, and greater preparedness and responsiveness of the entire defence
system of the RS.

In 2017, the SAF ensured its readiness in the ever more challenging situation which, for several years,
had been reflected in reduced financial resources and personnel for the SAF, as well as in the economy
measures implemented up to 2016 in the areas of modernization, maintenance of material resources
and infrastructure, and the provision of ammunition, explosive ordnance, and personal equipment of
SAF members.

In 2017 the downward trend of aging and wear of weapons and equipment, the aging of the armed
forces, and the inadequate ratio of the personnel structure between officers, non-commissioned
officers (NCOs) and soldiers continued. The economic measures had a negative impact on the planned
provision and maintenance of capabilities, and on training in accordance with current professional
military standards. The failure to update the SAF has led to a technological lag in comparison to modern
armed forces, and has hindered the SAF’s interoperability within the Alliance.

Nevertheless, in 2017 the SAF still maintained the required level of readiness and was able to fulfil
the majority of its international operational obligations, participate in protection and rescue activities,
carry out its functions in the wider protection of the state border, and provide for the readiness and
responsiveness in accordance with the plans, though with an increased risk in relation to previous years
(modernization standstill, aging and reduced availability of weapons and equipment). The reasons for
this were insufficient manpower in commands and units, lack of weapons and military equipment and
their wear and obsolescence, and the inadequate provision of their relevant operational availability.

The knowledge, skills and processes of the SAF are complementary to the Alliance and allow the SAF to
operate successfully in international operations and missions. The SAF ensures the readiness of forces
to intervene under the EU and NATO, and the planned level of preparedness to respond to natural and
other disasters, participate in protection and rescue activities, and support other state bodies and
organizations in ensuring the safety and welfare of the citizens of the RS. In 2017, the SAF provided the
necessary forces and resources for migrant care, supported the Police in carrying out the tasks of state
border protection, and provided logistic support to Civil Protection (CP).

The SAF has a limited ability to achieve its mission and the tasks assigned both within and outside
the national territory to the extent required across the full spectrum of combat operations. The
current human and material resources and the level of sustainability hinder its operation in the most
demanding combat situations, so its performance is linked to a higher risk with regard to the effective
implementation of the assigned tasks.


-----

###### 5 KEY PROJECTS OF THE MODERNIZATION OF THE SAF

Equipping the SAF was conducted in accordance with the equipping plans and the allocated financial
resources. In 2017, the following important projects were carried out:

–– The purchase of the Belin unmanned aircraft system, and its upgrade to a digital mode of operation;
–– The purchase of equipment for the efficiency of the JTAC/TACP Forward Air Control teams (JTAC

protective vests and helmets, radio amplifier);

–– The purchase of an ambulance for the emergency medical service;
–– The purchase of 10 multi-purpose and 41 passenger vehicles;
–– The purchase of 3200 sets of new battle dress uniform;
–– The purchase of 2000 protective tactical vests;
–– The purchase of 50 semi-automatic pistols;
–– The purchase of 800 active earmuffs for the protection of hearing, and 595 pieces of eyewear for

the protection of vision;

–– The purchase of optoelectronic equipment for observation and aiming (laser target designators,

observation stations, thermal aiming devices, night aiming devices);

–– The purchase of CBRN decontamination materials;
–– The purchase of 20 trainers for light infantry armament;
–– The acquisition of the planned quantities of ammunition and training resources for the preservation

of stocks and for training purposes.

In 2017, the SAF completed and issued orders on the introduction into operational use of the following
products and systems:

–– Doublepen PA auto-injectors against nerve agents;
–– Personal decontamination kits;
–– The C2 AIR MASE/MICE system;
–– Personal protective equipment for the implementation of procedures for crowd and unrest control;
–– The 7.62 mm FN SCAR-H CQC automatic rifle;
–– The 7.62 mm FN MINIMI Mk3 machine gun;
–– The 9 mm Rex Zero1 Standard semi-automatic pistol;
–– A firearms training simulator at the Peter Petrič Military Post in Kranj for carrying out firing with

infantry weapons in combat operations.

Within the framework of the US military assistance programmes, six radios, night vision device mounts,
EOD equipment, a 4x4 HMMWV light wheeled armoured vehicle, and a 6x6 MRAP vehicle were supplied.

_MRAP vehicles_


-----

In 2017, procedures for the introduction of MRAP vehicles into operational use continued. So far, five
vehicles out of seven have been prepared, serviced and registered.

Storage control was conducted for two tanks, and this extended the period of storage from seven to
ten years. General renovation of the M84 tank engine (in Croatia) and three hydraulics (in Serbia) was
carried out.

The purchase of new Toyota personal all-terrain vehicles in 2017 has enabled a gradual replacement of
old vehicles, and thus the implementation of the vehicle resupply project in the SAF.

_New all-terrain vehicles of the SAF_

The revitalization of the Cerklje ob Krki Military Airfield was also carried out as planned in 2017.

At the end of the year, the introduction of the command and control communication and information
system (C2 CIS) into operational use was completed. The system enables commanders to have a better
awareness of the situation and quick access to important information, thus giving them a better chance
of making good decisions. The most important areas of use are currently the SAF Operations Centre,
and the two Battalion Battle Groups. Within the framework of the project, software was purchased
which is in line with data interoperability standards and which combines the past partial software
solutions in the following projects: LKOV 6 x 6 Valuk, SKOV 8 x 8 Svarun, LIV 4 x 4 JRKBO Cobra and
transport company vehicles. New DR 10 tactical computers were purchased to be installed in combat
vehicles.

In 2018, the FMN (Federated Mission Network) test node will be trialled during the NATO interoperability
exercise, CWIX. FMN nodes, whose purpose is mutual connection between NATO member states on
missions, will enable the SAF’s participation in IOM, NRF, and NATO exercises after 2020. Due to the
lack of financial resources, the SAF was unable to modernize other tactical military communication
and information systems (CIS).

Investments in CIS terminal equipment increased in 2017 in comparison to previous years. As part of
investment maintenance, individual CIS subsystems and several application solutions were modernized.

Permanent removal from use and write-off was completed by destroying the following munitions:

–– 244 pieces of 40 mm ammunition;
–– 1588 pieces of 20 mm ammunition;
–– 14.8 kg of explosives;
–– 6 pieces of 18 mm training ammunition for the RGW-90 trainer;


-----

–– 10 m of detonating cord;
–– 120 hand grenades.

The Factoria (291) missiles were removed from use and sold to a selected bidder from Bulgaria on the
basis of a concluded contract.

Permanent removal from use and write-off of 151 Roland missiles was completed. Their destruction
was carried out by an external contractor on the basis of a concluded contract.

The processing of all the SAF’s NEMO 120 mm mortar mines used on the MN-9 mortar, which were
produced by Mecar, was also completed in 2017.


-----

###### 6 SAF OPERATIONS IN SUPPORT OF THE SYSTEM OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS

 6.1 Helicopter Rescue and Relief

In the military area of Jože Pučnik Ljubljana Airport, two SAF helicopters are on 15-minute standby
for mountain rescue every day during the hours of daylight. In addition to rescues in the mountains
and in hard-to-access areas, the duty crews also provide emergency helicopter transport within the
framework of helicopter emergency medical assistance. The table below shows detailed information
on helicopter rescue and relief.

Overview of the Participation of the SAF Helicopters in Rescue and Relief in 2016 and 2017

**Number of Rescue Operations/Casualties and Total** **2016** **2017** **Change**
**Flying Hours** **Index**

Mountain rescue 197 141 72

Helicopter emergency medical assistance 166 293 176

Wildfires and natural disasters 28 18 64

Transportation of incubators / 19 /

Transportation of transplant organs / 1 /

Total Number of Rescue Operations 391 472 121

Total number of helicopter flying hours 550 582 106

Total number of casualties 345 488 141

The duty crews of the 151[st] Rotary Wing Squadron carried out 472 rescue operations, which involved
293 operations for the provision of emergency medical helicopter assistance, 19 transportations of
incubators, one transportation of a transplant organ, 141 mountain rescue operations, and participation
in the extinguishing of 18 fires. The crews transported 488 injured or sick people and over 1000 emergency
responders, and dumped 460,000 litres of water on the fire sites, in a total of 582 flying hours.

Based on the agreement on cooperation between the MoD and the Institute of the RS for the
Transplantation of Organs and Tissues, Slovenija Transplant, the duty crew of the 152[nd] Fixed Wing
Squadron carried out 12 transportations of vital organs and medicines with the Falcon aircraft.

Since the signing in March 2015 of the agreement on cooperation between the MoD and the Institute of
the RS for the Transplantation of Organs and Tissues, Slovenija Transplant, the duty crews of the Falcon
aircraft have carried out 29 transportations.

_The Falcon aircraft carries out transportations of vital organs and medicines_


-----

###### 6.2 Forms of Assistance and Operation of the SAF in the System of Protection against Natural and Other Disasters

In 2017, the SAF was actively involved in helping with the migrant issue. It provided continuous
participation of a relatively large number of its members assigned to different tasks. The SAF supported
the Police throughout 2017, and provided support to Civil Protection until 7 December 2017. In 2017 it
did not carry out any tasks based on authorizations in accordance with Article 37 of the Defence Act.
During this period, SAF members carried out disinfection and disinsection in support of Civil Protection.

On average, 85 members of the SAF provided support to the Police and Civil Protection. The majority
of tasks were carried out in joint patrols. 6410 patrols were conducted during the day, and 6423 patrols
during the night. In addition to patrolling tasks, the SAF supported the Police in setting up, removing,
and repairing damaged protective technical barriers. In November and December, the SAF loaded and
transferred eight containers of material resources for rapid installment of protective technical barriers
to specific locations near the migration route (once in Murska Sobota, twice in Zavrč, twice in Metlika,
and three times in Kočevska Reka). The SAF also transported protective technical barriers, containers
and construction machinery for the Police. In 2017, SAF members participated in the capture of 108
migrants on 27 occasions.

The SAF provided logistic support to Civil Protection for assignments to give support to national bodies
during migrant care. Until 7 December 2017 (when activities in support of Civil Protection ended), key
Civil Protection support was associated with the provision of capabilities of the Military Medical Unit/
Logistics Brigade (pest control and disinfection) for the premises maintained by the Civil Protection
in the event of potential need. During this period, the SAF performed disinfection and pest control on
location. In December 2016, the SAF received a request for additional patrols. The Chief of the General
Staff of the SAF approved up to 15 patrols in each shift – their activity commenced on 4 January 2017.

_SAF members during their assistance and activities in the system of protection against natural and other disasters_


-----

On the General Police Directorate’s request to increase the number of SAF patrols on the border, the
Force Command approved an increase in the contribution of the SAF by ten patrols a day (each day from
32 to 42 patrols, and from 16 to 21 patrols for 12-hour day shifts) on 28 August 2017. This arrangement
was in place until the end of 2017, and during this time no other planned assignments were withdrawn
from the SAF units. As specified above, the activities of SAF patrols intensified in Koper, Ljubljana and
Murska Sobota.

During the flood in December 2017, which affected certain regions in Slovenia, the SAF responded
efficiently at all levels. During the entire operation, all the material resources requested by Civil
Protection were available in the affected area. Analyses conducted in the SAF at all levels showed that
SAF members did their job well and were very well received by the public. Morale and willingness to
help the affected people were at the expected level. By 20 December 2017, 19 out of the 20 generators
used had been returned to their respective units. Based on the ACPDR’s request, one generator (24 kW)
was left on location in Solčava. It was expected to be returned to its unit on 29 December 2017.

The SAF’s participation in mitigating the consequences of a natural disaster – floods in December
2017 – was in accordance with the prepared plans, the commanders’ guidelines, and Civil Protection
requirements. The motivation and responsiveness of the SAF members, especially the Logistics Brigade,
were crucial and comprehensive.


-----

###### 7 SAF CONTRIBUTION TO INTERNATIONAL PEACE, SECURITY AND STABILITY

In 2017 the SAF continued its participation in International Operations and Missions (IOM), taking into
account the national interests, available resources and capabilities, adopted international commitments
and the increasingly unpredictable dynamics of IOM. The SAF’s participation in IOM was conducted on
the basis of documents of the Ministry of Defence (MoD), Operations Plans (OPLAN) and SAF command
and control documents. In terms of Slovenia’s participation in IOM, the priority area of operations
remains the Western Balkans (KFOR, EUFOR Althea, NATO integration and counselling structures),
and participation in the NATO counselling mission in Afghanistan (RSM), the eFP structure, the EU
operation in the southern part of the Mediterranean Sea (EUNAVFOR MED in Sophia), the EU mission in
Sahel in Africa (EUTM MALI), and UN missions in the Middle East (UNIFIL, UNTSO). The SAF continued
its engagement in the military part of the Global Counter-Terrorism Coalition against Daesh. In 2017, it
also provided capabilities for the NATO and EU rapid response forces.

Average Number of SAF Members in International Operations and Missions in 2017

**Operation** **International** **Area of** **Operational** **Rotation** **Number of**

**Force** **Operations** **Leadership** **Members in**

**2017**

UNTSO UN Middle East UN 12 months 3

UNIFIL UN Lebanon UN 6 months 15

Joint KFOR Kosovo NATO 6 months 243

Enterprise


NHQ Sarajevo, Bosnia and

Herzegovina,


NATO 6 months/ 7


NLO Skopje, Macedonia 12 months

MLO Belgrade Serbia

RSM RSM Afghanistan NATO 6 months 7


ALTHEA EUFOR Bosnia and

Herzegovina


EU 6 months 9


EUTM EUTM Mali EU 6 months 5


E U N A V F O R
MED/


EUFOR Southern part EU 6 months/ 4


Sophia of the

Mediterranean

Sea


12 months


OIR Global Iraqi Coalition 4 months/ 6 + 1


Counter
Terrorism

Coalition

against

Daesh


Kurdistan,

USA


12 months (7)


TOTAL 300


-----

###### 7.2 NATO Operations

**KFOR**
In accordance with the fundamental strategic interests of the RS pertaining to areas such as foreign
affairs and security, among others, the majority of the SAF members participating in IOM in 2017
performed duties in the Western Balkans. There, the focus was on the operation of the Allied KFOR
Forces in Kosovo, in which an average of 243 SAF members and four civilian functional experts took
part. Under the KFOR mandate, Slovenian members’ activities were aimed at maintaining a secure
and stable environment and freedom of movement; protecting KFOR facilities and facilities of special
importance; patrolling and monitoring the security and general conditions in the area of operations;
providing rapid response forces and tactical reserves; and carrying out staff duties. Members of the
Slovenian contingent provided support to the development of Kosovo security forces through the NATO
group for integration and counselling. The contingent operated mostly in the area of central Kosovo,
although part of the operational activities of the SAF units were carried out in the north of the country.
At the international level, the MoD continually defended Slovenia’s position that it is necessary to
prudently and gradually address the issues of the further reduction of the extent and the changes in
the structure of the KFOR forces, taking into account the security situation on the ground and all other
relevant factors and conditions.

_SAF members in KFOR forces_

**NATO Enhanced Forward Presence (eFP) in Latvia**
SAF members participated in the peacekeeping activities of eFP forces, which is defined as a mission
for ensuring and maintaining readiness in support of a comprehensive and enhanced deterrence and
defence posture of the Alliance, which encompasses exercises, training and other peacetime activities,
including movements to protect Battalion Battle Group forces.

In February 2017, the Government of the RS adopted a decision to participate, with a total of up to
50 SAF members, in a multinational Battalion Battle Group in Latvia, and in command and staff
structures within the framework of NATO Enhanced Forward Presence (eFP), including a National
Support Element, starting in June 2017 with the option of rotations.


-----

_SAF members in Latvia_

**NATO Response Force (NRF)**
During two three-year rotations from 2017 up to and including 2022, the SAF participated in the NRF in
the rotations of the enhanced NATO Response Force (eNRF). On this basis, the MoD or the SAF plans
to cooperate, within the framework of the eNRF, with those capabilities which provide the highest
added value to the process of the SAF’s transformation, and in those areas which are of the greatest
importance in ensuring the SAF’s preparedness and future development.

The SAF monitors and participates in the implementation of the Readiness Action Plan (RAP), adopted
at the NATO Wales Summit. The RS participated in the temporary NATO Rapid Reaction Force with a
helicopter for medical evacuation and a radiological laboratory, as well as two officers, at the NATO
Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe (SHAPE).

**NATO’s Peacetime Operation Air Policing in Slovenian Airspace**
The signing and ratification of the amended bilateral agreement between the governments of the RS
and Hungary, on military cooperation in the areas of aviation and air defence from 1996, enabled the
inclusion of Hungary (beside Italy) in NATO’s peacetime operation Air Policing in Slovenian airspace in
2016. In addition to long-range radars for air policing, the RS also contributes two helicopters for search
and rescue (S&R).

**NATO HQ in Sarajevo and NATO Liaison Offices in Belgrade and Skopje**
The presence of seven SAF members was maintained in the NATO HQ in Sarajevo and one member in
each of the NATO liaison offices in Belgrade and Skopje. Their mission is the performance of tasks that
are important in terms of carrying out defence and military reforms and partnership programmes in
host countries, and in terms of their progress towards Euro-Atlantic structures. Slovenia led the NATO
liaison office (NLO) in Skopje, which is an important sign of confidence by the Alliance, and a great
responsibility for the RS.

###### 7.2 UN Operations and Missions

The Middle East is one of the priority areas of cooperation of Slovenia in IOM. For this reason the MoD
endeavored to maintain an appropriate level of contribution of the SAF to the UN missions UNIFIL (15
members) and UNTSO (3 members), which support the maintenance of peace in the region.


-----

_SAF members in a UNIFIL operation_

###### 7.3 EU Operations

Within the framework of the EU’s activities in Africa in 2017, under Item 7 of Article 42 of the Treaty
on the European Union, the SAF participated in a training mission for the Malian Armed Forces (EUTM
Mali) with the presence of five SAF members (formerly three). By training the Malian Armed Forces,
the SAF contributes to the establishment of Malian defence capabilities and to the stabilization of the
security situation in the country and the wider Sahel region.

**EUFOR ALTHEA (Bosnia and Herzegovina)**
The SAF continued its participation in the EUFOR ALTHEA Operation with nine members and one
deployable team for training and mentoring the BiH Armed Forces, which are deployed to the area of
operations for short periods of time and for the execution of specific tasks. Slovenia thus continued
its military contribution to the strengthening of peace and security in BiH, and to the joint efforts for
the establishment of a properly trained, professional and efficient armed forces of that country. The
activities of the Slovenian contingent were primarily focused on carrying out staff and logistics support
tasks, on the gathering of information regarding the situation on the ground, and on the training and
mentoring of members of the BiH Armed Forces.

**EUNAVFOR MED/Sophia**
Within the EUNAVFOR MED maritime operation Sophia, four SAF members participated in the
operation’s Operational Command in Rome and on the command ship.

###### 7.4 Other Operations

**OIR (Iraqi Kurdistan, USA)**
The RS adopted a decision to enhance its cooperation in the Global Counter-Terrorism Coalition against
Daesh (ISIL). This decision defined the contribution of the RS in the fight against international terrorism,
in the form of donating weapons and equipment, and participating in the Coalition with the presence of
SAF members. The operation of the Global Counter-Terrorism Coalition against Daesh, of which the RS
is also a part, takes place in the context of the Operation Inherent Resolve (OIR).

The SAF has been participating in the military part of the Coalition within the established OIR operation
with seven members: a SAF officer as planner at the United States Central Command (US CENTCOM)


-----

in Tampa, and six SAF members participating in deployable training teams at the Kurdistan Training
Coordination Centre (KTCC) in Erbil in Iraqi Kurdistan. Members of the Slovenian contingent, together
with the members of other participating countries at the KTCC, train members of the Armed Forces of
Iraqi Kurdistan (Peshmerga) in basic military knowledge and skills.


-----

##### PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS

###### 1 PREVENTIVE ACTIVITIES

 1.1 Preventive Activities

The Administration of the Republic of Slovenia for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief (ACPDR), which
carries out administrative and professional functions in protection against natural and other disasters,
implements its tasks under the framework of the Protection against Natural and Other Disasters Act,
the Fire Protection Act, the Protection against Drowning Act, and other implementing regulations.
Prevention is a highly interdisciplinary activity which requires good inter-ministerial coordination and
cooperation with other stakeholders.

In 2017, the Council of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia for Protection against Natural and
other Disasters, which functions as the national platform for the mitigation of risks related to the
occurrence of disasters, and which represents the institutionalization of inter-ministerial cooperation
in the field of protection against natural and other disasters, convened on two occasions.

At the third Council meeting, the members present decided that the Republic of Slovenia should join the
UN worldwide initiative for safe schools. The initiative focuses on promoting and providing support to
governments in the development of national strategies, and is divided into three areas: safe educational
facilities (infrastructure resistant to accidents); school personnel appropriately qualified for disaster
management; and an appropriate education programme addressing the reduction of accident risk and
increased resilience to disasters.

In 2017, the ACPDR’s priority assignments in the role of the National Coordinating Body in the Republic
of Slovenia were the execution of tasks, carried out in cooperation with ministries, that were related
to the preparation of risk assessments and assessments of risk management capacity in line with EU
regulations, the coordination of the preparations of assessments of risk management capacity together
with other ministries, and the preparation of the Assessment of the Risk Management Capacity for Ice
Damage. Once it had been prepared, the Assessment of Risk Management Capacity for Ice Damage was
signed.

The ACPDR carried out activities for the planning of fire protection measures for vulnerable population
groups. The emphasis lay on the preparation of system solutions for inspections and testing built-in
active fire protection systems.

Special attention was devoted to different education activities and awareness-raising of different
population target groups concerning the implementation of preventive measures, and personal and
mutual protection. Activities were also carried out involving non-compulsory forms of training for
the general population, children and young people by providing current warnings and instructions,
cooperating with the media and preparing different activities and materials for the population.


-----

In the area of protection against drowning, 28 short educational films that include comments on water
rescue were prepared for the population and lifeguards. In the area of fire protection, different activities
related to unobstructed access roads for firefighters were carried out for the population during Fire
Prevention Month.

###### 1.2 Public Relations, Activities Related to the Raising of Public Awareness and the Promotion of the System of Protection Against Natural and Other Disasters

One of the ACPDR’s fundamental tasks is to increase individuals’ and society’s resilience to natural and
other disasters through preventive actions. With the implementation of measures for the mitigation of
the consequences of natural and other disasters, the ACPDR directly contributes to a reduction in the
costs of the elimination of and recovery from the consequences of disasters. In this process, raising the
awareness of the population plays an important part. The aim is to:

–– Increase the level of the population’s awareness concerning risks presented by natural and other

disasters,

–– Increase the level of the population’s awareness of joint and mutual measures to be taken before,

during and after disasters,

–– Present the ACPDR’s activities,
–– Strengthen the ACPDR’s reputation as the central expert institution in the field of protection

against natural and other disasters.

In accordance with its set objectives, the ACPDR, in 2017, prepared and published 133 posts on its
website, which, including available applications, reached 387,378 views (Source: Google Analytics). The
ACPDR was actively involved in social media communication. A total of 407 posts were prepared and
published on the ACPDR’s Facebook profile (which has 7500 followers with a maximum reach of 36,163
people per post) and 1159 posts on its Twitter profile (669 followers). The ACPDR helped organize nine
press conferences at which it offered different presentations of the system of protection against natural
and other disasters. In 2017, it appeared in the media – the internet, print media, Twitter, Facebook and
others, on 7306 occasions. (Source: Mediatoolkit). As part of its promotional activities, the ACPDR took
part in the preparation and implementation of the following events: European 112 Day, Bojan Ušeničnik
Day, Civil Protection Day, the RECALL Conference and Bogataj’s Protection and Rescue Days. Last but
not least, the ACPDR participated in the TESTFEST event, the testing of the Civil Protection and the
Red Cross teams’ readiness, at the children’s bazaar, and also organized an event in honour of the
anniversary of the 112 emergency call number.

###### 1.3 Normative Working Programme of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia

In 2017, the Decree on the Implementation of the Decision on a Union Civil Protection Mechanism
was amended (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia, Nos. 62/14 and 13/17). The Decree defines
the types of disaster risk assessments and assessments of risk management capacity, the competent
bodies and their tasks, the content, competences and responsibilities of the preparation of disaster risk
assessments, the content and the preparation of records for individual disasters, the implementation
of preventive and readiness measures, and the content of assessments of risk management capacity.


-----

###### 2 PREPAREDNESS OF THE SYSTEM OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS AND THE PROTECTION, RESCUE AND RELIEF FORCES

 2.1 Planning

The planning of preparedness included activities such as the amendment of threat assessments,
preparations and updating of disaster response plans and threat assessments, and the planning
of protective measures. The following documents were adopted in 2017: the new National Threat
Assessment for Nuclear and Radiological Accidents, the ACPDR Action Plan, the Protective Evacuation
– recommendation document and the Basic Living Conditions – recommendation document. The Threat
Assessment for Aircraft Accidents was amended. The ACPDR prepared a draft of the National Disaster
Response Plan for Floods and the National Disaster Response Plan for Large Wildfires. The annexes to
the disaster response plans were updated, and the measures introduced after the inspection control
carried out by the Inspectorate of the Republic of Slovenia for Protection Against Natural and Other
Disasters, were abolished.

In mid November, a two week Emergency Preparedness Review (EPREV) Mission which took place in the
Republic of Slovenia was concluded with the presentation of findings. The EPREV Mission thoroughly
examined Slovenia’s comprehensive system of preparedness for nuclear and radiological accidents,
and congratulated Slovenia on the plans prepared and the training carried out in its draft report. At the
same time, the EPREV Mission recommended measures to strengthen the current coordinating body
and system, the initial finalization of the already-begun review of the National Disaster Response Plan
for Nuclear and Radiological Accidents, and the preparation of a comprehensive strategy for monitoring
in all phases of a nuclear accident - before, during and after.

###### 2.2 Operational Planning and Preparedness

The operational preparedness of the system of protection against natural and other disasters is
provided through the uninterrupted operation of the emergency notification centres and public rescue
services, and through the preparedness of other rescue services, commissions, units and civil protection
headquarters. Organized, trained, and equipped members of rescue services, commissions, units and
the CP headquarters ensure an appropriate and coordinated response to natural and other disasters.
The ACPDR maintained its level of preparedness of response to natural and other disasters.

The Programme for the Formation of National Material Reserves for Protection, Rescue and Relief,
which provides the materiel and equipment from state reserves to help affected people and the
population at risk after major natural and other disasters, as well as personal and group equipment for
the operation of the protection, rescue and relief (PRR) forces, was prepared for the period 2016-2022
and implemented in 2017 in accordance with the available resources.

With regular replacements, replenishments and maintenance of the equipment and resources of
the National Material Reserves, the ACPDR provides for the readiness, responsiveness and logistical
support of the national Civil Protection units and PRR forces.


-----

The ACPDR provides a comprehensive and responsive logistics system at the regional level through the
National Logistics Centre to support the national CP units, and through 13 regional logistics centres to
support the regional CP units and the protection, rescue and relief forces.

Also in 2017, the co-financing of the services, societies, units and other organizations in the field of PPR
provided for the availability, adequate qualification and equipment of the PRR forces, and consequently
their readiness for emergency response in the event of natural and other disasters. The aim is to ensure
the rapid and effective response of the protection, rescue and relief forces for the rescue of people,
property, cultural heritage and animals in the event of natural and other disasters.

The co-financing resources ensure the modernization of the protection and rescue equipment which is
required for the operation of units, their coordinated and harmonized development, and the operation
and development of the system of protection against natural and other disasters – one of the three
national security subsystems, as a whole. The co-financing of activities in the field of protection, rescue
and relief was fully implemented.

The Republic of Slovenia has a modern, capable and adaptable PRR system which is constantly being
maintained, supplemented or improved.

###### 2.3 Protection, Rescue and Relief Forces

The protection, rescue and relief (PRR) forces intervened on 18,637 occasions. As many as 26,602
structures were activated, which is a total of 170,615 members of different units, services and other
structures of the PRR forces.

Overview of the Number of Emergency Response Operations of PRR Forces in 2017

**Type of unit** **Number of activated PRR** **Number of participants**

**structures**

Rescue dog units 100 432

Mountain rescue service 644 4220

Cave rescue service 15 50

Voluntary territorial fire brigades 16,959 128,545

Professional firefighting units 8811 37,089

Voluntary industrial fire brigades 59 246

Underwater rescue service 14 33

**Total** **26,602** **170,615**

Note: Data on the PRR forces participating in emergency response are based on reports completed in the system
for reporting on emergency response operations and disasters by 31 January 2018.

Based on the Decree on the Civil Protection Service (Official Gazette of the RS, Nos. 1/08, 99/08 and
45/14), the ACPDR, as the founder, organizes Civil Protection units, services and bodies to carry out
protection, rescue and relief tasks at the national and regional levels, and prepares plans for the
conclusion of contracts of service in Civil Protection with CP members and candidates for the conclusion
of a contract on service in Civil Protection, in accordance with the Decision stipulating priority manning
with contract Civil Protection members (ACPDR, No. 833-16/2011-16-DGZR dated 4 October 2016).


-----

Based on this decision, contracts on service in Civil Protection were concluded with a view to priority
manning of the units for search and rescue in the urban environment, the emergency notification
centres, and the logistics and the psychological assistance units.

In 2017, 38 new contracts were concluded, one contract was amended, and three contracts that
terminated were not prolonged. On 31 December 2017, the total number of contract Civil Protection
members amounted to 148.

Contract Civil Protection Members

**Number of**
**Unit**
**contracts**

National rapid response unit – Technical diving unit 13

National rapid response unit – IT support group 3

National rapid response unit – Transport unit 4

National rapid response unit – Command 1

National rapid response unit – CBR decontamination 2

National rapid response unit – Unit for search and rescue in urban environments 22

National rapid response unit – Support service – Medical care team 7

Support services 2

Support service – Psychological assistance team 6

Field hospital 5

Support service – Catering department 2

Notification centre – Notification centre manning team 27

Technical rescue team with special machinery and equipment 14


Service for the support and conduct of special protection, rescue and relief tasks
during environmental and other disasters at sea


18


Logistics centre 20

Technical and rescue units 2

_Note: Number of contract members in individual Civil Protection units, services and bodies on 1 January_
_2018._

At the end of the year, the Civil Protection records listed a total of 56,338 protection, rescue and
relief forces members, of which 33,362 were members of duty units and 22,976 were volunteers. The
protection, rescue and relief forces at the national level included approximately 840 professional
members, 1,200 voluntary members and 1,520 members of duty units.

###### 2.4 Protection against Unexploded Ordnance

Protection against Unexploded Ordnance (UXO) is organized as a single or uniform measure throughout
Slovenia, and comprises the detection, identification, disposal, transportation, storage and destruction
of UXO, and the training of members of the National Unit for Protection against UXO.

In 2017, the National Unit for Protection against UXO carried out 494 emergency responses (on average
1.37 a day), in which members disposed of 3299 pieces of various UXO (on average 9.16 pieces a day), or
9474 kg (on average 25.96 kg a day). Three regular periodic destructions of UXO were carried out at the


-----

protection and rescue training range Poligon 208, during which 2241 pieces of UXO with a total weight
of 5170 kg were destroyed.

Due to the fact that UXO is increasingly dangerous, both in terms of the temporal distance from the
moment it is dropped and in terms of chemical and other changes, members of the National Unit
for Protection against UXO destroy all those assets whose transport and temporary storage are not
acceptable on site. Last year, 26 destructions were carried out, i.e. 715 pieces of UXO with a total weight
of 2691 kg.

In addition to emergency response operations and the periodic destruction of UXO, six inspections of
terrain were carried out at the prior request of the owner or investor because of suspected UXO on the
terrain.

A total of 16 articles were published in the media, and 42 presentations on UXO were held in schools, at
public events and at the facilities of the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief for the
purposes of raising public awareness of the dangers of UXO.

In 2017, a total of EUR 580,533 was spent on the implementation of operational measures in the area of
protection against UXO. Thirty-three members of the National Unit for Protection against UXO carried
out measures for protection against UXO.

###### 2.5 Providing Conditions for the Operation of Protection, Rescue and Relief Forces

Operational preparedness of the system of protection against natural and other disasters is provid­
ed through the continuous operation of notification centres and public rescue services, and through
the preparedness of other rescue services, commissions, units and CP headquarters. Trained,
equipped and prepared members of commissions, units and CP headquarters and other PRR forc­
es ensure an appropriate and coordinated response to natural and other disasters. In 2017, the
required level of preparedness for response to natural and other disasters was ensured.

###### 2.5.1 Co-Funding of Rescue Services, Associations and Other Organizations

The operational part of the system of protection against natural and other disasters is primarily based
on voluntary rescue services and other structures organized by associations and NGOs. The subsidy
provided by the ACPDR represents over 75% of the total funds required for the operation of individual
units. Such operation includes the ongoing training and practice of unit members; carrying out members’
medical examinations and arranging insurance policies; payment of salaries and reimbursements
for loss of income to employers during the call-up of members; the purchase and maintenance of
their collective and personal protection and rescue equipment; and the material costs of emergency
response operations.

Co-funding programmes of rescue services, societies and other organizations were carried out on the
basis of the established criteria and provided funds, through the conclusion of contracts or annexes
to the existing contracts for the co-funding of protection, rescue and relief activities in the amount of
EUR 7,388,679. These funds ensured the operational preparedness of public rescue services (with the
exception of operational firefighting units), fire brigades of general importance, associations and other
organizations, and rescue services and structures which operate on a voluntary basis.


-----

Annexes to contracts were concluded with the Firefighting Association of Slovenia; Mountain Rescue
Association of Slovenia; Cave Rescue Service of the Speleological Association of Slovenia; Slovenian
Kennel Club; Slovenian Diving Federation; Slovenian Red Cross; Slovenian Catholic Girl Guides and Boy
Scouts Association; Scout Association of Slovenia; National Institute of Biology; Institute of Occupational
Safety; Faculty of Medicine – Institute of Microbiology and Immunology; Faculty of Medicine – Forensic
Identification Unit; Veterinary Faculty – Institute of Microbiology and Parasitology; Jožef Stefan
Institute; Velenje Coal Mine; TKI Hrastnik (a chemical products factory); National Laboratory of Health,
Environment and Food; Institute of Occupational Safety Ljubljana; Slovenian Professional Firefighters
Association; Association of Societies and Clubs of Rescue Dog Handlers of Slovenia; Association of
Radio Amateurs of Slovenia; CB Radio Club Soča; Adria TOW d.o.o. (towing services and assistance to
ships and vessels); Prosub d.o.o.; sole trader Mitja Petrič s.p.; and the following flying clubs: Josip Križaj
Ajdovščina; Postojna; Tolmin; Zagorje ob Savi; Coastal Flying Centre Portorož; Slovenj Gradec Airport;
and Kras Flying Centre Divača.

###### 2.5.2 Programme of Co-Funding Firefighting Units of General Importance

The protection, rescue and relief area of general importance, which includes rescue after traffic, industrial
and other accidents involving dangerous substances, rescue after accidents in long motorway and
other road and railway tunnels, technical rescue tasks carried out after traffic accidents and accidents
in standing and flowing waters, and other protection, rescue and relief tasks of general importance,
are carried out by 45 firefighting units of general importance (FUGI), and since 2016 and 2017, by an
additional seven firefighting units of general importance with which a contract for a set period of two
years was concluded for the execution of technical rescue tasks in the event of traffic accidents. For
the smooth conduct of activities of general importance, data on the influential factors in operational
areas (new tunnels), as well as dual activation areas of FUGI, were updated and complemented. The
plans for 2017 and reports on the utilization of funds from 2016 were evaluated, taking into account the
double-overlap areas. Fifty-four annexes to contracts were prepared. The code list of the basic FUGI
equipment was also updated in 2017.

The programme of the co-funding of FUGI was fully implemented, and amounted to EUR 2,822,399.
Of that amount, EUR 152,044 was allocated to the amortization of eight special firefighting vehicles for
tunnel rescue. The remainder of the funds was divided between units, in line with the criteria for the
allocation of funds.

###### 2.5.3 Emergency Rescue in Long Road and Motorway Tunnels

On the basis of contracts for the performance of operational duties in the event of road tunnel acci­
dents, concluded between the Motorway Company of the Republic of Slovenia (MCRS), the MoD,
and individual firefighting units (Jesenice Fire and Rescue Service, Domžale Fire Safety Centre
and Celje Professional Firefighting Unit), a total of EUR 65,500 was paid for the co-financing of the
maintenance and restoration of personal protective equipment, insurance and transport costs for
tunnel firefighters.

###### 2.5.4 Co-Funding of Firefighting Protection and Rescue Equipment

In 2017, the ACPDR continued with the modernization of protection and rescue equipment of firefighting
units in voluntary fire brigades, and thus with the provision of harmonious development of these units.
A total of 640 applicants responded to the tender notice, published in the Official Gazette of the RS, No.
12/17. A total of 620 co-funding contracts in the amount of EUR 1,700,000 were concluded.


-----

Protective fire suit 1496 1456 369 211,993

Suit/two-part uniform type A 90 90 22 5933

Suit type B 194 194 29 5816

Fire safety helmet 1581 1532 417 53,889

Firefighter boots 1494 1468 397 36,845

Firefighter gloves 1964 1855 381 22,675


Self-contained breathing
apparatus


197 184 56 49,538


Blower 21 18 6 2315


Collapsible backpack firefighting
pump


70 70 11 2560


Fire safety belt 462 452 145 4806

Firefighter fatigue uniform type A 74 74 30 3199

Firefighter fatigue uniform type B 3728 3627 1411 110,434

Motor fire pump 22 22 11 34,457

Submersible pump 28 17 9 3879

Generator 23 18 7 14,555

Vehicles 161 146 53 1,137,097

###### 2.5.5 Co-funding of Important Anniversaries of Voluntary Fire Brigades

Based on the Criteria for the co-funding of important anniversaries of Voluntary Fire Brigades, the
ACPDR allocated dedicated funding in the amount of EUR 61,500 for major anniversaries (110, 120, 130
and 140 years) to 31 voluntary fire brigades.

###### 2.5.6 Co-funding the Harmonized Development of Territorial Firefighting Units

Based on the Criteria for the co-funding of the harmonized development of territorial firefighting units,
the ACPDR allocated dedicated funding in the amount of EUR 69,000 to 37 firefighting units that met
the required conditions.

###### 2.6 National Material Reserves for the Event of Natural and other Disasters

With the preparation and implementation of the Programme for the Formation of National Material
Reserves for Protection, Rescue and Relief during the period 2016-2022, material and equipment from
the state reserves are being provided to help the population at risk and affected people after natural
and other disasters, as well as personal and group equipment for the operation of the PRR forces.
Based on the available financial resources, the planned maintenance and purchase of the national
material reserves and equipment of the PRR units were realized at 89.65%.


-----

Public procurement procedures for the following equipment were carried out: a residential container
with a kitchen; firefighting sets (table with two benches); decontamination agent; plastic and metal
palettes; 12 V to 220 V power converters; EKOCID S - disinfectants; power generator cables; electrical
sludge pump; plastic personal equipment containers; first aid backpacks and reserve kits; CP boots; dry
suits; heating kits; sets of self-contained breathing apparatus; breathing regulators; decompression mix
cylinders; MUSAR rescue apparels; vacuum braces; KED immobilization support corsets; stethoscopes;
fingertip pulse oximeters; anoraks; UXO cameras; metal detectors; tablets; plastic explosive; UXO
identification tools; hiking boots; MUSAR and TRE protective boots; small equipment for diving; CP
shoes; caving helmets with a headlamp carrier; tents; cave rescue stretchers and equipment for the
transportation of stretchers; protective suits; small equipment for cave rescue; MUSAR and TRE gloves;
headlamps; detonators; CP work uniforms; equipment for water rescue unit; mining triggering devices;
aluminium crates for personal equipment.

The public procurements for the maintenance of mobile dispensary, power generators, electrical
submersible pumps, high pressure devices, heating appliances, blowers, compressors, pneumatic tents,
chemical and radiological detectors, geophones, diving gear, CBRN protective clothing, boat engines,
medical equipment, hydraulic tools and devices, triggering devices and water barriers were carried out.

A total of 78 out of the 87 planned public procurements were fulfilled for purposes of maintenance,
repair and purchase of materiel and equipment for the national material reserves or equipment for the
national units; four public procurements remained unrealized due to inadequate tenders, while the
ACPDR received no offers for five other public procurements.

A framework scope of financial assets required for the supplementation of materiel and equipment of
national material reserves and national units in the period of 2018-2020 was defined with the formation
of the Medium-Term Programme for National Material Reserves.

###### 2.7 Delivery of Fire Fund Assets and Vehicles to Voluntary Firefighting Brigades

In 2017, based on the Physical Assets of the State and Local Government Act, and to ensure the necessary
preparedness for natural and other disasters, the ACPDR transferred, free of charge, the following
assets to transferees, the units that are active in the field of protection against natural and other
disasters: a hydraulic kit for the technical rescue of the injured from vehicles, an all-terrain vehicle, a
pump, a tent and seven residential containers.

With the resources of the Fire Protection Fund, the ACPDR bought 260 sets of self-contained breathing
apparatus, which were distributed to firefighting units in the territory of the Republic of Slovenia.

###### 2.8 Fire Tax

The eligible use of fire tax funds is laid down in Article 58 of the Fire Protection Act.

In 2017, based on the Decree on the Fire Tax which was introduced by the Fire Protection Act, a total of
EUR 8,238,882 was collected. These funds are distributed on the basis of the RS Government’s Decision,
which stipulates that at least 70% of the funds collected are to be allocated to the performance of fire
protection tasks in local communities for the purposes set out in the Fire Protection Act, while 30% of
the funds are to be allocated to the performance of tasks of general importance, also specified by the
Act. The use of the Fire Fund assets at the local level is planned by the municipal committee for the


-----

distribution of fire fund assets, based on the medium-term fire tax programmes for the co-financing
of fire protection tasks, and on the annual plans for the protection against natural and other disasters.
The use of the Fire Fund assets at the national level is planned by a Committee appointed by the
Government of the RS. The use of the Fire Tax funds is planned by the Committee in accordance with
the national programme of protection against natural and other disasters, and the annual plan of
protection against natural and other disasters. Such an approach ensures a comprehensive approach
to the uniform allocation of funds earmarked for the training, equipping and education of all firefighting
units in Slovenia. In addition, the purchase of specialist fire protection and other equipment and cofinancing the purchase of special firefighting vehicles contributed to a more uniform equipment of
firefighting units.

A good 70% of the Fire Tax, a total of EUR 6,256,080, was allocated to local communities. Local
communities must send a report on the use of the Fire Tax funds by the end of March.

The remaining Fire Fund assets, in the amount of EUR 2,435,036, or 30%, were planned and implemented
on the basis of the adopted and approved plan for the use of Fire Fund assets for tasks of general
importance. The majority of tasks defined by the committee on the basis of the National Programme
of Protection Against Natural and other Disasters and the Annual Plan of Protection Against Natural
and Other Disasters (the purchase of 2184 pagers, 54 command pagers, 352 manual radio stations,
172 mobile radio stations, 390 sets of self-contained breathing apparatus, 100 firefighting hoses, 16
suction hoses and 4 rotors for the Borger pumping system) were implemented, and the maintenance
and servicing of various items of firefighting equipment for the firefighting school was carried out.
Additionally, the co-financing of the purchase of firefighting vehicles for the extinguishing of fires
and high altitude rescue (vehicle ladders) was concluded. In accordance with the Implementation of
the Republic of Slovenia’s Budget Act, the funds will be allocated to the Ljubljana, Ptuj and Trebnje
municipalities, which met the conditions for the purchase. In accordance with the plan, the education
and training of firefighters and the Vulkan information system were financed.

###### 2.9. Research and Development in the Field of Protection against Natural and Other Disasters

In 2017, the ACPDR continued its successful work in the context of various projects, which are financed
by different resources and from different funds. It participated in the implementation of 16 projects,
namely in seven projects of the EU Civil Protection Mechanism (a project of courses for modules and
technical experts – the MBC/TEC project, staff exercises for CP modules, the CCCM and EET courses,
the Matilda Project, the Alpdiris Project, and the Neiflex and the Adriatic 2018 practical exercises); in
two projects of the Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA Floods and IPA DRAM); in a project of the Internal
Security Fund (development and implementation of psycho-social assistance); in research projects
under the developmental project the Seventh Framework Programme (the EPISECC Project), the
European Territorial Cooperation project (the INTERREG SI-HR FRISCO 1 project);the Connecting Europe
Facility project for the period 2014-2020 (the I-HeERO Project); and a project in which the ACPDR will
finance 98 public warning system sirens with cohesion funds and notify the population on protection
against floods; and in the JERU project carried out in the context of the Disaster Preparedness and
Prevention Initiative for South Eastern Europe (the DPPI SEE Initiative). In the context of applications
to public tenders, the ACPDR obtained three new European projects, the implementation of which will
begin in 2018.


-----

In the context of the research and development (R&D) projects, the ACPDR completed three R&D tasks:
an Upgrade of the System for Determining the Seismic Threat and Responsiveness for the Needs of
Civil Protection and Disaster Relief in Slovenia – POTROG 3; an Upgrade of the System for Notification
and Warning in the Event of Landslides – MASPREM 3; and the Development of a Comprehensive Model
of Disaster Response Management at all Levels of Management in the Field of Protection, Rescue
and Relief in the Republic of Slovenia – the Incident Command System (ICS). The implementation of
project results from the previous period was carried out. Individual projects were presented to the local
communities, firefighters, professional institutions, ministries and other users.

The bases and proposals for two new projects to tender in 2018 were prepared. No R&D projects were
carried out in the area of fire protection in 2017. Proposals were collected and tendering procedures for
2018 were conducted.

###### 2.10 Monitoring, Notification and Warning

Operations and communications tasks concerning monitoring, notification and warning are carried out
continually 24 hours a day, 365 days a year by the Emergency National Notification Centre (NNC) and
13 Regional Emergency Notification Centres (RNC) responding to the emergency call number 112. The
operation of the RNCs ensures the availability of emergency medical assistance, rapid activation of
rescue workers, mostly firefighters, and the appropriate response of various rescue services during
natural and other disasters for all citizens.

The 13 RNCs received 519,098 emergency calls in 2017, according to the latest unaudited figures, which
is more than 1400 calls per day. At the same time, the operators conducted 248,995 return calls.
December 12 was the day with the highest number of calls – 5238. Firefighters were called out the
most often, almost 25,000 times, followed by mountain rescue, over 640 times, and rescue dog units,
100 times. Together with other units, there were 26,610 callouts.

People usually called during the day, between 8am and 8pm. The largest regional notification centre,
both in terms of territory and the number of inhabitants, Ljubljana RNC, received the majority of calls,
that is 125,163, followed by Maribor RNC with 62,888 calls, Celje RNC with 52,471 calls and Kranj RNC
with 46,359 calls.

The operators answered 90% of the calls within 5.97 seconds. In 90% of all cases, the calls lasted less
than 78.22 seconds. The longest conversation, however, lasted around 128 seconds.

The majority of calls to the 112 emergency call number result in the activation of rescue units and
emergency response operations. The main reason for the calls remained the same in 2017; people called
the number over 116,158 times because they needed emergency medical assistance. In such events, the
operator in the RNC transferred the call to the nearest medical assistance centre. Information on the
number of emergency medical assistance calls followed by an emergency response operation is kept
at the emergency medical assistance centres, which also decide on the level of the emergency and the
type of the emergency response operation required.

The ACPDR keeps data on the interventions of all other rescue services. A closer look at the events
reveals that the incidents resulted in 25,442 emergency response operations, with the participation of


-----

159,287 members of various PRR forces. The majority of emergency response operations took place
in December (3651), followed by August (2582) and June (2578). The majority of emergency response
operations were carried out by voluntary territorial fire brigades (15,404), professional firefighting units
(8777), the Mountain Rescue Association of Slovenia (552) and the National Unit for Protection against
UXO (506).

The regional notification centres faced an extreme event on 12th December 2017, when a total of 5238
calls were received within 24 hours in all RNCs; 1792 in the Ljubljana RNC, 563 in the Celje RNC, and 556
in the Kranj RNC. The highest number of calls per hour was 592 and took place at 8am.

###### 2.11 Communication and Information Systems

In 2017, the MoD continued to update the computer software for the operation of the system of protection
against natural and other disasters. The ACPDR used the resources of EU projects to purchase 13 field
laptops for IT support of PRR tasks during emergency response operations and disasters.

In 2017, the outdated and worn-out radio dispatch console ZETRON at the Ptuj RNC was replaced
by a new one. In seven RNCs, mobile aircraft radio stations were installed and two manual aircraft
radio stations were purchased. Aircraft stations are intended for radio communication with aircraft,
especially during wildfires. For the rescue services, the ACPDR purchased 120 pagers and 57 DMR
radios with a GPS receiver. Radios with GPS receivers enable the tracking of rescuers during emergency
responses.

The ACPDR developed the eSPIN application which helps the protection and rescue units monitor the
input data, identify locations and direct the route to the site of the accident by communicating data on
the emergency response and the timeframes of individual activities. The application has not yet been
tested in practice, and no other emergency call services were developed.

The ACPDR is participating in the i-HeERO project as a full member. The i-HeERO project is intended
for the development of automated calls from a damaged vehicle, called the eCall. In Slovenia, eCall
has been operable since 2015. Within the i-HeERO project, eCall is being extended to cargo vehicles
transporting dangerous substances, to single-track vehicles, and on the development of the next
generation of eCall. The established infrastructure provides functionality prescribed by the relevant
standards. In October 2017, two international events within the context of the i-HeERO Project were
held in Slovenia, namely the sixth eCall Testfest, which took place between 9 and 13 October in Kranj,
and the HGV Roadshow (eCall for cargo vehicles) organized on 16 October 2017 in Ljubljana, at which the
prototype solution for the reception of eCall from a cargo vehicle transporting dangerous substances
and the use of e-way bill were presented.

A demonstration of a possible solution for the reception of data from vehicles transporting dangerous
substances (UXO) was carried out. In 2018, the ACPDR plans to equip all vehicles transporting UXO with
IVS devices to be able to include them into the eCall system.


-----

###### 2.12 Migrant Situation

Based on the Resolution of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia for the establishment of the
Ministry of the Interior’s Asylum Home Branch Office in the Logatec Training Centre for Civil Protection
and Disaster Relief, a part of the Ministry of the Interior’s Asylum Home Branch Office in the Training
Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief was transferred to the Government Office for the Support
and Integration of Migrants in 2017.


-----

###### 3 DISASTER RESPONSE AND DAMAGE ASSESSMENT

 3.1 Disaster Response

In 2017, 18,637 different events occurred in Slovenia: natural and other disasters; road traffic ac­
cidents; fires and explosions; pollution; accidents involving dangerous substances; nuclear and
other events; findings of unexploded ordnance; supply disruptions; damage to facilities; and events
requiring technical and other assistance. The PRR forces, in addition to other services, responded
to these events.

Events in 2017

**Event** **Number of events**

Natural disasters 1689

Other disasters 2080

Road traffic accidents 2591

Fires and explosions 5660

Pollution, accidents involving dangerous substances 760

Nuclear and other events 15

Findings of UXO, supply disruptions and damage to fa­ 864
cilities

Technical and other assistance 4978

**Total** **18,637**

Note: Data on events in 2017 are based on reports completed by 31 January 2018.

A closer look at the events reveals that the accidents resulted in 25,442 emergency response operations,
with the participation of 159,287 members of various PRR forces. The majority of emergency response
operations took place in December (3651), followed by August (2582) and June (2578). The majority
of emergency response operations were carried out by voluntary territorial fire brigades (15,404),
professional firefighting units (8777), the Mountain Rescue Association of Slovenia (552) and the National
Unit for the Protection against UXO (506). Through their timely and effective action, and assistance
to those affected, the PRR forces contributed to the mitigation of damage and other consequences
caused by these events.

Natural Disasters and Emergency Response Operations in 2017


**Events** **Number of emer­**

**gency response**

**operations**


**Number of**

**participants**


**Number of injured**

**people**


Floods 1058 6667 2

Avalanches 93 512 0

Deep snow 101 521 0

Hail 19 194 0

Strong winds 2569 16,414 2

Lightning strikes 50 346 0


-----

Disruption of traffic due to

natural phenomena


97 619 0


Note: Data on emergency response operations in 2017 are based on reports completed in the system for reporting
on emergency response operations and disasters (SPIN) by 31 January 2018.

Among the largest emergency response operations in 2017 were the following: fires at the company
premises of Kemis, Eko Plastkom in Ljutomer, and Ekosistem; two large wildfires in Divača near Komen;
and storms with strong winds in the broader area of Slovenia.

###### 3.1.1 Fire at Kemis on 15 May 2017

In the evening of 15 May 2017 a fire broke out at Kemis, d.o.o., a company which collects, processes
and disposes of hazardous waste. The first firefighters on the scene came from Vrhnika Firefighting
Association and the Ljubljana Fire Brigade, who were later followed by units from Logatec Firefighting
Association, Cerknica Firefighting Association, Brezovica Firefighting Association and Ljubljana
Firefighting Association, which helped with water supply and fire watch. Kranj Fire and Rescue Service
was activated to carry out decontamination, and the mass casualty trailer was also called out. The
emergency response included a total of 322 firefighters, 27 employees of Vrhnika Health Care Centre
and Ljubljana University Medical Centre who carried out primary triage, 24 police officers and five
members of the support service. In addition, the entire Vrhnika CP headquarters was called out.
Eleven people were evacuated and provided with temporary accommodation by relatives. After the
fire was contained on 16 May 2017, all the emergency response operations focused on the prevention of
environmental hazards, the provision and monitoring of measurements, and the sampling of soil, air
and water, for which the Ecological Laboratory with its Mobile Unit (ELMU at the Jozef Stefan Institute)
and the Mobile Meteorology and Hydrology Unit (Slovenian Environment Agency), as well as the Drava
Water Management Company Ptuj, were activated. The restoration of the fire site, the Tojnica stream
and the Ljubljanica river followed. Disaster response costs were estimated at EUR 350,000.

_The Fire at Kemis_


-----

###### 3.1.2 Fire at Eko Plastkom in Ljutomer on 8 June 2017

On Thursday, 8 June 2017, at 9:21pm, fire broke out in the Ljutomer industrial zone, on Rado Pušenjak
1 street, in the Eko Plastkom plant, a company which processes waste grave candles. The facility that
caught fire was 4300 m2 in size. On the first day, the large fire was fought by 258 firefighters from
Pomurje and Podravje in extremely difficult circumstances at night. Over four days, 483 firefighters
from 36 voluntary fire brigades and firefighters from the Nafta Lendava Industrial Firefighting Unit
worked on extinguishing the fire, in total doing over 4200 hours of firefighting work. At the fire site,
there were 59 different firefighting vehicles and trailer vehicles – two vehicle ladders came from
Gornja Radgona and Murska Sobota, 16 road tankers, four smaller firefighting vehicles with water
tanks, 13 firefighting vehicles with firefighting gear and tools, and two fire command vehicles. The
firefighters spent a total of 953 hours in the field. Fire engines pumped water from the Globetka
stream for almost 70 hours. A Slovenian Armed Forces helicopter was also involved in extinguishing
the fire; in 15 overflights the helicopter dropped over 30,000 litres of water on the fire site. Besides the
firefighters, the regional firefighting commander and the commander of the Firefighting Association
of Slovenia, the following were also involved in the emergency response: the Ljutomer municipality
CP headquarters; the National CP Commander; the Pomurje regional CP commander; the Drava Water
Management Company Ptuj for monitoring and the prevention of pollution of the Globetka stream; the
Mobile Meteorology and Hydrology Unit of the Slovenian Environment Agency for measuring the level
of air pollution and monitoring the water in the Globetka stream; and the National Institute of Public
Health and the mobile unit of the National Laboratory of Health, Environment and Food for collecting
samples of field crops, vegetables and soil, etc. Disaster response costs of the fire were estimated at
EUR 200,319, of which the direct material costs amounted to EUR 72,253.

###### 3.1.3 Fire at Ekosistemi, d.o.o. on 20 July 2017

In the afternoon hours, waste plastics and wood chips caught fire at Ekosistemi, d.o.o. in Zalog, which
falls under the municipality of Straža. Due to the wind, the fire spread rapidly to other company
facilities and posed a threat to the neighbouring forest and residential buildings. While waiting for the
firefighters to arrive, the employees attempted to extinguish the fire, but were unsuccessful. However,
they did manage to rescue mobile machinery and drove it out of the company’s courtyard. A total of
38 inhabitants of the Loka and Zalog neighbouring settlements were evacuated due to the thick black
smoke. At the fire site, Emergency Medical Assistance members provided medical assistance to 32
firefighters for smoke inhalation, dehydration and minor injuries. Before the arrival of the Emergency
Medical Assistance teams, one firefighter was taken to the Novo Mesto emergency unit; another, after
having received medical assistance from the Emergency Medical Assistance team, was taken to Novo
mesto General Hospital (both were later discharged from hospital without complications). Employees
of the Elektro Ljubljana Company disconnected the transmission line, which left the inhabitants of
Zalog without electricity. For precautionary purposes, Geoplin, d.o.o. disconnected a nearby gas pipe. A
request was also sent to Slovenske Železnice Ltd (railway company) to halt trains on the Novo mestoStraža railway track. Due to the initial greater consumption of water from the hydrant network, the
drinking water supply in the Drska, Brod, Mestne njive and Kamence settlements in the Novo mesto
municipality was disrupted, so on that same day, pipes were conducted from the Krka river.

Between 20 and 23 July 2017, the fire was being fought by professional firefighters of the Novo mesto
Fire and Rescue Centre and voluntary firefighters from 61 voluntary firefighting associations, which is
a total of 575. While extinguishing the fire, firefighters used 618 pressurized vessels for self-contained
breathing apparatus, 1200 litres of foam and according to estimates, between 50 and 250 m3 of water


-----

per hour, depending on the intensity of the work. Among others, the following were also activated: CP
members of the Straža municipality; the Ecological Laboratory with the Mobile Unit (ELME) at the Jozef
Stefan Institute; the Mobile Meteorology and Hydrology Unit of the Slovenian Environment Agency; the
Novo mesto Branch Office of the National Institute of Public Health; the Novo mesto Branch Office of
the Administration of the Republic of Slovenia for Food Safety, Veterinary Sector and Plant Protection;
the Novo mesto Red Cross Society; and the Straža Regional Red Cross Society. On the first and the
second day, a SAF helicopter also participated in extinguishing the fire. The total disaster response
costs amounted to EUR 900,000.

_Fire at Ekosistemi d.o.o._

###### 3.1.4 Fire near Divača on 3 and 4 August 2017
On 3 August 2017, at around 4pm, fire broke out at seven locations along the Rodik-Divača railway track.
With the help of the wind, which was blowing from a west-southwesterly direction at a speed of 21
km/h, the fires spread rapidly on the ground, partially as surface fires, but in certain places they also
manifested as underground fires.

Local firefighting units were involved in putting out the fire; a team for intervention management was
established; the police helicopter was called out for carrying out reconnaissance activities; and the SAF
helicopter was used for fire extinguishing activities. Representatives of the Slovenian Forest Service
participated in making the plan for extinguishing the fire. The National Disaster Response Plan in the
Event of Large Wildfire was activated. The plan provided a basis for the activation of forces from within
the country.

According to an estimate by the Slovenian Forest Service’s Sežana district unit, the fire caught 95
hectares, 80 hectares of which were mixed forest and 15 hectares were under grass. The disaster
response costs for the fire in Divača amounted to EUR 28,607.


-----

_Divača fire site_

###### 3.1.5 Fire near Komen 6 and 7 August 2017

On 6 August 2017, a fire broke out near the Komen-Branik road. Due to a long period of drought, the
great dryness of the soil and vegetation, and the Bora wind (41 km/h, with individual gusts of over 70
km/h), the fire spread extremely fast. It spread over and along the ground, and also burned underground
in some places. Due to the open terrain and the Bora wind, the fire rapidly approached the hamlet of
Jablanec and the village of Rubije. Rubije has a population of 38, and comprises 21 buildings, while
Jablanec houses 12 people in 4 buildings. Both settlements have a hydrant network. The National
Disaster Response Plan in the Event of Large Wildfire was activated.

The local firefighting units, a SAF helicopter, a larger command vehicle for the management of PV-2
interventions, the Komen municipality CP, the Police, the Slovenian Forest Service Sežana Branch Office
and the Emergency Medical Assistance were involved in the emergency response. Due to the spread
of the fire, firefighters from the following associations additionally responded: Postojna Firefighting
Association, Koper Coastal Firefighting Association and Ajdovščina Firefighting Association. The fire
was contained at approximately 7pm. All the units watered, sprayed, and cleaned the edge of the fire


-----

_Požarišče Komen 7. avgusta 2017_

site, keeping it wet. The emergency response ended on 7 August 2017 at 10am. A fire watch at the site
was provided until 5:30pm, when the emergency response officially ended.

According to an estimate by the Slovenian Forest Service Sežana Branch Office, the fire caught an area
of 116 hectares, and of that 38 hectares were woods and 78 hectares of scrub and scrubland. Disaster
response costs for the fire at Komen amounted to EUR 50,861.

###### 3.1.6 Heavy rain and strong winds between 9 and 18 December 2017

The storms and strong winds that occurred between 9 and 18 December caused an increase in the
flow of watercourses, which resulted in floods, damage to buildings and in forests, slumps, the falls of
ground and landslides, disruption to road and rail traffic, and damage to roads and electricity networks.

With the exception of Prekmurje, the heavy rain, rapid melting of snow and the strong winds affected all
the Slovenian regions: Gorenjska, Koroška, the wider Ljubljana area, Notranjska, Primorska, Podrava,
Posavje, Dolenjska, Northern Primorska, Eastern Štajerska, Western Štajerska and Zasavje.


-----

According to reports, the floods affected 1088 residential buildings, 42 blocks of flats, 21 schools or
kindergartens, 319 commercial and other facilities, 262 other buildings (garages, woodsheds), 712.5 km
kilometres of road and large-scale agricultural and other land. The saturated ground and several days
of rain caused 35 landslides and rockfalls, which in some cases damaged or directly threatened housing
and infrastructure (roads, electricity network) facilities. Due to the impassable roads, 34 people were
evacuated or provided with temporary accommodation.

The cost of the disaster response and disaster measures, which helped prevent greater harmful
consequences of the storms, strong winds and floods between 9 and 18 December 2017, were estimated
at EUR 4,351,516.

###### 3.2 Damage Assessment

Damage assessment after natural and other disasters to agriculture and other specific objects is carried
out by qualified appraisers according to the prescribed methodology and in parallel with the regular
maintenance of the AJDA application. The appraisers concluded contracts for work in field conditions.

In 2017, decisions on damage assessment were issued for four major natural disasters:

–– Assessment of damage to crops due to the effects of cold between 21 and 22 April 2017: the final

assessment of damage to crops (fruit and vines) amounted to EUR 46,837,600.

–– Assessment of damage to property due to the effects of floods between 27 and 28 April 2017:

the final assessment of direct damage to property due to the effects of floods in the regions
of Gorenjska, Koroška, Ljubljana, Notranjska, Posavska, Northern Primorska, Eastern Štajerska,
Western Štajerska and Zasavje (a total of 51 municipalities) amounted to a total of EUR 56,255,565;
of that, EUR 1,542,099 was for damage to agricultural land, EUR 324,868 for partial damage to
buildings, EUR 3,050,970 for damage to construction and engineering facilities, EUR 319,416 for
damage to forest roads, EUR 50,776,249 for damage to watercourses, and EUR 241,961 for damage
to state roads.

–– Assessment of indirect damage to ongoing agricultural production due to the consequences of

drought in 2017: the date considered to be the date of agricultural drought is 20 July 2017. The final
assessment of indirect damage to ongoing agricultural production due to the consequences of
drought was estimated at EUR 65,295,869.

–– Assessment of damage to property due to the effects of floods and strong winds between 11 and 13

December 2017. A decision was issued to 147 municipalities, and the damage assessment activities
will terminate in 2018.

The AJDA application was upgraded with new price lists for agricultural products and imported
applications for subsidies from the Agency of the Republic of Slovenia for Agricultural Markets and Rural
Development. Training courses on damage assessment were carried out for members of the municipal
and regional damage assessment commissions. The members were introduced to innovations in the
AJDA damage assessment application. A training course for the 5v (watercourse) form entry was carried
out for the Slovenian Water Agency. The training sessions were carried out at the AJDA application
provider’s head office, the Urban Institute of Ljubljana.


-----

###### 4 EDUCATION AND TRAINING

In 2017, training programmes took place in the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief of
the Republic of Slovenia for the following groups: CP members, members of rescue units, services and
other operational structures, societies, commercial companies, institutions and other organizations.
All the planned training courses which received a sufficient number of applications, and other training
courses which had not been planned but for which a need arose during the year, were carried out. In
line with its capabilities and available resources, the ACPDR also provided for the implementation
of specific programmes and other activities for other entities of the system of protection against
natural and other disasters and for external users, and, at the same time, presented the ACPDR’s and
the Ig Training Centre’s activities to Slovenian and foreign delegations and visitors. A total of 27,760
participants attended the listed training courses, visits and other activities organized at the Ig Training
Centre and its training units in Sežana, Logatec and Pekre in 2017.

The ACPDR continued with the establishment of a comprehensive and responsive support system for
investment maintenance, and the adaptation of infrastructure capabilities to the education and training
of PRR forces and the functional operation of the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief
with the units.

These small efforts did not provide for the comprehensive adaptation and reconstruction of
infrastructure solutions for the proper functioning of the education and training system. Insufficient
financial resources and delays in the procedures for the preparation of public tenders’ documentation
and procedures do not provide for comprehensive solutions of the adaptation and reconstruction of
infrastructure solutions for the functioning of the system of education and training, which is organized
by the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief of the Republic of Slovenia. The regular
maintenance of infrastructure and equipment provided conditions for the smooth running of the
planned and other training courses, as well as other activities. Due to the age, wear and tear of facilities
and natural disasters, 27% more emergency adaptations were carried out on buildings in 2017 than the
year before.

A comprehensive analysis of the 104 currently used education and training programmes in the field of
protection against natural and other disasters was also carried out. Based on the analysis, a written
overview of the situation with proposals for future conduct was prepared.

A new application which enables the unified and central management of education with guaranteed
information support was developed for faster and easier management of the main phases of the
training processes within the system of protection against natural and other disasters. The purchase of
the new Wi-Fi network improved the options for communication through information technology and
support for the participants of training courses, as well as international and other events held in the
Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief of the Republic of Slovenia.

With the implementation of training courses for first responders and members of the PRR forces based
on training programmes and the EU programmes, we contributed our share to their better operational
qualification and preparedness for emergency response in the event of natural and other disasters.


-----

###### 4.1 Development of Education and Training Programmes

Three programmes (supplementary training – protection and rescue application, training for water
rescuers at natural bathing sites, and basic training for the execution of PRR tasks with the use of
aircraft) for the education and training of the members of protection and rescue forces were updated,
while one programme was cancelled (introductory and basic training for CP contract members). Eight
programmes are currently in different renovation phases, while three new programmes are being
prepared.

The record of training programmes was regularly updated. All the information was submitted for
publication on the ACPDR website. Information on the updated programmes was disseminated to all
ACPDR’s internal organizational units, other bodies or organizations, societies and non-governmental
organizations.

In 2017, the Director General of the Administration of the Republic of Slovenia for Civil Protection and
Disaster Relief appointed a working group for the comprehensive systemic regulation of training and
the upgrading of the first aid training programmes. The group was composed of representatives from
the ACPDR, the Ministry of Health, the Slovenian Red Cross, the Firefighting Association of Slovenia
and the Ljubljana University Medical Centre. The members of the working group prepared an analysis
of the situation with first aid training courses (legal basis, training programmes, costs required for the
implementation of an individual training programme).

The ACPDR actively participated in the work of the First Aid Professional Centre within the Slovenian
Red Cross. Special attention was devoted to the rules and examination of the level of preparedness of
the first aid teams and the preparation of opinions on the recognition of preparedness for the provision
of first aid.

###### 4.2 Implementation of Education and Training Courses

The education of the PRR forces’ members and public employees in protection against natural and
other disasters was carried out in line with the annual plan of education and training at the Training
Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief.

Training of CP headquarters staff and heads of emergency response were carried out in line with the
annual plan. After the technical conditions had been provided (telephone connections in classrooms,
the equipping of one premises with several computers for the purposes of role plays), the ACPDR, at the
request of the municipalities, carried out the introductory and basic training of CP commanders, their
deputies and CP headquarters members within municipalities in the Pekre unit (two implementations
in Pekre and three in Ig, with a total of 145 participants) for the first time. The introductory and the basic
training of CP commanders, their deputies and the CP headquarters members in individual regions
was carried out on only one occasion (24 participants). Of eight disasters which are carried out as
individual two-day training courses for CP headquarters, the ACPDR carried out only one course on the
management of PRR activities for the event of earthquakes (21 participants) and two for the event of
floods (43 participants) in 2017.

Training courses for a number of different target groups: Basic training for heads of emergency response
(one training event, 35 participants); Basic training for international rescue operations in Slovenia and


-----

abroad (three training events, 82 participants); Leadership and group dynamics (one training event, 22
participants); Public relations in the event of disasters – part 1 (three training events, 26 participants);
Public relations – part 2 (two training events, 16 participants); Public relations – part 3 (three training
events, 19 participants); New migration case study 2015/16 (four training events, 163 participants); New
case study of fire in a skyscraper, Domžale 2013 (three training events, 68 participants); Training of radio
stations users and the custodians of the ZA-RE and ZA-RE+ communications systems (five training
events; 117 participants); Introductory and basic training of geophonists in technical rescue units (one
training event, 6 participants); Programme of introductory and basic training of members of rescue
units within the CP technical rescue units (one training event, 16 participants).

Other training courses: Introductory and basic training for CP commissioners (two training events, 39
participants); New supplementary training of members of commissions for the assessment of damage
to facilities (one training event, 24 participants); Two training events for the training of employees of the
Ministry of the Interior and the Police on the system of protection against natural and other disasters
(66 participants).

Four training events following the basic training for members of services and units performing
protection and rescue tasks during floods and other water disasters (Programme E) were carried out
for the members of professional and voluntary firefighting units. Altogether 51 participants attended
the training, which was successfully completed by 46 of them.

A total of 15 training events for members of the PRR units were carried out with the use of aircraft in
different modules (A, A1, C, C1). The training courses were attended and successfully completed by 297
participants.

Two training courses were carried out based on the programme of supplementary training for members
of rescue and other services and the units for response in the event of nuclear or radiological disasters
for members of firefighting units, CP units, the Police, medical workers and others. The training courses
were attended and successfully completed by 185 participants.

A programme of supplementary training for the preparation and implementation of exercises in the
field of protection against natural and other disasters for 27 participants was carried out. Five lecturers
of the optional course of protection against natural and other disasters were trained in the e-classroom.

In 2017, the Firefighting School carried out 35 different training courses, which provided training for a
total of 1008 participants. The biggest challenge for the Firefighting School in terms of time, personnel,
materiel and logistics, is the organization of the six-month professional training for firefighters, which
is usually held between 3 January and 15 June. In 2017, in the 24th generation of trainees, 52 of the
enrolled 54 candidates successfully completed the training (the other two candidates took the decision
to resign from the course).

With the provision of equipment, means and logistical support, the Firefighting School also participated
in the implementation of the 162 training events which were organized by the Firefighting Association
of Slovenia and held at the Ig, Sežana and Pekre training centres. The courses were attended by 3612
participants.


-----

The Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief also held international training events in the
context of the EU Civil Protection Mechanism (three courses for the management of CP units or modules
from over 25 European countries) and within the Disaster Preparedness and Prevention Initiative for
South-Eastern Europe (DPPI SEE) (two training events for water rescue in the context of the joint unit
for emergency response in the event of floods in SE Europe).

Attention was also continually focused on the provision of appropriate conditions for the implementation
of training courses for the PRR forces’ members. With the replacement of damaged equipment
(equipment for technical rescue, firefighting equipment, rope technique equipment, firefighting
protective suits, warehouse racks and wardrobe benches with hangers) and regular maintenance of the
currently used equipment, the conditions for the smooth running of all training courses were ensured.
The regular maintenance of infrastructure and equipment provided conditions for the smooth running
of the training courses and other activities.

The Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief was also actively involved in the different
working, expert and project groups, whose purpose was to include appropriate content in the
preparation or upgrading of the training programmes, provide for a quality transfer of knowledge or
strive to provide appropriate quality support for work and the implementation of training and other
events in the centre and its units.

In 2017, the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief carried out all planned and additionally
assigned tasks in accordance with requirements, personnel and financial capabilities.

###### 4.3 Assessment of Training Level and Exercises

In accordance with the Plan of Exercises in the Defence System and the System of Protection against
Natural and other Disasters the following exercises were prepared and carried out in 2017: the Murska
Sobota 2017 exercise, the Search for Missing Aircraft 2017 (state exercise), the Posočje Earthquake 2017,
the Zasavje Earthquake 2017, the Grosuplje Railway Accident 2017, the Maribor Pohorje Massif Aircraft
Accident 2017, Ljubljana Airport Aircraft Accident 2017 (all exercises of regional importance), staff
exercises for the CP modules, and exercises NATO EADRCC B&H 2017, DPPI SEE JERU, Istra 2017, Buna
2017, EU EDREX and COOPERATE 2017 (all international exercises in which the CP units or members of
the PRR forces were actively involved). The implementation of the international exercise NEIFLEX was
postponed to 2018. Of the 19 planned exercises, only 17 were carried out.

In 2017, the ACPDR carried out 11 regional training examinations of the first aid teams in which 117 teams
(55 teams of the Red Cross District Associations, 34 CP teams of the local communities, commercial
companies, institutes and organizations, 24 teams from firefighter organizations, the Cave Rescue
Service, the Mountain Rescue Service, the Police and four teams from Croatia and Hungary) took part.
Thirteen first aid teams qualified for the national examination (eight RC District Associations teams,
three CP teams, and two teams from firefighting organizations). The best Slovenian Red Cross team
was the team of the Zagorje ob Savi District Association.


-----

###### 5 INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

In 2017, international activities in the field of protection against natural and other disasters were
primarily focused on the strengthening of bilateral and regional cooperation, development assistance
to the Western Balkan countries, and the ensuring of an active role of Slovenia in EU international
organizations.

###### 5.1 Bilateral Cooperation

The ACPDR carried out bilateral activities in cooperation with neighbouring countries: active participation
within permanent committees with Austria and Italy, participation in permanent mixed commissions
and sub-commissions with Croatia and Hungary, and participation in the Cooperate 2017 exercise
together with Austria and the Istra 2017 exercise together with Croatia. The ACPDR strengthened
bilateral cooperation with the Czech Republic and Georgia, especially in terms of the exchange of good
practices and knowledge. Slovenia was visited by delegations from Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, and the USA. Good cooperation continues with Sweden and Germany. The transfer of
knowledge and experience on the functioning of the Slovenian system of protection against natural
and other disasters to the countries of the Western Balkans strengthened, a joint exercise, Buna 2017,
was carried out in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and a strengthened bilateral cooperation programme
with Montenegro for 2018 was coordinated. The procedure for concluding a bilateral agreement on
cooperation in the field of protection against natural and other disasters with the Republic of Albania
continued. Cooperation with the countries of the Western Balkans continued through the projects of
the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance (IPA) for entry to the EU.

###### 5.2 Regional Cooperation

Regional cooperation contributes significantly to the development of both the national systems of
protection against natural and other disasters and to the emergency response in the event of major
disasters with possible transboundary effects. The most important regional cooperation framework in
South-Eastern Europe is the Preparedness and Prevention Initiative for South-Eastern Europe (DPPI
SEE). After its successful presidency of the DPPI SEE in 2016, the ACPDR actively participated in its
institutional operation, and also attended both of its regional meetings. Three training courses were
organized in the Republic of Slovenia: a course for cave rescuers and two courses for rescuers in swift
flowing waters. With its unit, the Republic of Slovenia participated in the project of establishment of the
joint SEE countries’ unit for emergency response in the event of floods, which in 2017, participated in an
exercise held in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The ACPDR followed the work within the Adriatic-Ionian, the
Danube and the Alpine macro regions. ACPDR members, as the Slovenian point of contact, attended
two meetings of the platform for natural and other disasters in the context of the Alpine Convention
(PLANALP), the main purpose of which is the exchange of experience in the area of prevention of and
response to disasters in the Alps. Members also participated in two meetings of the Action Group 8 of
the EU-Strategy for the Alpine Region (EUSALP) within the Alpine macroregion, the main task of which
is the improvement of disaster management, adaptation to climate change and the improvement of
appropriate prevention measures.


-----

###### 5.3 European Union

In 2017, the ACPDR, at the EU level, continued to have an active role in the EU Civil Protection
Mechanism. It participated in the interim evaluation of the Mechanism and in the discussions on
possible improvements within the Council’s Working Group for Civil Protection and at Director Generals’
meetings. The Council’s decision on the use of new technologies for improved maritime safety, which
was the main topic of the Maltese presidency, was adopted. During the Estonian presidency, however,
there was a discussion on the raising of public awareness with regard to disaster risks and disaster
preparedness.

The ACPDR participated in the EU Civil Protection Committee, expert working groups for preparations
for the fire season, prevention and risk assessments, the training policy and at meetings of the training
coordinators. It also continued with the preparation of the National Risk Management Capability
Assessment, the deadline for the submission of which to the EU Commission is 2018. The process
for the certification of the Cave Rescue Unit as part of the voluntary pool of the EU Civil Protection
capabilities is also underway. Slovenian representatives attended training courses and exercises within
the EU Civil Protection Mechanism. As part of the theoretical exercise the European Disaster Response
Exercise (EDREX 2017), and alongside the main scenario, the Republic of Slovenia trained in procedures
for filing a request for international assistance and for the provision of host nation support in the event
of the reception of international assistance in Slovenia. It carried out activities to support the inclusion
of candidate countries and potential candidate countries into the EU Civil Protection Mechanism. The
ACPDR participated in activities concerning the single European Emergency Call Number 112, and in
activities for the implementation of obligations of the Seveso III Directive.

###### 5.4 International Organizations

In the field of disaster prevention and preparedness, the ACPDR, in cooperation with the Council of the
Government of the Republic of Slovenia for protection Against Natural and Other Disasters, coordinated
activities for the implementation of guidelines of the UN Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015-2030, also from the aspect of sustainable development. One ACPDR representative attended the
open European Forum for Disaster Risk Reduction, which took place in March in Istanbul, and the
Global Platform for Disaster Reduction which was held in Cancun in Mexico in May. The administration
continued to carry out obligations assumed under the UN Convention of the Transboundary Effects of
Industrial Accidents, and the Hague Convention. The ACPDR also participated in the UN International
Search and Rescue Advisory Group (INSARAG). The initial steps for inclusion in the United Nations
Disaster Assessment and Coordination system (UNDAC expert team) were taken. In November 2017,
a two-week Emergency Preparedness Review (EPREV) Mission for nuclear and radiological accidents
was carried out by experts of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), at the request of the
Government of the Republic of Slovenia.

The ACPDR participated in working bodies related to civil emergency planning within NATO. In
September 2017, the Republic of Slovenia attended the NATO EADRCC consequence management field
exercise “Bosna i Herzegovina 2017” with the Civil Protection Water Rescue Unit.


-----

###### 5.5 Assistance in the Event of Disasters Abroad

Through the EU Civil Protection Mechanism, the ACPDR monitored the occurrence of all large scale
disasters across the world and requests for assistance submitted by the affected countries. The
Republic of Slovenia participated in one international rescue intervention within the EU Civil Protection
Mechanism and provided assistance to one country at the bilateral level.

On the basis of a bilateral agreement on cooperation in protection against natural and other disasters
and requests for assistance, the ACPDR deployed one Civil Protection Search and Rescue Dog Handlers
Unit to Bosnia and Herzegovina in March 2017 to help in a search for a missing or drowned person in
the Sana river. During the December 2017 floods in Albania, Slovenia sent material assistance to the
affected country. The ACPDR also contributed one expert to the EU Civil Protection multinational team
for the coordination of international assistance in the elimination of the consequences of floods in
Albania. The expert participated in the EU multinational professional team.


-----

###### 6 INSPECTION ACTIVITY IN THE FIELD OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS

The Inspectorate of the Republic of Slovenia for Protection against Natural and Other Disasters
(IRSPANOD) carries out inspections of the implementation of regulations in the areas of fire protection,
firefighting, protection against natural and other disasters, and protection against drowning. In
compliance with the Minor Offences Act, the IRSPANOD also performs the function of a minor offence
authority in these fields. The IRSPANOD inspectors participate in emergency response operations
during natural and other disasters, and in investigations into the causes of fires. As evaluators,
they participate in national and regional emergency response exercises and in NATO and EU crisis
management exercises. They also participate in the Inspection Board and in regional coordinations,
running two of them.

In 2017, inspectors in the field of protection against natural and other disasters carried out 4476
inspections. In the area of fire protection, inspections were carried out in buildings with a large number
of people, in facilities where activities that may endanger workers and nearby residents are carried
out, and in companies that collect and process hazardous waste. Inspections were conducted during
the construction of buildings, based on filed reports. The inspectors participated in a number of joint
actions of different inspection bodies at the level of regional coordination and of the Inspection Board.
Additionally, inspectors participated in firefighting emergency response operations and in determining
the causes of fires. Firefighting units were supervised with regard to meeting the prescribed conditions
and standards for the directors of professional firefighting units and for personal protective equipment.

In the area of protection against drowning, inspections of swimming pools, equipment lenders and
water activity organizers were carried out. Special attention was paid to the organizers of rafting and
canyoning.

In the field of protection and rescue, inspections of companies representing a major source of
environmental risk were carried out, as well as inspections of UXO storage sites. In addition, inspections
were carried out in municipalities, ministries, primary schools and organizations which have concluded
contracts with the ACPDR.

The IRSPANOD carried out the planned regular inspection controls in all areas under its surveillance and
in accordance with the work programme. With the change in the work plan for 2017, the IRSPANOD also
responded to accidents that occurred in 2017. In the context of this assignment, additional inspections
in companies that collect and process hazardous waste were carried out.

Based on the Minor Offences Act, the IRSPANOD carried out 4056 inspections and issued 22 payment
orders. It introduced 39 procedures for the issuing of offence decisions, and issued 3995 offence
warnings.

In the previous year, the Inspectorate had assessed nine exercises related to protection and rescue.
The inspectors of the head of the inspectorate and its branch offices, together with other competent
inspectors and experts in healthcare, firefighting and the police, assessed exercises of national and
regional importance, i.e Murska Sobota 2017, Search of a Missing Aircraft 2017, Tlake Railway Accident


-----

2017, Posočje Earthquake 2017, Cooperate 2017 – Leisure Time Accidents, Hospital Fire 2017, Maribor
Pohorje Massif 2017, Ljubljana Airport Aircraft Accident 2017 and Zasavje Earthquake 2017.

Due to the lack of inspectors in specific areas of the country, and in order to ensure an even range of
inspections in Slovenia (which, within the competence of the IRSPANOD, provides a uniform standard of
safety for the citizens of Slovenia in the field of protection against natural and other disasters), 2017 saw
the continued implementation of the concept of the provision of uniform criteria to perform inspections
in Slovenia. The work of the IRSPANOD continued to be adapted in administrative operations, where the
ACPDR and the Defence Affairs Directorate signed an Agreement on Cooperation in the Performance of
Tasks in Administrative Operations and Maintenance of Materiel and Equipment in 2013. According to
this Agreement, employees of the organizational units of the signatories perform tasks related to joint
administrative operations.


-----

##### THE DEFENCE SYSTEM AND CRISIS MANAGEMENT

###### 1 DEFENCE POLICY AND PLANNING

 1.1 NATO

The Alliance continued its intensive adjustment to the changed security situation through the attainment
of the full operational capability of the battalion battle groups in the Baltic area; the strengthening of
the capabilities and structures for the identification of challenges stemming from the south, through
work on the development of capabilities for the defence against hybrid warfare; and the discussion on
the adjustment of the NATO command structure. The development of the required capabilities calls for
an increase in defence expenditure in line with economic growth.

The emphasis was on the preparation for the NATO meeting of Heads of State and/or Government
in Brussels in May, and the implementation of the conclusions adopted at that meeting. At the
meeting, the Allies adopted an action plan with specific projects aiming to strengthen NATO’s role
in the international community’s fight against terrorism. Based on this, the Alliance strengthened its
support for the Global Coalition to counter ISIL. The leaders also discussed the fair distribution of the
burden and were introduced to a proposal for the preparation of national plans for the fulfilment of
the commitments on defence spending specified in Wales and Warsaw, which will include specific
plans aimed at investing 2% of GDP in defence and 20% in investments. It was pointed out that the
Allies have started to increase defence spending, which means that eight of the Allies will already be
allocating 2% of GDP for defence by next year.

Slovenia was active in shaping the Alliance’s efforts to stabilize the situation in the south, since the
events in this area have direct security implications on the Western Balkans and, consequently, the
Republic of Slovenia. Slovenia is therefore planning to make a contribution in terms of personnel to
NATO’s southern regional command in Naples.

In 2017, Montenegro became a full member of NATO, which is undoubtedly a positive signal for the
region as a whole, and a clear confirmation of the Alliance’s open door policy. The Republic of Slovenia
has always actively supported the Alliance’s open door policy, and assisted the NATO Mission of
Montenegro in its inclusion in the work of the Allied committees. Slovenia also extended its support
through its defence advisor in Podgorica.

The development of events in Macedonia is also positive; the new Government has begun to implement
an ambitious plan for its re-accession to Euro-Atlantic Integrations, including a solution on the name
of the country. The Republic of Slovenia supports Macedonia’s efforts through its defence advisor in the
NATO Liaison Office (NLO) in Skopje, which is headed by a Slovenian officer.
EU Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP)


-----

During Malta’s Presidency of the EU Council, from January to June, and Estonia’s Presidency from July
to December, the main focus was on the preparation of the EU Global Strategy (EUGS) on Foreign
and Security Policy, followed by the EUGS Implementation Plan on Security and Defence, which came
under the context of the EU Defence Package together with the European Defence Action Plan (EDAP)
and the Implementation Plan of the EU-NATO Joint Declaration signed in Warsaw. All three documents
are highly interlinked and constitute a framework for further in-depth work in the field of defence and
security, and the strengthening of political will and finance.

The implementation of the defence package and cooperation between the most intertwined countries
– the EU Member States – in the field of security and defence is one of Slovenia’s most important
priorities. In the context of the EUGS Implementation Plan on Security and Defence, the greatest
emphasis was on the initiative deriving from the Lisbon Treaty, the Permanent Structured Cooperation
(PESCO). PESCO helps those EU Member States that wish to be included in the cooperation of the
Common Security and Defence Policy in a more in-depth way to arrange mutual cooperation, planning
and the implementation of the Common Security and Defence Policy on the basis of the jointly agreed
provisions and commitments.

The Republic of Slovenia actively participated in the preparation of the provisions of PESCO and all
related projects. The Government of the Republic of Slovenia also adopted a decision on Slovenia’s
accession to PESCO and the consequent commitments with regard to PESCO’s implementation plan
and Slovenia’s cooperation in two PESCO projects.

The European Defence Action Plan (EDAP), prepared by the European Commission, is expected to
reinforce the common market in the field of security and defence, to increase investment, to boost the
European defence industry, to strengthen the technology base and research domains, and to promote
civil-military synergy. For this reason, the Decree on the European Defence Industrial Development
Programme (EDIDP), which will promote joint investments, cooperation and development of capabilities
between the EU member states, was also harmonized. In the context of the latter, the European
Commission established the European Defence Fund, which was aimed at achieving a more efficient
use of resources for joint defence capabilities, and enhancing the safety of citizens.

In the context of the Implementation Plan for the Joint Declaration on Strategic Partnership between
the EU and NATO, the latter agreed on 42 concrete proposals for cooperation in seven key areas: hybrid
threats; operational cooperation at sea and in the solving of migrant issues; cyber security; defence
capabilities; the European defence industry; crisis management exercises; and the resistance of partner
countries. Slovenia stressed the Western Balkans in particular as an example of good practice of
cooperation between organizations. In countering illegal migration and addressing the issue of stability
in the EU’s southern neighbourhood, Slovenia highlighted the strengthening of operational cooperation
at sea, such as Operation Sophia and NATO’s Operation Sea Guardian.

In the context of the European Defence Agency (EDA), the Republic of Slovenia actively participates in
the form of points of contact and directors in the area of defence policy, capabilities, weapons, and
research and technology. Slovenia participates in a number of EDA projects, with emphasis on helicopter
training, medical capabilities and transport nodes. The EDA is also one of the most important players
in the context of PESCO and its projects. The Republic of Slovenia actively participates in the context
of the Coordinated Annual Review on Defence (CARD), which represents a two-year cycle of inspection
and signifies a comprehensive overview of the capabilities and activities of the EU Member States in the
area of the EU Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP). Besides Finland, the Republic of Slovenia


-----

was the only EU Member State to send one person from the MoD for the purposes of launching and
implementing the Coordinated Annual Review on Defence (CARD).

The United Kingdom’s announcement of withdrawal from the EU (Brexit) also affected the EU Common
Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), as the EU Member States will have to define their position towards
the United Kingdom after its exit, specifically in EU operations and missions, the Athena Financial
Mechanism, and the personnel employed in the European External Action Service (EEAS). The MoD
regularly monitors the negotiation procedures and the provisions related to the future cooperation
of the United Kingdom in the context of the EU Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), and
regularly participates in coordination meetings within the Brexit inter-ministerial working group which
are headed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

The Republic of Slovenia has already commenced preparations for its Presidency of the EU Council in
the second half of 2021. The MoD conducted an internal survey with regard to covering the contents
of the CSDP and the EU across all its organizational units, the inspection of the working groups in
Brussels, and commitments and events in the Republic of Slovenia.

In the light of preparations for Slovenia’s Presidency to the EU Council, and numerous initiatives in
the area of the CSDP, the strengthening of European security and defence, in-depth cooperation, and
inclusion in new projects at the level of the CSDP, the MoD established a new sector within the Defence
Policy Directorate – the European Affairs Sector.

###### 1.2 Bi- and Multilateral Events and Defence Diplomacy

The Minister of Defence, Andreja Katič, hosted the Minister of Defence of the Republic of Croatia, the
Minister of Defence of the Kingdom of Spain and the Minister of Defence of the Republic of Macedonia
during official visits to the Republic of Slovenia. Slovenia also hosted General Edwards during his
working visit to the MoD and the SAF; he is now a former commander of the Colorado National Guard,
with which the Slovenian Armed Forces actively cooperates in the context of the State Partnership
Programme. Minister Andreja Katič paid official visits to the Republic of Serbia and to Montenegro. In the
margins of the ministerial meeting of the South-Eastern Europe Defence Ministerial (SEDM) initiative,
which was held in October in Batumi, Georgia and attended by the State Secretary Miloš Bizjak, a
short working meeting with the Georgia delegation was organized, and an agreement between the
Ministry of Defence of the Republic of Slovenia and the Ministry of Defence of the Republic of Georgia
on cooperation in the field of defence was signed. State Secretary Miloš Bizjak attended two other
ministerial meetings of the Central European Defence Cooperation (CEDC) initiative, which took place
in February and July in Vienna and in Prague respectively, and the meeting of the US-Adriatic Charter
Defence Ministerial (A-5), which was organized at the end of November in Ohrid in Macedonia. Minister
Katič also had several short bilateral meetings with the ministers of defence of partner countries in the
margins of the NATO and EU ministerial meetings.

The MoD leadership hosted a large number of ambassadors and defence attachés accredited to the RS
in introductory and working meetings.

One of the most prominent multilateral events coordinated and organized by the MoD was an
international military bands concert, which was arranged in July in Kobarid. The concert was part of
the 100th anniversary of World War I, and was attended by orchestras from those countries whose


-----

members fought on the Isonzo Front during the war. At the end of November, the MoD hosted a number
of different working meetings of the Multinational Land Force (MLF). This is especially important as
the EU Battlegroup, which is based on the MFL, should be on stand-by for possible intervention in the
second half of 2021, when the Republic of Slovenia will preside over the EU Council.

With eight resident and two roving attachés, two defence representatives at the OSCE and the UN,
and one defence counsellor in Montenegro, the size of the defence and diplomatic network remained
the same as in 2016. In the recent years, the defence diplomacy corps accredited in the Republic of
Slovenia also extended to the countries of the African continent (Zambia and Nigeria accredited their
first non-resident defence attachés to the RS). The MoD organizes several regular annual meetings for
defence attachés accredited to the Republic of Slovenia. At these meetings, which are also attended by
companies representing the Slovenian defence industry, the attachés are informed on all topics. The
meetings are also noted for their high number of participants.

###### 1.3 International Operations and Missions

The MoD was actively involved in the national decision-making processes on participation in
International Operations and Missions (IOM) and the monitoring and assessing of the operational
capabilities of individual international organizations. At the highest level of decision-making of the
MoD, the Coordination Group for IOM continued with the practice of regular consultations and the
coordination of the participation of defence capabilities in IOM.

At the beginning of 2017, new directives for the planning of Slovenia’s cooperation in IOM in the following
two-year period, which were supplemented during the year, were prepared. Taking into consideration
the good practices and possible improvements in the planning and implementation procedure with
regard to participation in IOM, amendments to the Rules on the Planning and Implementation of
Participation in IOM were adopted at the end of 2017. In line with the IOM Strategy, the MoD participated
in the preparation of the regular annual report of the RS Government to the National Assembly on the
participation of Slovenia in IOM.

The MoD was the body responsible for the preparation of a number of Government decisions referring
to Slovenia’s contribution to IOM (taking part in the Enhanced Forward Presence (eFP) in Latvia, an
extension of Slovenia’s cooperation in the EUBG, and a financial contribution in support of the G5
Sahel Joint Force). At the same time, the MoD prepared a set of key findings and suggestions on the
implementation of the IOM Strategy, as a ministerial contribution to the inspection of the implementation
of this strategic document. Two visits to the Slovenian contingents were carried out by the Minister
of Defence, specifically to contingents in Kosovo and Lativa. Inter-ministerial coordination and the
exchange of information and viewpoints at different levels on Slovenia’s participation in IOM took place
on a regular basis.

In addition, in 2017 the MoD marked the 20th anniversary of Slovenia’s participation in IOM by
organizing several events either independently or in cooperation with other state bodies (reception for
the commanders of past contingents, civilian experts and diplomatic representatives who participate
in IOM with the President of the Republic, a two-day inter-ministerial conference at Brdo near Kranj, a
permanent photographic exhibition, and the issue of a special publication).


-----

In 2017, the MoD marked a number of important anniversaries related to Slovenia’s participation in IOM,
of which the following should be highlighted: the 20th anniversary of Slovenia’s first inclusion in an
international military operation, the ALBA Operation in Albania in 1997, which was conducted under the
auspices of OSCE – the first international organization that Slovenia joined as an independent country
25 years ago.

##### 20-letnica sodelovanja

# 2

##### Republike Slovenije v mednarodnih

## LET

### MIRU operacijah in misijah

Since then, the Republic of Slovenia has upgraded and strengthened its participation in the efforts to
maintain international peace and stability through its military and civilian capabilities, and has thus
become known as a responsible and solid ally of the international community, committed to international
peace, and ready to take on an active role in joint efforts to support security and stability in different
crisis areas. Under the auspices of the UN, NATO, the EU and other international organizations, or within
a bilateral or coalition framework, the Republic of Slovenia has so far participated in a total of 25 IOM
with over 5,300 SAF members and civilian functional experts. So far, 174 members of the Police have
been included in international stabilization efforts through 16 international civilian missions, and three
representatives of the Ministry of the Interior through three international missions. It should be stressed
that a large proportion of these participants carried out duties in the service of providing international
peace and security on a number of occasions, which means that a total number of deployments to
IOM actually exceeds 13,500. Currently, on average, a total of 345 SAF members and civilian functional
experts, 12 police officers and one representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are working under
the auspices of NATO, the EU, UN and in the context of other frameworks.

With the intent of marking the 20th anniversary of Slovenia’s participation in IOM, the MoD organized
a number of events and projects in 2017, which were all related to active participation in providing
international peace and security. In May, the President of the Republic held a reception for all the past
and present contingent commanders of the SAF, the Police and the civilian functional experts. The
reception was followed by exhibitions. In addition, a publication comprising expert articles and the
personal views of participants in IOM was published. In October 2017, the central event, in the form
of an inter-ministerial conference between the MoD, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry
of the Interior, was organized. In the context of these activities, the current security challenges in the
international environment were addressed, as was the related role of the RS, its participation in IOM,
and the importance of a comprehensive approach to crisis response.

###### 1.5 Renovation of strategic steering and planning documents

In line with the resolutions of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia, which were based on the
findings of the Strategic Defence Review 2016, the MoD inspected the applicable Resolution on National
Security Strategy and the Defence Strategy. To this end, an operational team for the inspection and


-----

updating of strategic documents in the area of national security was set up. The team established
that the current Resolution on the National Security Strategy of the RS represents an appropriate
fundamental development and steering document in the area of national security, and is thus an
adequate basis for the preparation or the supplementation of strategic and other developmental and
doctrinal documents in the field of defence. For this reason the MoD did not suggest any revisions to
the applicable Resolution on the National Security Strategy of the RS; however, the operational team
did start to update the Defence Strategy of the RS.

The most urgent amendments to the Defence Strategy refer, in particular, to the greater risk of specific
security threats that are already defined in the Resolution on National Security, such as hybrid and
cybernetic threats. This part of the content is also linked to the need for greater resilience of countries
and for civilian readiness. The part referring to financial resources was also amended, as the financial
projection is currently more positive, in line with the resolutions of the Government of the Republic of
Slovenia, which are related to the findings of the Strategic Defence Review 2016.

The amendments to the Defence Strategy also reflect the changes within NATO; the biggest emphasis
lies on Article 3 of the North Atlantic Treaty (development of own capabilities), the aspect of national
defence is more pronounced and accentuated, and a greater balance between capability targets within
NATO and with the permanent structural cooperation in EU (PESCO) is suggested.

The draft proposal of the urgent amendments to the Defence Strategy is prepared to be submitted to
the Government of the Republic of Slovenia in line with the timeline of the adoption of the new Defence
Act.
In the context of preparations for the strategic steering and planning bases, the most important task
of the MoD was the preparation of a draft Medium-Term Defence Programme 2018-2023, which is
the basis for medium-term development, the establishment of defence capabilities in the RS and the
distribution of defence resources between the planned defence capabilities in accordance with the
level of urgency. The draft Medium-Term Defence Programme 2018-2023 is based on the medium-term
financial projection, which takes into account the assessment of the recovery of economic activity in
the RS and the consequent growth in GDP, as well as the challenges that the country faces in the
consolidation of the government deficit and the balancing of revenues and expenditures in the state
budget. The projection envisages an increase in defence spending between 2018 and 2023, in nominal
terms, by at least EUR 30 million per year, which means that spending will reach 1.11% of GDP in 2023,
with the objective of reaching 1.2% of GDP in 2025. In this way, the set increase in defence spending will
be in line with the findings of the Strategic Defence Review 2016 and will, at the same time, allow the
RS to meet the commitment to increase the defence investments that was adopted at the NATO Wales
Summit in 2014. Based on the scope and the level of ambitions of the RS defence system, the financial
projection will allow for the development of the SAF’s priority combat capabilities, especially the first
Medium Battalion Battlegroup, which will require the most personnel, financial and material resources
in the following planning year. The Strategic Defence Review was adopted by the Government of the
RS on 19 April 2018.

###### 1.6 NATO Defence Planning Capability Review for Slovenia

As member of NATO, Slovenia is directly involved in the NATO Defence Planning Process (NDPP), which
takes place in cycles, in five steps. One of the steps is a review of the completed objectives, in the context
of which all NATO members, through a special questionnaire on the planning of defence capabilities


-----

(the Defence Planning Capability Survey – DPCS), report on national targets, priorities and ambitions in
the medium-term period, the inventory of military and non-military capabilities potentially useful for
the Alliance, financial plans in the field of defence, and the achieved results.

In the first part of 2017, the MoD prepared responses to the questionnaire in its area of competence,
coordinated its answers with other ministries, and sent a comprehensive response from the RS to NATO
and the EU in July 2017. Slovenia’s answers to the questionnaire were a starting point for an analysis
conducted by NATO and for the implementation of bilateral discussions. Bilateral discussions with
NATO representatives were carried out in January 2018 at the premises of the MoD.

In 2017, preparations for the first (test) Coordinated Annual Review on Defence (CARD) for the RS took
place. The review was carried out by the European Defence Agency (EDA) in January 2018. The aim of the
review was to assess the options for Slovenia’s participation in joint projects of capability development
in the context of the EDA and the EU, and the final formation of the survey methodology, as it will be
used in regular cycles later on. The findings of the test review of the CARD will also be submitted to the
defence ministers of the EU member states in 2018.

###### 1.7 Provision and Implementation of the Unified Operation of the NATO Registry System in Slovenia

In 2014, the Central NATO Registry/EU Sub-Registry successfully coordinated the work of the NATO
Registry System in Slovenia, ensuring its operation and that of the NATO sub-registries and the EU
sub-registry at the MoD. All conditions for the receipt, traceability, sending and destruction of classified
and official NATO and EU data were fulfilled in full and by the due time. The transport and transfer
of NATO and EU classified and official data in Slovenia and abroad for the needs of the MoD and
other ministries and public authorities in Slovenia was successfully carried out. A total of 14,737 NATO
and EU documents were transferred in 2017. The Central Registry, in cooperation with the national
security authority, continued to upgrade the conditions for compliance with the security principles and
standards which Slovenia, as a NATO member state, must satisfy in order to ensure a unified level of
protection for the data exchanged between the member states.

In the past year, the MoD successfully concluded the transition to a new system of distribution of NATO
and EU documents, and ensured data transfer between different networks within the MoD. So in April
2017 the MoD started using the IRDG CRNE module in the IRDG application. This module enables the
electronic transfer, recording and processing of NATO and EU data to the level of RESTRICTED (NATO
UNCLASSIFIED and NATO RESTRICTED, EU UNCLASSIFIED and EU RESTRICTED) from the NATO and
EU networks into the MoD CIS INTRANET subsystem. On the day of introduction, the central register,
sub-registers and the control points in the RS, which are specifically authorized to this end, started
collecting documents up to and including the level of RESTRICTED, together with the contents of the
documents. RESTRICTED and SECRET documents are not included, but only listed in the records.
The traceability and destruction of physical documents is ensured for all levels of classification.
Concurrently, the MoD prepared an Instruction for working with the data received by the MoD from the
NATO and EU, and carried out training for their users. With the successful completion of this project,
the MoD achieved faster and easier access to these documents for most NATO data users in the MoD
and the RS. This has also resulted in the saving of money on cartridges and paper, as the need to print
documents containing NATO and EU data has decreased significantly.


-----

###### 2 SLOVENIA’S CRISIS PREPARATIONS AND RESPONSE MEASURES

In compliance with the Regulation on Defence Planning, the MoD continued to coordinate the preparation
of defence plans and the necessary bases for defence planning. As manager of the National Defence
Plan, the MoD prepared guidelines on the preparation of crisis response measures for the entities
responsible for defence planning in Slovenia. The MoD provided the entities with expert assistance
in supplementing and coordinating their defence plans, in accordance with the annual programme of
professional guidance and coordination with the entities in the supplementation of defence planning
documents. The objective is to keep the plans harmonized with the regulations, up-to-date and above
all useful, all of which is also reflected in the defence plan of the state.

Regular supplementation of the MoD Defence Plan and the harmonization of its contents with new
bases was ensured, especially in the area of crisis response measures and the updating of the records
of defence duties, referring to military, work and material duty.

The MoD participated in the preparation and coordination of the legal documents which fall under
the competence of other ministries in those areas that refer to crisis management, defence planning
and the protection of critical infrastructure. The MoD’s views on defence planning were represented in
numerous interdepartmental working groups and commissions.

Cooperation also took place related to host country support tasks and the role of the state in military
movements, as carried out within EDA and PESCO, the procedures of which will gradually become part
of defence planning.

In 2017, the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Group for coordinating preparations for the protection of
critical infrastructure, which is managed by the MoD and its core working group, continued to work
on the text of the draft Critical Infrastructure Act. The Critical Infrastructure Act was adopted at the
36th session of the National Assembly, on 12 December 2017, and published in the Official Gazette of
the RS, No. 75/17, dated 22 December 2017. A report to the Government of the RS on the work of the
Inter-Ministerial Coordination Group for 2017 was prepared in November 2017.

The participation of the MoD was ensured at events organized by the European Commission in the
context of the tasks carried out by the MoD in the role of the national POC for the protection of the
European critical infrastructure in the RS. In that same context, responses to the Commission’s initiatives
and to the proposals of individual EU member states were made. Special attention was devoted to the
formation of vulnerability indicators for hybrid threats and critical infrastructure.

In accordance with the Decree on European Critical Infrastructure, a report was submitted to the
European Commission on the implementation of its provisions and the provisions of the Council Directive
(EC), No. 114/2008 on the establishment and identification of the European critical infrastructure and
the assessment of the need to improve its protection.

In the context of the EU Financial Perspective 2014-2020, the MoD carries out a number of projects
funded by the Internal Security Fund (ISF) in the areas of crisis management and critical infrastructure
protection. The following projects took place in 2017:


-----

–– The upgrading and modernization of the National Crisis Management Centre’s (NCMC) multimedia

system – the presidential room (PAMM);

–– The survey and upgrading of the crisis management mechanisms in the RS (MEHANIZMI KUV);
–– The development and implementation of the system of psychosocial support after disasters

(PSYCIV);

–– The required knowledge and proposals for the training programme of critical infrastructure

managers (PROPU).

The PSYCIV projects, the management mechanisms and the PAMM mechanisms were concluded in
2017, while the PROPU project is expected to be completed by the end of May 2018, as its results are to
be harmonized with the provisions of the newly adopted Critical Infrastructure Act.

The following projects were submitted for co-financing from European funds in 2017 (the implementation
of the projects will begin in 2018):
Basic Training of the Critical Infrastructure Managers and Responsible Entities (UNUKI);

–– The preparation of expert bases for the assessment of risks posed to the functioning of the critical

infrastructure (SPOTKI);

–– Cyber security of the National Crisis Management Centre (NCKU) network (KIBVAR);
–– Updating cartographic bases at a scale of 1:25 000 for the needs of the crisis management players

at the operational level and the holders and managers of the critical infrastructure (POSKART).

Regular examination and coordination of applications within the MoD’s organizational units and
constituent bodies was carried out for construction adaptations for the needs of defence.

The MoD regularly prepared resolution proposals for government consideration concerning the issuing
of authorizations by the RS Government for carrying out air imaging for the production of cartographic
publications. Regular examination and coordination of applications within the MoD’s organizational
units and constituent bodies was carried out for issuing consent for the conduct of research relevant
to defence.

In accordance with the Plan of Exercises in the Defence System and in the System of Protection Against
Natural and other Disasters in 2017, and in accordance with the Rules of Exercises in the Defence
System, the following exercises were organized and carried out: the NATO cyber defence exercise –
Cyber Coalition 2016 (CC17); the NATO Able Staff 17 exercise for nuclear safety; and the NATO Crisis
Management Exercise 2017 (CMX17). The MoD prepared and harmonized draft reports of the exercises
for submission and consideration by the Government of the RS.

On the basis of the findings of the Government P7 project “A System of Crisis Management in the
Republic of Slovenia”, a Government of the Republic of Slovenia Act introducing the structure and
mutual relationships between crisis management bodies and their tasks was amended. The Act further
foresees the preparation of implementing regulations which will specify the structure, appointment,
tasks and functioning of the bodies, as well as crisis management in more detail. In pursuit of this,
the MoD prepared a draft Regulation on Crisis Management, the National Crisis Management Centre
(NCMC) and two inter-ministerial analytical groups.

In 2017, the NCMC continued to update and upgrade its communication and information network, which
provides for a faster and more reliable transfer of data and information between the crisis management


-----

bodies. The NCMC also upgraded the multimedia equipment in the small conference and analytical
rooms through co-financing from the EU Fund.

###### 2.1 Strengthening resilience in civilian preparedness

Activities were carried out in the area of civil preparedness within the framework of NATO’s civil
emergency planning and in line with the fulfilment of commitments adopted in Warsaw by the heads
of states and governments and the strengthening of countries’ resilience.

The self-sufficient operation of all important functions and services of the country and the provision
of support to the armed and allied forces with civilian capabilities is more important, as within the
context of NATO’s strengthened deterrence and defence posture, resilience is starting to become one of
the most important pillars of collective defence and security, even though it is entirely under national
jurisdiction, in line with Article 3 of the North Atlantic Treaty.

As the examination and execution of activities in the area of civil preparedness goes beyond simply
the Ministry of Defence, the MoD, as the coordinator and director of civil emergency planning in the
Republic of Slovenia, carried out a number of consultations and coordination meetings.

For the first time ever, seven areas related to the strengthening of the country’s resilience were
included in NATO’s Defence Planning Capability Survey (DPCS), which additionally strengthened interministerial cooperation and increased inter-ministerial awareness of the importance of resilience in
civil preparedness for both national and collective security and defence.

Simultaneously with NATO’s activities in the area of civil preparedness, and as part of a more
comprehensive approach by the EU towards security and defence, the activities and the work carried
out in the context of the joint EU framework for countering hybrid threats also started to intensify, with
the intent of raising awareness and increasing the strength of countries’ resilience to hybrid threats
and vulnerabilities. At an indirect level, the MoD was included in the preparation and harmonization of
an EU questionnaire on hybrid threats and the formation of indicators for their identification, including
special indicators in the area of critical infrastructure, among other things.


-----

###### 3 DEVELOPMENT OF CIVILIAN CAPABILITIES

 3.1 Civilian Functional Experts

In 2017, most of the efforts relating to civilian functional experts were oriented towards the provision of
the continuity of their work in IOM, and the additional manning of the post in the NATO Liaison Office
(NLO) in Skopje.

In 2017 the Republic of Slovenia participated in the provision of civilian capabilities to NATO’s IOM in
Kosovo, in the context of NATO’s initiative for the establishment of defence capabilities in Georgia, the
NATO Liaison Office (NLO) in Skopje and the Multinational Civil-Military Cooperation (CIMIC) Group
(MNCG) in Italy. In the same year ten civilian functional experts manned seven different positions in
IOM and within the NATO initiative. Within the framework of the NATO initiative for the establishment
of defence capabilities, one civilian functional expert operated in Georgia, one in the NATO Liaison
Office (NLO) in Skopje, two in the KFOR command as SPECAD POLAD, and six in the NATO Advisory
and Liaison Team (NALT), more specifically in the areas of contracts and public procurements, budget
and finance, and legal affairs. In addition to these, one Slovenian civilian functional expert continued
to serve as a liaison consultant in the Multinational CIMIC Group (MNCG) in Italy. Currently, the record
of qualified and trained civilian functional experts comprises 105 people.

In the light of strengthening civil-military cooperation, intense bilateral cooperation was in place with
the Multinational CIMIC Group (MNCG), related to the strengthening of the active role of civilian functional
experts and the integration of part of the civilian capabilities (a team of civilian functional experts) into
the MNCG structure. This was presented to the CIMIC/CMI community at the CIMIC Unit Commanders’
Conference, in the context of which a broader version and strategy of the civilian functional experts’
cooperation within the framework of the IOM command structures was presented. The MoD provided
an instructor for the CIMIC course.

With the support of and under the auspices of NATO’s CIMIC Centre of Excellence (CCOE), Slovenia
hosted the NATO CIMIC Staff & Field Worker & Functional Specialists Course. The close cooperation
with the CCOE in reference to the future strengthened cooperation, was rewarded by a working visit of
the CCOE Director to the Republic of Slovenia (MoD) and a return working visit.

With the MoD’s visit to the Bundeswehr Civil Military Cooperation Centre in Nienburg, Germany, a closer
cooperation was established with the institution, and the foundations for further cooperation were
formed. In line with past practice, the NATO CIMIC Education and Training Conference (NCETC) for
the implementation of training in the area of CIMIC was attended, at which the instructors who will
participate in international CIMIC courses in 2018 were confirmed.

###### 3.2 Cartographic and Geospatial Support to the Defence System

In the area of mapping and geospatial affairs, the MoD continued with the execution of developmental
tasks and maintenance of the mapping system, coordinated with the national military and NATO
standards and the NATO geospatial policy, with a view to providing mapping and geospatial support
to the SAF and to the protection and rescue services. In cooperation with the Surveying and Mapping


-----

Authority of the of the Republic of Slovenia and the Geodetic Institute of Slovenia, the contents of the
five systemic sheets of the military topographic map of the Republic of Slovenia were renewed and
printed. At this scale, a unified raster and vector data layer was established for the whole of Slovenia.
Two topographic maps were prepared at a scale of 1:25000 for the areas of Brežice and Vipava. For the
needs of mountain training and the cooperation of the SAF and ACPDR in the execution of protection,
rescue and relief tasks, a NATO interoperable topographic map was prepared at a scale of 1:25000 for
the Pohorje Massif area. New and current data were included in the military aviation navigation map of
the RS at a scale of 1:250000 and an updated ortophoto map of the SAF Main Training Area in Postojna
at a scale of 1:10000 was prepared.

In cooperation with the Geodetic Institute of Slovenia, a developmental task was carried out for the
upgrading of the editorial plan for the production of a military topographic map at a scale of 1:25000
was prepared. An entirely renovated test sheet was produced and supplemented by shading and other
characteristics and data which are important for the SAF.

For the purposes of preparing SAF members for exercises and IOM, the MoD acquired certain cartographic
material and other geospatial data based on agreements concluded with the countries of the Alliance
in the geospatial region, and from the Allied Supreme Command in Europe (SHAPE). A report on the
available interoperable cartographic bases for the area of the RS was prepared.


-----

###### 4 INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY OPERATIONS

The MoD intelligence and security operations were carried out in line with the Defence Act and with
the adopted annual work programme, objectives and tasks. The key tasks and pursued objectives were
linked to the provision of adequate intelligence and security support to SAF members and other MoD
employees in Slovenia and abroad, as well as to cooperation with other national security system bodies.

The Intelligence and Security Service analyzed and assessed data used by high state representatives in
the adoption of decisions on national security and the defence policy, and drew attention to potential
sources of threat to the defence system in Slovenia and abroad.

For the purposes of providing intelligence, counterintelligence and security support to the SAF in
Slovenia and abroad, the Intelligence and Security Service cooperated directly with the Intelligence,
Counterintelligence and Security Division of the SAF General Staff. During the period concerned, the
Intelligence and Security Service actively cooperated with partner intelligence and security services,
NATO, and the EU in the areas of intelligence, counterintelligence and security.

In line with Article 32 of the Defence Act, the Intelligence and Security Service identified and assessed
the military, political and security conditions and the military capabilities outside the state, and
collected and assessed data on the situation in the areas where SAF members and MoD employees are
active within international peacekeeping forces and peacetime NATO structures abroad i.e. in Kosovo,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Lebanon, Afghanistan, Iraq, on the Golan Heights, in Mali, in the sea area of
south-east Sicily, which represents the wider area of the EUNAVFOR Med humanitarian operation, and
in Latvia.

The basic security-related tasks in the Intelligence and Security Service were focused on detecting,
investigating and preventing security threats to people, work posts, facilities and areas of special
importance for defence in Slovenia and abroad. The Intelligence and Security Service also carried
out functions of detecting and preventing the activities of foreign intelligence services of military
organizations and other bodies and organizations which pose a threat to the defence interests of
Slovenia, the SAF and the MoD.


-----

###### 5 EQUIPPING, REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT, STANDARDIZATION AND CODIFICATION

 5.1 Equipping

In 2017, the MoD continued to carry out major projects of equipping the SAF with military equipment,
weapons and other equipment in line with the objectives laid down in the MoD planning documents: the
project to establish the Medium Battalion Battlegroup; equipping the SAF units for Explosive Ordnance
Disposal (EOD) and Joint Terminal Attack Control (JTAC); equipping the SAF with engineering machinery;
upgrading of the Pilatus aircraft; equipping the SAF for intelligence and reconnaissance operations
(unmanned aerial vehicles, IMINT); the reconstruction of the MoD’s vehicle fleet; communication
equipment; investment maintenance of aircraft technical equipment; the modernization of the Cerklje
ob Krki Military Airfield; the Air Command and Control System – ACCS Software Based Element
(ACCS-ASBE); capacity building of the SAF Poček Central Firing Range and Training Area; the 4x4 Light
Wheeled Armoured Vehicle with increased ballistic and counter-mine protection; the rehabilitation of
warehouses; and the regulation of the ventilation system in ammunition depots.

The investment documentation was prepared mainly for the projects that are included in the
Medium-Term Defence Programme of the Republic of Slovenia for 2016-2020 and the MoD Financial
Plan for 2018 and 2019.

###### 5.2 Real Estate Management

In 2017, works for the establishment or upgrading of the computer and CIS network within SAF facilities,
namely in the Franc Uršič Barracks in Novo mesto and in the Štula Military Medical Unit, were carried
out. Maintenance work on the administrative part of the SAF was carried out in accordance with the
contract for the maintenance of technical security systems. In addition to the regular maintenance,
a contract for the upgrading and updating of the technical security system was carried out at the
following locations in 2017: the Franc Uršič Barracks in Novo mesto; the Baron Andrej Čehovin Barracks
in Postojna; the Vincenc Repnik Barracks in Slovenska Bistrica; the Stanislav Požar Barracks in Pivka;
the Technical Depot of Ammunition and Mine Explosive Ordnance in Borovnica; the Technical Depot of
Ammunition and Mine Explosive Ordnance in Zgornja Ložnica; the Technical Depot of Ammunition and
Mine Explosive Ordnance in Zaloška Gorica; the Technical Depot of Ammunition and Mine Explosive
Ordnance in Mačkovec; the Technical Depot of Ammunition and Mine Explosive Ordnance in Drulovka;
the Ivan Cankar Barracks in Vrhnika; the Joint Operations Centre facility; the Edvard Peperko Barracks in
Ljubljana; and the administrative building of the SAF General Staff in Ljubljana. Project documentation
for an optical connection between the motorway and Brnik was prepared. Based on this documentation,
the MoD will continue to build the MoD and the SAF optical network. Project documentation for the
replacement of the worn-out cable conduit and transformer station of Vojna pošta Grosuplje was also
prepared.

Regular maintenance and larger construction works were carried out in flats and facilities (the
administrative part) of the MoD. For the execution of these tasks, new multi-annual maintenance
contracts were concluded. The contractor selection process for the maintenance of facilities and the


-----

SAF’s built infrastructure is in place, and technical specifications for the maintenance of lifts, hydrants
and fire extinguishers in the MoD facilities are being prepared.

In recent years, the percentage of flats registered in the Land Register has been increasing. Of the 1026
flats managed by the MoD, only 78 flats are still not registered in the Land Register, so 92% of the flats
have now been registered. Of the 1026 flats managed by the MoD, 145 flats are unoccupied. Due to the
sale of old, unoccupied flats, and the allocation of flats which are ready for occupation to applicants for
MoD flats following invitations to tender, the percentage of occupied flats has increased.

The MoD acquired 114 energy performance certificates, predominantly for flats.

The Rules Amending the Rules on the Ministry of Defence Flats was adopted.

In the area of forest management, 24 decisions and 19 expert opinions issued by the Slovenian Forest
Service were implemented. For purposes of restoration of the consequences of natural disasters, the
MoD cut down 6110.73 m[3] net wood mass. The MoD sold wood in the amount of EUR 35,520. However,
not all the felled wood has yet been sold.

###### 5.3 Standardization and Codification

The adoption and implementation of Slovenian Military Standards in support of the establishment
and maintenance of SAF capabilities is one of the cornerstones of achieving the interoperability of
the Slovenian defence system with NATO, NATO member states, NATO partner countries, and the
EU member states. A particular focus was on the elimination of backlogs in the national approval of
STANAGs, with an emphasis on important Alliance standards arising from the commitments made in
Wales and Warsaw. Slovenia’s backlog has been reduced by 368 STANAGs.

This year, the MoD standardization plan, which includes the adoption and implementation of Slovenian
Military Standards, as well as the certification of NATO standards, was not implemented in accordance
with expectations. In 2017, a total of 62 Slovenian Military Standards were adopted, resulting in the
realization of two-thirds of the MoD standardization plan. Fifty-four decisions and orders were issued
for the implementation of Slovenian Military Standards. In the process of the national certification
of NATO STANAGs and STANRECs, 148 national responses were signed, which is a deviation from
the planned elimination of backlogs. The progress made in 2017 in response to the critical standards
identified by NATO was insufficient. Since defence standardization should be addressed in a systematic
(comprehensive) way, amendments to the Defence Act were proposed. To this end the MoD will have
to supplement the Standardization Act, and will have to prepare new Rules on the Implementation of
Standardization at the MoD.
Codification is the only universal logistics tool that contributes to the transparency and reduction
in costs of the equipping and maintenance of weapons and military equipment. The codification of
supply resources is incorporated throughout the equipping processes, from investment programmes to
delivery orders, acquisitions, and the introduction of weapons and military equipment into operational
use, to their removal from service and divestment. The results are best reflected in the optimization
of stocks and in achieving the best prices for spare parts. Codification strengthens the status of the
Slovenian economy and other organizations which manufacture products and provide services for the
needs of the defence systems of NATO member states and partner countries.


-----

Within the framework of its national competence, the National Codification Bureau of Slovenia
allocated 148 new NATO codification numbers (NSNs) to Slovenian products in 2017, and registered
42 Slovenian companies, which makes 320 altogether. On the basis of the acquisition of new supply
resources, Slovenia was registered as the user of 556 NSNs; altogether it uses 34,640 NSNs. A total of
1159 identifications of material resources were carried out in the register of material (SAP SKEV). Data
for identification was fully prepared in the SAP and e-ZAHMAT software environments, which ensures
quality data for use in logistics processes. Significant progress was also achieved in the introduction of
the new NATO rules, ACodP-2 and ACodP-3.

###### 5.4 Cooperation with Military Industry

Sixteen activities were carried out in cooperation with the military industry, such as presentations of
Slovenia’s defence industry organized for national and foreign diplomatic representatives. In cooperation
with the Slovenian Defence Industry Cluster (GOIS), a new catalogue of Slovenia’s defence industry was
prepared. Together with representatives from Slovenia’s industry, the MoD actively participated at the
DSEI arms fair in London, and the AUSA Annual Meeting and Exposition in Washington, in the testing of
a gamma ray locator and a telephone terminal and in pressure testing of mortars.

In cooperation with the Ministry of Economic Development and Technology and the Slovenian
Defence Industry Cluster (GOIS), the MoD, among other things, organized a meeting of more than 50
representatives of the Slovenian defence industry and scientific institutions.


-----

###### 6 COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SYSTEM (CIS)

 6.1 Information Security

The key activities were focused on the management and maintenance of systems and devices for the
provision of information security within the Ministry of Defence’s communication and information
system (CIS) and its subsystems, which provide interoperability within the Alliance.

The MoD cooperates with a qualified trust service provider providing certificates for electronic
signatures, electronic seals, electronic time seals and the authentication of websites for MoD users. In
2017, the service provider carried out the adjustments required due to the entry into force of Regulation
(EU) No. 910/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council on electronic identification and trust
services for electronic transactions in the internal market, and the repealing of Directive1999/93/EC,
successfully passed the compliance assessment, and was included in the reliable list of qualified trust
service providers for the issue of qualified certificates for electronic signatures and electronic seals.

Also this year the MoD placed great emphasis on training and awareness-raising in the area of cyber
security. To this end, the MoD participated in two important international exercises on cyber security
(response to cyber threats) – in the EU Cyber Europe exercise as a participant, and in the NATO Cyber
Coalition exercise as the holder of the exercise, which took place in the Republic of Slovenia. The
purpose of the two exercises was the training of technical and operational procedures for cyber defence,
the promotion of cooperation between the training audience, and making decisions to minimize the
consequences of cyber attack in the Republic of Slovenia, within the framework of the Alliance.

###### 6.2 Information Infrastructure

In 2017, the MoD renovated part of the stationary computer equipment, the system software for
archiving emails within the MoD internet network, and modernized and arranged the CIS MoD PUBLIC
network, which contributed to the availability and security of the system. The MoD adapted the system
to the requirements of the eIDAS Regulation and introduced the functionality of regular testing of the
validity of digital certificates.

###### 6.3 Communication infrastructure

The MoD renovated some telecommunication facilities, extended the optical network at specific
locations, and set up a new and a more advanced telephone exchange control system. The new
location of the Permanent Representation of the Republic of Slovenia to NATO was furnished with
communication equipment. The MoD set up a supervised and secure system for providing wireless
access to the GOST (HOST) subsystem for external users.


-----

###### 6.4 IT Solutions

In 2017, the MoD upgraded the IT solution for the management of archives (the IRDG) with new
functionality – management of classified documents (NATO Restricted/EU restraint); the register
of material (SKEV); the information system for defence and protection duties (ISOZD); the public
procurement information system (ISOJAN); the real estate record (ENEP); and the unified accounting
(MFERAC), by following the legislation, automating the recording process, preparing reports, merging
data in different records, and ensuring the consistency of data and their protection.

Partial transfers to the new technology were carried out for the ISOZD, ENEP and SKEV systems. The
new technology offers greater safety, lower maintenance costs and more user-friendly access to the
information.

###### 6.5 Development of C4I Systems

The development of the C4I systems focused on supporting the General Staff of the SAF in the
preparation, execution and implementation of projects which will enable the SAF to increase its
mobility and connectivity within the Alliance. In cooperation with the SAF units, and especially the
72nd brigade, the 1st brigade and the Military Schools Centre, the MoD participated in the testing and
introduction of the CIS C2 systems into the Svarun and the CBRN Light Wheeled Armoured Vehicles,
and assisted in the preparations for the verification of the units’ capabilities and preparations for the
eFP mission in Latvia, and in the education and the preparation of environments for computer training
within the Military Schools Centre. The professional bodies of the SAF General Staff participated in the
analysis of the capability targets for Slovenia, in the preparation of different project documents and the
acceptance of standards for C4I.


-----

###### 7 INSPECTION AND INTERNAL AUDIT ACTIVITIES IN THE FIELD OF DEFENCE

 7.1 Inspections in the Field of Defence

In line with regulations, the Defence Inspectorate of the Republic of Slovenia (DIRS), as an MoD body,
performs inspections of the implementation of laws and other regulations, as well as of command
and control acts in the field of defence. It reviews, identifies and evaluates the preparedness and
performance of military commands, units and institutions, the status of defence preparations, the
implementation of military education and training, and the provision of administrative and technical
issues in the field of defence.
In line with the statutory provisions, the Inspectorate carries out inspections of the implementation of
the regulations on the handling of classified information at the MoD and the entire field of defence. It also
inspects the MoD in the implementation of the administrative and technical tasks of its organizational
units, except for the tasks and activities of the ACPDR and the Inspectorate of the RS for Protection
against Natural and Other Disasters (IRSPANOD).

Inspectors conduct procedures and decide on any violations in accordance with the Minor Offences Act.
The key objectives of the Inspectorate for 2017 were specified in the annual work plan:

–– Work planning and management of the Inspectorate;
–– Implementation of inspections in the field of defence;
–– Implementation of inspections in the area of classified information;
–– Conduct of procedures and decision-making in minor offence proceedings;
–– Training of DIRS inspectors and employees;
–– International cooperation.

To achieve the above objectives, the chief inspector directed special attention towards the planning and
coordination of the work of the Inspectorate, which was conducted on the basis of monthly and weekly
DIRS work plans.

In 2017, the Inspectorate carried out inspections in accordance with the adopted amendments to the
Rules on Inspection Procedures in the Field of Defence, which it started in 2016. The Inspectorate
carried out a total of 48 inspections, of which 40 were regular, five were special announced inspections,
and three were repeated inspections. The inspectors conducted these inspections over a period of 337
days. Based on the findings, a total of 226 inspection measures were issued, of which 222 were related
to the elimination of established deficiencies or non-compliance with regulations, and 4 were on the
termination of activities.

In accordance with the imposed inspection measures, the inspectors regularly monitored their
implementation, based on the analysis of notifications on the implementation received by the inspected
entities, and performed repeated inspections and took appropriate action by issuing inspection
decisions.

In accordance with the Minor Offences Act, the defence inspectors introduced appropriate minor
offence proceedings for the identified offences.


-----

The DIRS provided the Minister of Defence and the Secretary of State with up-to-date information on
the findings of inspections. Similarly, in 2017, on the basis of Article 32 of the Inspection Act, defence
inspectors submitted to the competent authorities several initiatives to improve the situation in
inspections.

###### 7.2 Internal Auditing

In 2017, the implementation of eight internal audits and two formal consulting engagements was
planned. In line with the annual work plan of the internal audit, all eight internal audits were carried
out. Of the two planned formal engagements, only one was carried out; however, a number of small
informal consulting engagements were completed.

Internal audits covered the following topics:

–– An internal audit of the state and functioning of internal controls and the correctness of the

procedure for the reimbursement of accommodation costs for employees in units and commands
abroad;

–– An internal audit of the state and the functioning of internal controls and the correctness of the

procedures relating to the reception of assets from suppliers;

–– An internal audit of the state and the functioning of internal controls and the correctness of the

purchase and use of medicinal products;

–– An internal audit of the state and the functioning of internal controls and the regularities with

regard to the SAF battle uniform in 2016;

–– An internal audit of the state and the functioning of internal controls and the correctness of the

procedure for the recording of purchased assets, and the transfer of the assets into use by business
partners, organizations and societies (the audited entity was the ACPDR);

–– An internal audit of the state and the functioning of internal controls and the correctness of

procedures for the withdrawal of material assets from use;

–– An internal audit of the state and the functioning of internal controls and the correctness of use of

business cards within the ACPDR and in the administrative part of the MoD (PU, 1911);

–– An internal audit of the state, the functioning, and the sufficiency of the system of internal controls

and the correctness of business in the awarding of lower value public procurements in the SAF in
2016.

The internal audit service issued 49 recommendations for improvements in operations in the audited
areas. Of these, 39 recommendations have been carried out, while the deadline for the implementation
of the remaining recommendations is still valid.


-----

###### 8 INVESTIGATIONS INTO AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS AND MILITARY AIRCRAFT INCIDENTS

The issuing of safety recommendations represents the implementation of measures to reduce or prevent
new threats and risks to military air traffic, and is based on the findings of investigations into aircraft
accidents and incidents. Investigations into accidents and incidents do not include the determination of
blame or responsibility of those involved in an accident or incident. Timely implementation of security
measures affects the elimination of or reduction in the possibility of the loss of human life and material
damage to military equipment and facilities on the ground.

In 2017, SAF aviation units reported 47 emergencies (in 2016, it was 69). However, it should be noted
that the number of flying hours decreased. Two investigations were concluded. In terms of flight safety,
the military aviation of the RS remains at the top of the NATO aviation scale, which is an additional
encouragement for further good work and a justification for future financial investment into the
renovation of military aircraft. The planning and implementation of the equipping of military helicopters
and airplanes with new Emergency Locator Transmitters, new radio stations and transponders should
be urgently accelerated, as the current ones do not in general meet the new European Aviation
Regulations (EASA) for flying in civilian air traffic. The Bell 412 helicopters, which have performed
the most difficult military tasks, especially within the system of protection against natural and other
disasters, for more than 25 years, should be modernized. Consideration should be given to the purchase
of new helicopters.

At the same time, all attention should be focused on the rejuvenation of the aviation personnel
structure, in particular the technical personnel. In addition, the MoD RS Aviation Investigation Body
needs one pilot investigator. The identification of the reasons for the occurrence of aircraft accidents
and serious incidents and the rapid introduction of corrective measures is urgent for the further
operational availability of the military aircraft of the SAF, but is not possible to carry this out without
competent and trained aviation personnel. Since investigator training takes a minimum two years, a
timely reassignment of an appropriate candidate from the SAF is urgent. The MoD also successfully
carried out the international and inter-ministerial crisis response exercise “Broken Wing 2017”. The
Service for the Investigation of Aircraft Accidents and Military Aircraft Incidents participated in the
investigation of accidents involving civilian aircraft which resulted in fatalities. In accordance with the
annual plan, theoretical and practical training was carried out for the permanent professional staff of
the MoD’s Aviation Investigation Authority in 2017.


-----

###### 9 STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION AND COOPERATION WITH CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS

 9.1 Strategic Communication

The Strategic Communication Service notified the public of different events and projects in a timely and
objective manner. It also ensured the transparency of operation of the MoD with the organization of
press conferences, the preparation of public releases and answers to press enquirers, and publications
of content on the internet, on social media and in the MoD’s publications, as well as through posting
short presentation videos on the MoD YouTube channel.

The following were organized at the ministerial level: eight press conferences in the area of protection
against natural and other disasters, preparations of new content for different laws and SAF activities,
and a number of public presentations of the proposals of new Acts, i.e. the Critical Infrastructure Act
adopted by the National Assembly at the end of December 2017, the draft Act on Defence, and the
draft Service in the Slovenian Armed Forces Act, which are, despite the MoD’s and the expert public’s
promotion of the urgent introduction of changes to the umbrella legislation, especially with a view
to arranging the status of soldiers and improving their position, at a halt in the National Assembly’s
proceedings.

Among the most important communication topics was the 20th anniversary of Slovenia’s inclusion
in IOMs, which was commemorated with the organization of a two-day conference and a number
of accompanying activities (an exhibition, a special issue of Revija SV (the SAF Magazine) “Že 20 let
v službi miru (In the service of peace for over twenty years)”, the setting-up of a themed website
www.20letmom.si, and a collection of scientific papers “20 years of Slovenia’s participation in IOM”,
etc.). The commemoration of the 100th anniversary of the Battle of Kobarid (Caporetto), one of the
most important battles of World War I, was likewise one of the topics that was given a lot of attention.
Another important communication topic was the Government of the RS’s decision to send SAF members
to NATO’s Enhanced Forward Presence operation in Latvia.

In line with the expectations and priority tasks of the MoD, the questions of both media and citizens
were mainly focused on the provision of adequate financial means for the operation of the MoD and on
investments in equipment, the purchase of vehicles, and the management of the lack of personnel in
the SAF. The MoD received a number of press inquiries with regard to the planned purchase of the 8x8
wheeled fighting vehicles for the needs of setting-up a Medium-Sized Battalion Battlegroup, and the
new Toyota Land Cruiser test vehicles. Also in 2017, the media and the interested public were curious
about the management of physical assets and the sell-off of uneconomic real estate and investments
in local infrastructure.

The MoD used both classic communication channels and social media to communicate with the public.
In 2017, an average of 1.8 press releases were published daily on the websites www.mo.gov.si and www.
slovenskavojska.si – a total of 660 releases. The releases were accompanied by 3154 photographs, 137
sound recordings and 53 video recordings, published on the MoD’s YouTube channel. Also in 2017, the
MoD published 359 posts on the MoD Twitter account and 75 posts on the Revija SV (the SAF Magazine)
Facebook account.


-----

A comparison with the past five-year period shows that the number of messages, accompanied by
photos and sound recordings and published on the different websites, remains the same, as does
the number of posts on Twitter. In 2017, the number of posts on YouTube was slightly lower than in
the previous years; however, an increase in the number of videos and tweets, which is in line with
the predominant guidelines of internet communication, is noted. The MoD published 53 videos on
YouTube which reached 18,884 views by the end of 2017. A video of Slovenian soldiers at an exercise in
Latvia received the most views. The video content was available to media houses for the preparation
of informational material, with archive footage regularly supplied to the media, and the MoD video
archive kept up to date.

In 2017, the MoD participated in a number of internet projects at the state level, such as upgrading the
unified editorial structure and the policy of the public administration’s websites, and the preparation
and publishing of metadata supported collections at the national open data portal, the OPSI (https://
podatki. Gov.si), in cooperation with the people competent for public information.

The Strategic Communication Service provided the design and page breaks of publications for print,
and the proofreading and editing of the military professional and other literature and material which
was submitted to the Government of the RS for treatment, including proposals for new Acts. The
MoD estimates over 10,000 pages were proofread. All the planned numbers of periodical publications
(the Revija SV (the SAF Magazine), Sodobni vojaški izzivi (Contemporary Military Challenges), Vojaška
zgodovina (Military History), Vojaškošolski zbornik (The Military Schools Collection of Scientific
Papers), and Ujma 31 (The Natural Disasters Magazine)) were published in line with the publishing
plan for military professional and other literature. In addition, several publications in the area of crisis
management and the publications for the occasion of the 20th anniversary of Slovenia’s participation
in IOM were released. However, the number of published professional military literature is lower.


-----

###### 10 NORMATIVE ACTS

 Internal General Normative Documents Adopted in 2017

REGULATIONS

Review of Regulations from the Field of Work of the MoD, adopt­ Publication:
ed in 2017

1 . Decree Amending the Decree on Voluntary Military Service Official Gazette of the
RS, No. 4/17

2 . Decree Amending the Decree Implementing the Decision on the Official Gazette of the
Union Civil Protection Mechanism RS, No. 13/17

3 . Decree Amending the Decree on the Slovenian Armed Forces’ Official Gazette of the
Rank Insignia RS, No. 13/17

4. Rules Amending the Rules on the Uniforms of the Slovenian Official Gazette of the
Armed Forces RS, No. 19/17

5 . Rules Amending the Rules on the Slovenian Armed Forces’ Official Gazette of the
Rank Insignia RS, No. 19/17

6 . Decree Amending the Decree on Authorizations for the Official Gazette of the
Production of and Trade in Military Weapons and RS, No. 30/17

Equipment and on Prior Authorization for the Import, Export,
Transit and Transfer of Defence-Related Products

7 . Rules Amending the Rules on Scholarships in the Slovenian Official Gazette of the
Armed Forces RS, No. 53/17

8 . The Critical Infrastructure Act Official Gazette of the
RS, No. 75/17

_Regulation in the area of protection against natural and other disasters is marked with an asterisk * in the_
_table_

**A Short Explanation of the Adoption Procedure and of the Content of Normative Changes in**
**the Field of Defence and Protection against Natural and other Disasters**
(1) By adopting the Decree Amending the Decree on Voluntary Military Service, the basis for the
calculation of soldiers’ revenue from voluntary military service was increased from 65% to 90% of
the minimum salary in the RS, due to the increased interest in voluntary military service, which has
been in partial decline in recent years. (2) Adopting the Decree Amending the Decree Implementing
the Decision on the Union Civil Protection Mechanism continued the implementation of the Union’s
decision on a comprehensive approach to disaster management in EU countries. The Decree rearranged
and redefined certain types of risk assessments for disasters and disaster management assessments,
and defined the competence of bodies and their tasks and the deadlines for the preparation of risk
assessments for disasters and the risk management capacity assessments. (3) By adopting the Decree
Amending the Decree on the Slovenian Armed Forces’ Rank Insignia, the MoD followed certain new
trends in SAF uniforms, new technologies in the production of specific parts of uniforms, and the actual
requirements during the implementation of military service, especially in IOM. The largest size of the
SAF rank insignia was determined, for both those worn on the sleeves of the uniform and those worn
on headgear. The MoD abolished the use of marking on helmets, and allowed the adjustment of colours

|Col1|Review of Regulations from the Field of Work of the MoD, adopt­ ed in 2017|Publication:|
|---|---|---|
|1 .|Decree Amending the Decree on Voluntary Military Service|Official Gazette of the RS, No. 4/17|
|2 .|Decree Amending the Decree Implementing the Decision on the Union Civil Protection Mechanism|Official Gazette of the RS, No. 13/17|
|3 .|Decree Amending the Decree on the Slovenian Armed Forces’ Rank Insignia|Official Gazette of the RS, No. 13/17|
|4.|Rules Amending the Rules on the Uniforms of the Slovenian Armed Forces|Official Gazette of the RS, No. 19/17|
|5 .|Rules Amending the Rules on the Slovenian Armed Forces’ Rank Insignia|Official Gazette of the RS, No. 19/17|
|6 .|Decree Amending the Decree on Authorizations for the Production of and Trade in Military Weapons and Equipment and on Prior Authorization for the Import, Export, Transit and Transfer of Defence-Related Products|Official Gazette of the RS, No. 30/17|
|7 .|Rules Amending the Rules on Scholarships in the Slovenian Armed Forces|Official Gazette of the RS, No. 53/17|
|8 .|The Critical Infrastructure Act|Official Gazette of the RS, No. 75/17|


-----

of all rank insignia on SAF uniforms due to field requirements. (4) For the purposes of unified wearing of
the SAF rank insignia and due to the requirements of military service and certain innovations introduced
by the Rules on the Slovenian Armed Forces’ Rank Insignia, the Rules Amending the Rules on the
Slovenian Armed Forces’ Uniforms detailed the wearing of specific rank insignia and the Slovenian flag
on military uniforms. (5) By adopting the Rules Amending the Rules on the Slovenian Armed Forces’
Rank Insignia, the insignia for the level of qualification of military personnel was redefined, the size of
the SAF unit and command insignia was defined in detail, and the possibility of wearing other insignia on
military uniforms redefined (the VETERAN insignia, the insignia of the Manoeuvre Structure of National
Defence (MSNZ) members, etc.). (6) By adopting the Decree Amending the Decree on Authorizations
for the Production of and Trade in Military Weapons and Equipment and on Prior Authorization for the
Import, Export, Transit and Transfer of Defence-Related Products, a modified list of defence products
defined by Commission Directive (EU) 2017/433, dated 27 March 2017, and the Amending Directive
2009/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to the list of defence-related
products (Official Journal L No. 79 of 15 3 was prepared. 2017) was implemented into the Slovenian
legal order; certain administrative restrictions in the area of transit and temporary export of military
weapons and equipment and the transfer of defence products were also eliminated. (7) By adopting
the Rules Amending the Rules on Scholarships in the Slovenian Armed Forces, the responsibilities of
scholarship holders towards the MoD, especially scholarship holders for officers and officer pilots, were
specified in more detail. (8) By adopting the Critical Infrastructure Act, individual critical infrastructure
sectors and the criteria for their identification were defined. The basic principles and the planning
of critical infrastructure protection, the tasks of the bodies and organizations in the field of critical
infrastructure, the notification, reporting and provision of support in the decision-making process, and
the protection of data and the control in the critical infrastructure area were defined.

INTERNAL AND GENERAL NORMATIVE DOCUMENTS ADOPTED IN 2017 RULES


-----

-----

INSTRUCTIONS


-----

###### 11 RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGICAL PROJECTS

In the area of research and development, in 2017 the MoD strengthened international research and
technological cooperation, provided support in the area of protection and rescue, and strengthened
the connection between research and industry participation. The MoD was extremely active in the
preparation of documents for the execution of activities and public tenders in the field of defence in the
context of the European Defence Agency (EDA) and the European Commission, and included Slovenian
institutions and companies in the cooperation. The MoD participated in the preparation of development
and research priority tasks based on the European defence package, and joined the preparation of
projects at the implementation level at which Slovenia will take part. Within the NATO Science and
Technology Organization, the MoD took part in 16 activities held at different panels with representatives
of external institutions or with MoD RS experts.

For the more successful inclusion of Slovenia’s know-how and companies into the international research
and technological environment, the MoD prepared conditions for the implementation of international
networking activities. The MoD also successfully completed the development of touring skis, presented
the project to the public, and thus promoted the transfer of knowledge to the industry.

With different research and development projects, the MoD supported different areas of protection,
rescue and relief: management, seismic safety, avalanche protection and fire safety.


-----

##### IMPLEMENTATION OF RESOURCE PLANS

###### 1 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FINANCIAL PLAN

In 2017, the Ministry of Defence spent EUR 406.6 million on the accomplishment of its tasks, which
makes up 97.6% of the applicable financial plan and 111% of the adopted financial plan.

2017 Budgetary Resources

**Adopted Amendments** **Applicable 2017 FP** **Realization 2017**

**2017**

**(17 November 2016)** **(31 December 2017)**

**FINANCIAL PLAN** 366,126,069 416,425,747 406,568,553

**Percent of the Adopt­** 100 113.7 111
**ed FP**

**Difference in the Ad­** 50,299,678 40,442,484
**opted FP**

###### 1.1 MoD Financial Plan

The adopted financial plan of the Ministry of Defence for 2017 was for EUR 366,126,069.

On 31 December 2017, the applicable financial plan amounted to EUR 416,425,747, which is EUR 50.3
million higher than the adopted financial plan. Of this, the integral (budget) funds increased by EUR
28 million. The increase was a consequence of additional funds received by the MoD based on the
RS Government’s Decision to improve the readiness of the SAF and build its capacities in 2017; to
cover urgent obligations with regard to funding the transport costs of emergency medical helicopter
assistance; and to refund the expenses incurred during the performance of tasks related to the provision
of the accommodation and care of migrants.

The appropriations increased by EUR 23.7 million, chiefly as a result of higher revenue from state
property management, which also represents a resource for equipping the SAF, and maintaining its
equipment and infrastructure. Their value was estimated when preparing the budget, while the final
amount depends on the actual inflow of funds and the transfer of unused funds from the previous year.

**The realization of the financial plan, in the amount of EUR 406,568,553, represents 4.44% of the**
national budget and 0.94% of GDP. In comparison to the applicable financial plan, the realization
of integral funds was 99.9%. The realization of appropriations was 72.5%, and the realization of EU
projects was 58.6% (centralized and other programmes: the Internal Security Fund, and EU projects
related to protection and rescue).

The MoD’s integral funds represent 93.8%, appropriations 6.1%, and the EU projects 0.1% of the
financial plan’s realization.

|Col1|Adopted Amendments 2017 (17 November 2016)|Applicable 2017 FP (31 December 2017)|Realization 2017|
|---|---|---|---|
|FINANCIAL PLAN|366,126,069|416,425,747|406,568,553|
|Percent of the Adopt­ ed FP|100|113.7|111|
|Difference in the Ad­ opted FP||50,299,678|40,442,484|


-----

The Proportion of the MoD’s Financial Plan in the National Budget and GDP in Millions of Euros

**2013** **2014** **2015** **2016** **2017**

**National Budget** 9,314,513 9,654,921 9,797,661 9,000,298 9,156,852

**MoD Financial Plan** 350,703 339,949 343,939 389,227 406,569

**DEFENCE EXPENDITURE** 381,658 366,460 361,376 406,166 422,277

**GDP in Million EUR** 36,239 37,615 38,837 40,418 43,278

**% of the MoD’s FP in the NB** 3.77 3.52 3.51 4.32 4.44

**% of the MoD’s FP in GDP** 0.97 0.90 0.89 0.96 0.94

**% of DE in GDP** 1.05 0.97 0.93 1.00 0.98

**The difference between the applicable financial plan and the realization is the uncommitted EUR**
9.9 million: EUR 255,446 in integral funds and EUR 9.4 million in appropriations, all of which will be
transferred to the 2018 budget year.

In comparison to 2016, the realization in 2017 was EUR 17.3 million higher (index 104.5). The realization
of integral funds indicates an increase of EUR 14 million, while appropriations increased by EUR 3.3
million. In the spending structure, the proportion for salaries decreased by 1.6 percentage points. The
proportion of investments increased by 2.6 percentage points.

Comparison of the Realization of the FP in the Past Two Years in EUR

**ECONOMIC PURPOSES** **REALISATION** **Structure** **REALISATION** **Structure**

**IN 2016** **IN 2017**

**INTEGRAL FUNDS** 367,440,824 94.4 381,417,387 93.8

**APPROPRIATIONS** 21,566,381 5.5 24,900,405 6.1

**EU PROJECTS** 219,543 0.06 250,761 0.06

**MoD TOTAL** 389,226,748 100 406,568,553 100

The overview of expenditure by budget users shows an increase in the share of the MoD administration
by 1.3 percentage points in comparison to 2016 (increased spending of appropriations). The share of
the ACPDR decreased by 1.3 percentage points, while the share of other users remained the same. The
table below presents the realization of budget users.

Realization of the 2017 Financial Plan by Direct Budget Users in EUR

**MoD TOTAL** **BU 1911** **BU 1912** **BU 1913** **BU 1914 SAF** **BU 1915 DIRS**

**Administra­** **ACPDR** **IRSPANOD**

**tive Part**

**406,568,553** 53,527,279 34,350,587 2,338,748 315,675,627 676,313

100 13.2 8.4 0.6 77.6 0.2

Graph 1 depicts the realization by budget users for the period 2008-2017 (base year 2008). In comparison
to 2008, all users had lower realization: the index of the ACPDR and the IRSPANOD was 92; the SAF’s
index was 74; the index of the MoD’s administration was 69; and the index of the RS Defence Inspectorate
was 63.

|Col1|2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|National Budget|9,314,513|9,654,921|9,797,661|9,000,298|9,156,852|
|MoD Financial Plan|350,703|339,949|343,939|389,227|406,569|
|DEFENCE EXPENDITURE|381,658|366,460|361,376|406,166|422,277|
|GDP in Million EUR|36,239|37,615|38,837|40,418|43,278|
|% of the MoD’s FP in the NB|3.77|3.52|3.51|4.32|4.44|
|% of the MoD’s FP in GDP|0.97|0.90|0.89|0.96|0.94|
|% of DE in GDP|1.05|0.97|0.93|1.00|0.98|

|ECONOMIC PURPOSES|REALISATION IN 2016|Structure|REALISATION IN 2017|Structure|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|INTEGRAL FUNDS|367,440,824|94.4|381,417,387|93.8|
|APPROPRIATIONS|21,566,381|5.5|24,900,405|6.1|
|EU PROJECTS|219,543|0.06|250,761|0.06|
|MoD TOTAL|389,226,748|100|406,568,553|100|

|MoD TOTAL|BU 1911 Administra­ tive Part|BU 1912 ACPDR|BU 1913 IRSPANOD|BU 1914 SAF|BU 1915 DIRS|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|406,568,553|53,527,279|34,350,587|2,338,748|315 ,675,627|676,313|
|100|13.2|8.4|0.6|77.6|0.2|


-----

Chart 1: The Growth Index of Realization by Budget Users (Base Year 2008)

**MoD (1911)** **ACPDR (1912)** **IRSPANOD (1913)** **SAF (1914)** **DIRS (1915)**

The pie chart below depicts the breakdown of realization by economic purpose.

Breakdown of 2017 Realization by Economic Purpose

SOCIETIES FOR VETERANS: 0.4   EU PROJECTS: 0.1

APPROPRIATIONS: 6.1

INVESTMENTS: 6.9

CURRENT EXPENDITURE: 22.6

SALARIES: 63.9


-----

**Salaries, in the amount of EUR 259.9 million, represent 63.9% of the total MoD expenditure. In**
recent years, the proportion designated for salaries has been decreasing, while the proportion of
investments has been increasing.

**Current expenditure amounts to EUR 92 million, which represents 22.6% of total spending. Of this, EUR**
20.3 million are current transfers, including the costs of membership in NATO and EU bodies, the cofinancing of societies for veterans, scholarships, and the co-financing of activities of the Euro-Atlantic
Council of Slovenia and the international project The Soča Valley – The Walk of Peace. The ACPDR
co-financed firefighting units, societies and NGOs which form part of the operational protection, rescue
and relief structure.


**Investment expenditure stood at EUR 28 million in integral funds (including investment transfers),**
accounting for 6.9% of the total MoD expenditure. Investment transfers totalled EUR 3.9 million (the
co-financing of firefighting units, societies and NGOs, and the co-financing of local infrastructure). An
important resource for providing equipment to the SAF is dedicated revenue, which the MoD generates
by selling movable and immovable property, and by renting facilities. EUR 13.9 million of appropriations
were used for investments.

The dynamics of the individual categories of the MoD’s expenditure in the period between 2008 and
2017 is depicted in the line chart below.


The Growth Index of Realization by Economic Purpose (Base Year 2008)


SALARIES CURRENT EXPENDITURES INVESTMENT EXPENDITURES APPROPRIATIONS


-----

###### Overview of the Realization by Programme Structure

2017 saw the implementation of the financial plan in line with programme planning. The financial plan
was implemented through three policies, five programmes, thirteen sub-programmes, and seventy-two
measures or projects. The MoD’s fundamental policy is Policy 07: Defence and Protection, and three
programmes: Defence System and Crisis Management, Military Defence, and Protection against
Natural and Other Disasters. In the context of Policy 18: Culture and Civil Society, the MoD co-financed
the activities of societies and associations acting for veterans in the public interest, in accordance with
the Rules on the Criteria for Co-Financing War Veterans’ Societies or Associations (Official Gazette of
the RS, Nos. 5/15, 89/15). As part of Policy 23: Intervention Programmes and Commitments, the MoD
settled the costs arising from the migrant issues.

2017 Financial Plan Realization by Programme Structure in EUR

|CODE OF POLICY/PRO­ GRAMME|TITLE OF POLICY/PROGRAMME/SUB-PROGRAMME|Col3|REALIZATION IN 2017|STRUCTURE|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|07|DEFENCE AND PROTECTION||401,927,162|98.9|
|0701|Defence System and Crisis Management||52,714,882|13.0|
||070101|Common Defence Functions and Defence Planning|27,265,245|6.7|
||070102|International Defence Cooperation|5,595,346|1.4|
||070103|Equipment and Infrastructure|19,177,979|4.7|
||070104|Inspections in the Field of Defence|676,313|0.2|
|0702|Military Defence||313,825,648|77.2|
||070201|SAF Human Resources Management, Education and Support|236,805,828|58.2|
||070202|Operational Tasks and Readiness of the SAF|57,522,629|14.1|
||070203|Infrastructure and Equipment of the SAF|4,062,524|1.0|
||070204|Membership of International Organizations and Cooper­ ation with the Local Environment|15,434,667|3.8|
|0703|Protection against Natural and Other Disasters||35,386,632|8.7|
||070301|Operation of the Protection, Rescue and Relief System|17,665,716|4.3|
||070302|Readiness of the Protection, Rescue and Relief System|15,382,168|3.8|
||070303|Inspection and Tasks Related to Minor Offences|2,338,748|0.6|
|18|CULTURE AND CIVIL SOCIETY||1,488,709|0.4|
|1804|Support to Non-Governmental Organizations and Civil Society||1,488,709|0.4|
||180406|Support to Non-Governmental Organizations in the Area of War Legislation|1,488,709|0.4|
|23|INTERVENTION PROGRAMMES AND COMMITMENTS||3,152,682|0.8|
|2301|General Budget Reservation||3,152,682|0.8|
||230102|Funds for Mass Migrations|3,152,682|0.8|
|MoD TOTAL|||406,568,553|100|


-----

###### 1.2 Defence Expenditure

The realized 2017 defence expenditure stood at EUR 422 million, accounting for 0.98% of GDP (IMAD,
Spring Forecast of Economic Trends 2018). It was higher than the adopted amendments by EUR 38
million (index 109.9). In comparison to the realization in 2016, the defence expenditure increased by
EUR 16.1 million.

Defence system resources (the financial plan of the Slovenian Armed Forces, the MoD administration,
and the RS Defence Inspectorate) represented 87% of the defence expenditure. The remaining 13%
was represented by military pensions, while the resources of the Office for the Protection of Classified
Information barely reached EUR 0.5 million.

Comparison of the Percentage of Approved and Realized Defence Expenditure in GDP

The chart shows that realized defence expenditure reached the lowest percentage of GDP in 2015,
i.e. 0.93%. The highest percentage was reached in 2010, when defence expenditure stood at 1.61% of
GDP. The highest percentage of the approved defence expenditure was recorded in 2006 and 2009, i.e.
1.59% of GDP. In the period 2001-2017, both the average approved and the average realized defence
expenditure represented 1.3% of GDP.


-----

###### 2 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PERSONNEL PLAN

 2.1 Implementation of the Personnel Plan in the Administrative Part of the MoD

In accordance with the Joint Personnel Plan of the RS Government, the number of personnel in the
administrative part of the MoD, as of 31 December 2017, was 1118 public employees, of which eight were
trainees. Due to the needs of several organizational units to change the systemization of work posts for
the employment of trainees, the MoD concluded employment contracts for the duration of traineeship
with eight of the permitted eleven candidates in 2017. If the trainees are subtracted, 14 people less
than the permitted number were employed by the MoD in 2017. The failure to achieve the permitted
number of employees on 31 December 2017 arose from departures in the later part of the year and
lengthy outplacement procedures, which were a result of the health limitations of selected candidates,
repeated calls for applications due to the unsuitability of applicants, delays in announcing the finality
of the decisions not to select candidates, the duration of the notice period of selected candidates with
their current employers, and the amount of administrative tasks, which are proportional to the number
of applicants. As of 31 December 2017, the procedures for the employment of ten new candidates were
in the final stages, and will have been concluded by the beginning of 2018. In 2017, the administrative
part of the MoD employed 42 new public employees (including the new employees who are excluded
from the Personnel Plan), while 43 left. In 2017, fixed-term employment contracts with public work
employees were not renewed after their termination, which means that the MoD has no public work
employees at present.

The table below shows the permitted number of employees by individual year. It shows that the MoD
has been fulfilling the RS Government Decisions regarding employment since 2009.

**Year** **Allowed Situation Based on** **Implementation of the** **Difference**

**the Personnel Plan** **Personnel Plan**

1 2 3=2-1

2008 1359 1378 19

2009 1328 1328 0

2010 1310 1300 -10

2011 1281 1274 -7

2012 1259 1190 -69

2013 1170 1161 -9

2014 1158 1134 -24

2015 1124 1123 -1

2016 1135 1130 -5

2017 1135 1118 -14

_*The permitted numbers of employees in 2016 and 2017 include the permitted numbers of trainees._


-----

###### 2.2 Personnel Plan Implementation in the SAF

 2.2.1 Active Component

The Medium-Term Defence Programme of the RS provided for 7,254 members in the SAF active
component in 2017. On 31 December 2017, the SAF numbered 6777 members, meaning that the predicted
size of the SAF had reached 93%. The structure of employees on 31 December 2017: 1071 officers; 1970
NCOs; 2711 soldiers; 261 senior military specialists; 318 junior military specialists; and 446 civilians.
This situation was especially unsatisfactory with regard to soldiers, where the predicted number of
employees only reached 80%.

In 2017, 286 members left the SAF (21 officers, 33 NCOs, 202 soldiers, 15 military specialists and 22
civilians), which is less than in 2016 (316), 2015 (381), 2014 (312) and 2013 (292). The Personnel Plan
was not fully realized. The main reason for the failure to achieve the planned number of members is a
reduced interest in employment with the SAF.

Comparison of the SAF Active Component in 2017 and 2016

**Status** **Situation as of** **Situation as of** **Difference**

**31 December 2017** **31 December 2016**

Officers 1071 1061 10

NCOs 1970 1960 10

Soldiers 2711 2886 -175

Senior Military Specialists 261 255 6

Junior Military Specialists 318 315 3

Civilian Personnel 446 443 3

**TOTAL** **6777** **6920** **-143**

Ratio between Officers, NCOs and Soldiers


**Category** **Officers** **NCOs** **Soldiers**


2017 1 1.8 2.5

2016 1 1.9 2.7

2015 1 1.9 2.8

2014 1 1.8 2.8

From 2010 to 2015, the average age of SAF members increased from 36.5 to 40.9.

Average Age of SAF Members Between 2010 and 2017

|Category|2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017|
|---|---|
|Soldiers|29.62 30.11 30.78 31.41 32.6 33.6 33.3 34.1|
|Total|36.5 36.89 37.46 38.23 39.3 39.8 40.4 40.9|


-----

_Planned and Achieved Number of SAF Employees by Year_

7800

7600

7400

7200

7000

6800

6600

6400

6200

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017

SOPR SAF Personnel Plan Realisa�on

###### 2.2.2 Employment in the SAF

To achieve the target number of employees in the SAF (7254), the MoD was permitted to employ 476
candidates in 2017. In 2017, 134 members were newly employed in the SAF: 12 officers, 1 NCO, 104
soldiers, 5 civilians, and 12 military specialists. At the end of 2017, the SAF employed 6,777 members,
which makes up 93.4% of the Personnel Plan (7,254 members). Despite the continuation of employment
up to the age of 27 and a number of other measures to complete the SAFs active component, the
personnel plan was not fully realized.

###### 2.2.3 Voluntary Military Service

In 2017, 192 candidates applied for voluntary military service, 153 of whom were men and 39 were
women. Due to non-compliance with general (cancellation of the application before signing the
contract, and reservations based on criminal records and security clearance) and health conditions,
only 83 of these – 69 male and 14 female – were assigned to voluntary military service. A total of 58
candidates successfully completed the training, which makes up 70% of the assigned candidates. In
comparison to the previous year, the number of candidates who applied for and were assigned to
voluntary military service and who successfully completed the training increased by over 10%. Of the
candidates who had previously done voluntary military service, 13 were employed in the SAF in 2017.


-----

###### 2. 2. 4 Contract Reserve Component

The Medium-Term Defence Programme 2016-2020 stipulated that in 2017 the number of contract
reserve members would be 1,500, which was also foreseen in the SAF’s Personnel Plan. The realization
of the SAF’s plan to employ contract reserve members in 2017 was 63%.

On 31 December 2017, the SAF contract reserve numbered 940 members, of whom 23 were officers, 40
NCOs, 812 soldiers, 41 senior military specialists and 24 junior military specialists.
A total of 285 candidates applied for military service in the contract reserve in 2017, and 142 contracts
concerning military service in the SAF contract reserve component were concluded. During the same
period, contracts with 64 contract members were terminated or were not extended.

Comparison of the Number of Contract Reserve Members in 2017 and 2016

**Status** **Situation as of 31** **Situation as of 31** **Difference**

**December** **December**

**2017** **2016**

Officers 23 24 -1

NCOs 40 47 -7

Soldiers 812 788 24

Senior Military 41 18 23
Specialists

Junior Military Specialists 24 15 9

**TOTAL** **940** **892** **48**

###### 2.2.5 Promotion of Employment and Service in the SAF

In 2017, in accordance with the provisions of the Military Service Act, 9,007 young men born in 1999
were invited to a briefing session for national service personnel. After the candidates’ entry in the
military records (in the same calendar year as the candidates reach the age of 18), the administrative
body competent for defence acquaints these young men with their obligations and rights, employment
opportunities in the SAF, voluntary military service, military camps, the possibilities for the awards of
scholarships for the SAF’s needs, and military service in the contract reserve. In 2017, SAF members were
actively involved in the briefing sessions, and also formed groups for the promotion of employment. Of
the candidates invited, 76.1% attended the briefing session, while the rest were subsequently informed
by mail.

The promotion of the military profession was mostly carried out on the Postani vojak (Become a Soldier)
website. In 2017, the website was supplemented by 50 different job descriptions in various SAF units,
with an emphasis on logistics units, where the majority of non-military professions are available.

During the year the website recorded nearly 100,000 visitors, who visited the website 147,154 times and
opened 434,396 pages. An average visitor viewed 2.95 pages and stayed on a single web page for 2.28
minutes.

In addition to briefing sessions, promotional activities took place in the Employment Service of Slovenia
offices, in secondary schools and at other promotional events, i.e. fairs, barracks open days and various
sporting events. In accordance with the Promotional Activities Plan, 279 promotional events were
carried out in 2017.


-----

###### 2.2.6 Scholarships for Work in the SAF

Due to a poor response to the call for the award of scholarships for SAF employment in the academic
year 2017/2018, for which only candidates for officers – pilots – applied, the Commission for the Award
of Scholarships repeated the call. The second call received a better response, and seven contracts for
SAF scholarships were concluded. Five contracts were concluded with pilot officer candidates, one with
a chemical technology candidate, and one with an applied electrical engineering candidate.

###### 2.2.7 Preparation of Personnel for Departure from Military Service

On 12-16 June 2017, a pre-retirement seminar was organized. It was attended by 80 members.

Nineteen soldiers who had lost their employment contracts when they reached 45 years of age were
granted one of the rights. Specifically, sixteen members accepted the offered redeployment within the
MoD; one member rejected the offered working position; one member terminated the contract before
it expired; and one member was granted the right to a lump-sum payment and severance pay.

###### 2.2.8 Care of Former SAF Members

The Intergenerational Information and Social Centres (MIDS) in Ajdovščina, Slovenska Bistrica, Novo
mesto, and Ljubljana organized 145 events which were attended by about 1,400 people. Within the
framework of the MIDS annual work plans, the centres carried out various different thematic workshops,
lectures, hikes, military professional excursions, meetings, photographic exhibitions, regular recreation,
and a multi-day intergenerational camp. The four-day intergenerational camp was attended by 35
MIDS heads, intergenerational group leaders, and the most active members. At the Third Age Festival,
former SAF members were offered a handicraft exhibition, a photographic exhibition, and creative
workshops. Currently, the MIDS has 260 members. The MoD voluntary intergenerational society for
quality aging has 151 members.

###### 2.2.9 Cooperation with Civil Society Organizations

In 2017, ten societies and associations acting for veterans in the public interest (hereinafter: societies
and associations) submitted tenders in response to a public invitation to tender for co-financing the
activities of societies and associations. Nine of them met all the requirements. At the beginning of
March 2017, the MoD and the societies and associations signed contracts on co-financing their activities,
in the total amount of EUR 1,504,520.

At the beginning of October, a working meeting with the representatives of the societies and associations
was organized. Deficiencies which occurred in the applications of the societies and associations to
public tenders in 2016 and 2017 were presented, and general information on the 2018 public invitation
to tender was given. The invitation to tender for 2018 was published on 27 October 2017, on the MoD
official website. All nine societies/associations which applied met the tender requirements.


-----

The MoD issued four positive decisions based on the Societies Act and the Rules on the Criteria
Determining an Association’s Significant Achievements in Order to be Granted the Status of an
Association Operating in the Public Interest in the Field of Defence.

The MoD issued twelve positive decisions in accordance with the War Veterans Act and the Rules on the
Criteria Determining an Association’s Significant Achievements in Order to be Granted the Status of an
Association Operating in the Public Interest in War Veterans.


-----

###### 3 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLAN FOR THE ACQUISITION OF THE STATE’S PHYSICAL ASSETS

 3.1 Real Estate

Within the project group Energy Rehabilitation of Buildings, the preparation of detailed design
documentation began for the energy rehabilitation of buildings at the Military Post in Postojna, where
the reconstruction of Building 4 was completed. As part of the energy modernization of the Military Post,
the rehabilitation of the boiler room commenced by replacing heating oil with wood chips as the energy
source. The boiler room at the Škrilj Military Post near Kočevska Reka also underwent reconstruction.
Cerklje ob Krki Airfield obtained an operating permit for navigation equipment and the extension of
the runway. The construction of the airfield fuel storage facility with a transfer area was completed.
After acquiring ownership of the plot still required for the construction of a section of the DrnovoČrešnjice by-pass, the procedure for obtaining a building permit for the missing section commenced. In
accordance with the Spatial Plan of National Importance for the Cerklje ob Krki Airfield, the redemption
of the real estate at Zasap 18 was completed. In cooperation with US National Guard members, the
plumbing system was renovated and the asbestos cement roof was replaced at the facility in Bile.
The facility also had its windows and doors replaced, and thus became suitable for use. The project
documentation for the construction of a water distribution system and a power cable conduit from the
village of Žeje to the village of Bile was prepared. The establishment of the central archives of the MoD
is planned at the facility Trojica in Vrhnika (the former 26 October Military Post), so the windows and
doors of the facility were replaced, the renovation of the facade commenced, the roof was replaced,
the gas boiler room in the thermal station was renovated, a gas pipeline leading to the facility was
laid, and the connection to gas was set up. The rehabilitation of the technical depot at Šentviška Gora,
and the first phase of renovation of the water supply network at Pokljuka also commenced. Work on
the replacement of the asbestos cement roof of a small storage facility at the firing range at Bloška
polica was completed, as was the work on two carports at the firing range at Crngrob. Work on the
replacement of the roofs of two garages at the General Maister Military Post in Maribor and the roofs
of storage facilities at the Franc Rozman Stane Military Post in Celje are underway. A total of 770 m
of a new safety fence were put up, and 150 m of a new concrete retaining wall along the main road at
the Slovenska Teritorialna obramba (Slovenian Territorial Defence) Military Post in Šentvid were built.
The safety fence surrounding the complex at Turnovše-Podkotelj was completely renovated. A new
platform for washing SAF vehicles and a carport next to it for equipment storage were built at the
Miltary Post in Murska Sobota. The renovation of toilets was carried out in two facilities at the Miltary
Post in Murska Sobota, and shower rooms and toilets were renovated in Building 4 at the General
Maister Military Post in Maribor. All the windows and doors in the administrative building and toilets
were replaced at the firing range at Bloška polica. The contractor selection process for the finishing and
installation works for ASBE is in progress.

In 2017, several measures were implemented to improve the situation in logistics. A prefabricated
tent, measuring 12 m x 24 m in size, was put up at the Maribor regional office in eastern Slovenia.
The work on the maintenance and adaptation of buildings was not finished, since the contract for the
maintenance of the buildings was not concluded. In central Slovenia, a public procurement procedure
was completed and a contract was concluded for the construction of a platform at the Roje National
Logistics Centre, where the setting up of a prefabricated tent measuring 25 m x 12 m is planned. The


-----

capacity for indoor and outdoor storage will thus increase appropriately. With regard to adaptations, the
walls of buildings at the Postojna regional office were painted, and adaptation works were completed
in the area surrounding the storage facilities. In the Dolenjska region, all the buildings at the Novo
Mesto regional office underwent adaptation. In western Slovenia, several measures were implemented
in the area of adaptation and construction. The walls of buildings used by the Regional Notification
Centre at the Kranj regional office were painted. Garages were built in Tolmin for the operation of the
Tolmin Mountain Rescue Service, which will relocate to the facilities next to the garage. The conditions
for the operation of this service will thus improve significantly.

###### 3.2 Procurement

In 2017, 277 orders were made, on the basis of which 346 contracts and framework agreements were
concluded. The MoD continued to carry out public procurement contracts for the purchase of military
equipment, and concluded framework agreements to ensure the security of supply within a period
of at least three years. In this way it follows the guidelines outlined in the Medium-Term Defence
Programme, which, in addition to security of supply, ensures the economic management of financial
resources and the unification of weapons and military equipment in operational use, which results in a
more economical implementation of logistics processes.

Multi-year framework agreements were concluded for the purchase of spare parts for the Bell
helicopters, active earmuffs and their spare parts, and sets of self-contained breathing apparatus, as
well as supplies of military field rations.

In 2017, the MoD carried out the following large orders and supplies of goods and services, including
those based on prior framework agreements: supply of military combat uniforms; protective tactical
vests; all-terrain, personal and multi-purpose vehicles; ammunition of various calibres and mortar
mines; various pieces of computer hardware and software; aviation equipment; and pagers and radio
devices. It also concluded contracts for the maintenance of long-range radar systems; the insurance
of vehicles; the maintenance of facilities, apartments and installed infrastructure of the administrative
part of the MoD; and several small-size construction contracts. Framework agreements were concluded
for the purchase of spare parts for Bell helicopters and the maintenance of the LET L-410 aircraft,
and for the training and practice of Bell 412 and AS-532 Cougar crews. On the basis of joint public
procurements carried out by the Ministry of Public Administration, direct contracts for the supply of
natural gas and liquefied petroleum gas were concluded for the needs of the MoD, as well as direct
framework agreements for the purchase of plane tickets.

The MoD continued the resupply of the material resources used during the wave of migration, and the
maintenance and supplementation of national reserves of material resources and the equipment of
national Civil Protection units.

The ACPDR carries out public procurement procedures in accordance with the applicable Public
Procurement Act. It carries out low-value public procurement procedures independently, while the
remainder of the public procurement procedures are carried out by the Logistics Directorate on behalf
of the ACPDR, with the professional and conceptual support of the ACPDR.


-----

In accordance with the adopted financial plan for 2017, 535 public procurement proposals were made,
of which 189 were carried out independently by the ACPDR, and 316 by the MoD’s Logistics Directorate.
Thirty public procurement proposals were reversed – informing the public (cohesion) – because public
procurement procedures were not carried out. All other public procurement proposals were realized.

Public procurements for the maintenance of mobile dispensary, power generators, electrical
submersible pumps, chemical and radiological detectors, high pressure devices, heating appliances,
blowers, compressors, geophones, diving gear, CBRN protective clothing, boat engines, medical
equipment, pneumatic tents, hydraulic tools and devices, triggering devices and water barriers were
carried out.

To resupply the materiel and equipment which had been used during the migration wave, and protection
and rescue equipment and means, public procurement procedures for the following equipment
were carried out: quartermaster equipment and Civil Protection uniforms; a residential container
with a kitchen; a decontamination agent; heating kits; sets of self-contained breathing apparatus;
decompression mix cylinders; MUSAR rescue apparels; equipment for emergency medical assistance;
UXO equipment and means (cameras; metal detectors; tablets; plastic explosive; detonators; mining
triggering devices; UXO identification tools); accommodation means (firefighting sets, tents); personal
and group protection equipment; disinfectants; electrical sludge pumps; equipment for water rescue
unit.

A total of 73 public procurements were fulfilled for the purposes of maintenance, repair and purchase
of materials and equipment for the national material reserves or equipment for national units.

###### 3.3 Acquisitions

In 2017, 568 quality control procedures for goods and services were carried out. The total financial value
of acquisitions in 2017 amounted to EUR 35.263 million, which is 107.68% more than in 2016, while the
number of acquisitions of quality goods and services increased by 28.80% in comparison to 2016.

Seven procedures were carried out for mutual recognition of Government quality assurance, in
accordance with STANAG 4107.

EUR 8,264,825.39 were allocated to the purchase of uniforms and personal equipment for SAF
members. Funds were used for the purchase of 3,200 sets of new battle dress uniform; 5,000 sets of
individual items, such as jackets, trousers, hats, underwear and socks for replenishment; 6,000 pairs of
boots; 1,000 sets of protective vests; and a very limited portion of the funds for the purchase of service
uniform items.

A total of EUR 2,869,184.57 was allocated to the purchase of equipment for operational functioning.
The following items were purchased: 100 defence shields; 595 pairs of firing eyewear; personal
protective equipment and cooking apparel; fire protection and environmental protection equipment;
100 field beds; laundry bags; conveyor x-ray scanners; kitchen equipment (three steam-convection
ovens, ten refrigerator and freezer units, two dishwashers, planetary mixers); serving trolleys; CBRN
decontamination agents; ten pilot helmets and ten helmets for the MEDEVAC crew; tools for the Falcon
aircraft; lathes for the maintenance of ammunition and mine explosive ordnance; microscopes for
quality control of ammunition and mine explosive ordnance; breath tests and motor helmets for the


-----

Military Police; medical equipment (a biochemical analyzer, a stationary ECG apparatus, a hearing test
apparatus); dog handling equipment; food safety equipment; 120 folding touring skis; furniture for the
accommodation facility at the Baron Andrej Čehovin Military Post in Postojna; a snowplow; and five
private, ten multi-purpose and fourteen all-terrain motor vehicles.


-----

###### 4 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE PLAN FOR THE SALE OF STATE-OWNED TANGIBLE ASSETS

 4.1 Real Estate

Based on the Annual Tangible Assets Management Plan, real estate in the amount of EUR 3,674,982
was sold at public auctions and through direct sales. The MoD sold 39 apartments, 11 garages, and 19
sets of real estate (land, and land with facilities).

The Annual Tangible Assets Management Plan includes non-marketable real estate which the MoD
does not need for its activities, regardless of whether or not it is registered in the Land Register. The
MoD is intensively implementing procedures for the arrangement, development and acquisition of the
appropriate documents for registry in the Land Register, including land allotment procedures. Common
obstacles to the sale are judicial proceedings, denationalization, and the problem of unsettled ownership
of the land on which the MoD facilities are situated. In 2017, the changed market situation and an
increased demand, especially for the sale of apartments and garages, contributed to the increase in
revenue from the sale of real estate.

Based on a Resolution of the Government of the RS dated 14 September 2017, which endorsed the MoD’s
co-financing of the local infrastructure due to the effects of the SAF’s activities in the Municipalities
of Postojna, Ilirska Bistrica and Krško in 2017 and 2018, the MoD carried out the following co-financing
of the public infrastructure: in the Municipality of Krško in the amount of EUR 76,700 (by transferring
two apartments); in the Municipality of Postojna in the amount of EUR 300,000 (by co-financing the
construction of a new Firefighting and Rescue Centre in Postojna, which will also improve fire safety
at the Poček training area); and in the Municipality of Ilirska Bistrica in the amount of EUR 110,296
(by co-financing the construction of a bridge at the intersection of the local road Bač-Koritnice and
a channel for the discharge of flood water, and co-financing the reconstruction of part of the road JP
135080 Bač-Koritnice).

In the area of cooperation with municipalities, all the land at the Edvard Peperko Military Post in
Ljubljana was registered in the Land Register on the basis of a harmonizing, exchange and sales
contract. In Postojna, the ownership of thirteen apartments and three basements was settled. The
MoD also acquired land at the Baron Andrej Čehovin Military Post, which was registered in the Land
Register, by concluding an exchange and harmonizing contract. In Maribor, a small part of the land at
the General Maister Military Post was also registered in the Land Register on the basis of an exchange
contract. The MoD signed an agreement with the Municipality of Sežana on the regulation of their
relationships with regard to the exchange of land and the construction of facilities at the location of the
Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief
– Sežana Training Unit. A Letter of Intent was signed with the Municipality of Ig, on the basis of which
the MoD fulfilled its obligation to carry out land allotment for one plot. Other obligations of the MoD
and the Municipality which are defined in the Letter of Intent will be fulfilled in 2018. Building K-35 was
transferred to the Municipality of Kočevje for use on free loan. The MoD concluded a contract with the
Municipality of Gorenja vas-Poljane on the free use of non-marketable real estate in the area of Todraž.

On the basis of regulations concerning the promotion of harmonized regional development, real estate
at the complex Češča vas was transferred free of charge to the Municipality of Novo Mesto, and land


-----

at the former military post in Škofja Loka was transferred free of charge to the Municipality of Škofja
Loka.

For the needs of other ministries, the kitchen and the guardhouse at the former 26[th] Oktober Military
Post in Vrhnika were transferred to the Ministry of Public Administration, and two garages in Kozina
were transferred to the Ministry of the Interior.

Based on a Resolution of the Government of the RS in 2012, the MoD carried out the transfer of 73
apartments to the ownership of the Housing Fund of the Republic of Slovenia, Public Fund.

###### 4.2 Movable Property

In 2017, the MoD sold the following movable property:

–– 10,789 weapons in the total amount of EUR 506,770, and 88 vehicles in the total amount of EUR

104,500 by public auction;

–– 7776 ammunition bags in the total amount of EUR 15,555; 485 sets of the Factoria, Fagot and Metis

anti-tank missile systems; the Factoria equipment and missiles in the total amount of

–– EUR 1,640,000; and 176 pieces of skiing equipment in the total amount of EUR 1,800 through the

bid collection method;

–– One ADRIA SPECIAL 530 caravan in the amount of EUR 215; a car in the amount of EUR 1,780;

seven machines and devices for the delaboration of military ammunition in the total amount of
EUR 10,850; and non-organic equipment in the total amount of EUR 4,610 by a direct contract.

The total value of all sold movable property was EUR 2,286,079.

###### Free Transfers

Movable property was transferred free of charge to individual societies, associations, and individuals,
if they fulfilled the necessary legal requirements. Seven transfers were carried out (Radioklub Škofja
Loka, OZSČ Jesenice-Kranjska gora, OZVVS Kranj, OZVVS Slovenska Istra, OZSČ Mislinjske doline, CB
radio klub “Soča” Nova Gorica).


-----

###### 5 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EDUCATION, TRAINING AND ADVANCED TRAINING PLAN

SAF members attended numerous military education and training courses in 2017. The education took
place within the Military Schools Centre, in comparable military education and training courses abroad,
and in institutions outside the MoD. The training contributed to an increase in military professional
qualifications of the SAF members, and to the maintenance and development of the achieved and
established capabilities.

In 2017, 303 SAF members were referred to various forms of education and training abroad, of whom
180 were officers, 71 NCOs, 18 soldiers, 31 military specialists, and 3 civilians. With regard to the type
of education and training, 24 members were referred to career education, 218 members to functional
education and training, 60 members to a renewal of their licences, and 1 member to the acquisition of
a licence.

Twenty-four members were referred to career education, the majority of whom (nineteen) attended the
IMET programme. Most SAF members were referred to courses at the Oberammergau NATO School
(43) and the Latina NATO School (20), and to career and functional military education and training
courses in accordance with the IMET programme in Germany and the US, which were attended by 42
SAF members (career courses by 19 members, and functional courses by 23 members). In 2016, 247
SAF members were referred to different forms of education and training abroad, which means that the
number of referrals in 2017 (303) increased by 22.67% in comparison to 2016.

In 2017, 11 SAF members finished their higher staff training to obtain the 2[nd] level of Bologna cycle
education. Fifteen new contracts were concluded with SAF members for the acquisition of higher
vocational education at the Higher Vocational College, in conjunction with the Level I NCO Course. Their
education will be completed in 2019. Fifteen SAF members continued their education at the Vocational
College of Traffic and Transport with the military module, and will complete it in 2018. A total of 2270
members of the SAF, the MoD, the Police and foreign armed forces participated in different forms of
military education and training within the organizational units of the Military Schools Centre.

The amount of funds allocated to military education and training in 2017, which had increased in
comparison to 2016, has had a positive effect on the potential to improve the individual training of
members. However, it cannot remedy the consequences arising from the decrease in education and
training in the years before 2016.

The Education, Training and Advanced Training Plan for 2017 in the administrative part of the MoD was
implemented as follows:

–– 158% in the area of functional internal training (1913 and 1915 – reasons: completion of the

e-learning course on the handling of classified information – refresher training; participation in
the training course on the inventory of material resources);

–– 72% in the area of functional external training (1911, 1913 and 1915 – reasons: streamlining of

financial resources, cancellation of certain forms of training, work obligations, personal reasons);

–– 50% in the area of language training (1911, 1912 and 1913 – reasons: capacity of the School of

Foreign Languages – one spot available for the administrative part of the MoD in a particular
language course, work obligations);

–– 91% in the area of training abroad (1911 – reason: cancellation by the training organizer).


-----

Functional Internal Training

1911

1912

1913

1915

**Total:**

Functional External Training

1911

1912

1913

1915

**Total:**

Language Training

1911

1912

1913

1915

**Total:**

Training Abroad


-----

###### 6 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION PLAN

The SAF’s international military cooperation is based on guidelines from the MoD’s Defence Policy
Directorate and the Chief of the General Staff of the SAF, and is set out in the Business Plans. With
regard to the area of international military cooperation, this document defines the main centres of
activity in accordance with the foreign policy and strategic interests of the RS, and financial, human
and material resources.

The SAF Management Plan for 2018-2019 focuses on strategic partners within the Alliance with whom
the MoD cooperates in international operations and missions, and on neighbouring countries with
which the MoD has already established project cooperation. The strategic interest of the RS remains
in the Western Balkans (the KFOR and EUFOR Althea missions, and NATO integration and counselling
structures), and neighbouring and partner countries (USA, Italy, Great Britain, Germany and France).
For this reason, cooperation with these countries was intensified.

The Plan of International Military Cooperation for 2017 identified 557 events, which is 9% more than in
2016. Of the planned events, 253 were carried out. In addition, 168 unplanned events were carried out,
so a total of 421 events were held. The implementation of the planned events from the Annual Plan of
International Military Cooperation was 45.42%. The funds available through the financial plan were all
spent.

When planning the implementation of individual activities in the international field, the MoD strived for
a rational use of funds and adhered to the principle that their implementation supports the strategic
priorities defined in the 2017 SAF Business Plan.

###### 6.1 International Cooperation within NATO

With regard to operation within NATO, 282 events were planned in 2017. Of these, 131 events were
carried out. In addition, 80 unplanned events were carried out, so a total of 211 events were held. These
events included participation in NATO strategic meetings and conferences (military committees at the
level of the Chiefs of General Staff, the participation of the NCO Corps in strategic conferences and
consultations, a conference of the heads of transformation, etc.). Due to the rationalization of the use
of resources, some activities abroad were also attended by the members of the Peacetime Structure of
the SAF Abroad.

Special attention was paid to cooperation with those countries that support the Republic of Slovenia in
joining the declared forces in the NATO Force Structure.

The SAF’s NATO activities to transfer the centre of gravity from operations to operational readiness
across the whole spectrum of possible sources of threat, particularly in the implementation of the
Readiness Action Plan (RAP), were at the forefront. The activities of the SAF were focused on ensuring
proper conditions for complementing the newly established NATO Force Integration Units (NFIU),
achieving key capabilities within the NATO Defence Planning Process (NDPP), participating in the
Connected Forces Initiative (CFI), and cooperating in the context of PESCO.

NATO continued its Enhanced Forward Presence (eFP) in 2017. The positioning of Allied forces in the
East demonstrates the Alliance’s unity, cohesiveness, determination, readiness and solidarity, and


-----

conveys the concept that each ally is supported by the whole Alliance and that any aggression against
any one ally will be deterred with an appropriate joint military response.
The Slovenian contingent participates in joint training and other peacetime activities which take place
in the Baltic countries. The purpose of these activities is to establish and maintain readiness in support
of a comprehensive and enhanced deterrence and defence posture of the Alliance in the Baltic region
and in Poland.

_A symposium of naval units in Venice_

###### 6.2 International Cooperation within the European Union

Within the framework of military cooperation with the EU, the SAF carried out 16 events in 2017. Due
to rationalization, participation at some events was taken over by the Military Representation of the
SAF to the EU. The Representation carried out its mission by representing national interests in the
EU committees and working groups within the EU Military Committee (EUMC). Thematically, new
activities were started and directed towards the European defence initiative, PESCO, which Slovenia is
already involved in. In 2018, the military boat Triglav will again participate in the EU’s EUNAVFOR MED
Operation.

In 2017, a programme agreement was signed with regard to the M3U – Multinational Modular Medical
Unit.

###### 6.3 Bilateral Cooperation

In 2017, 148 events were planned in the area of bilateral cooperation. The SAF carried out 51 planned
events and 49 additional events, which makes a total of 100 events.

_Force Commander visiting the Austrian Armed Forces_


-----

The annual bilateral cooperation programmes were carried out on the basis of framework agreements
on the cooperation of countries in the field of defence, which were prepared together with individual
countries. In accordance with the Declaration of the National Assembly on the Western Balkans, the
Guidance on the Activities of the RS in the Western Balkans, and the Action Plan on the Activities of the
RS in the Western Balkans, part of the operations planning was oriented towards the countries of that
region, in addition to the four neighbouring countries. In 2017, Slovenia cooperated most intensively
with its neighbouring countries of Austria, Croatia, Hungary, and Italy, and with the countries of the
Western Balkans and the USA.

In the area of the Western Balkans, Slovenia strengthened cooperation with Montenegro as a new
full member of NATO. Slovenia provided intensive support to Macedonia in its progress towards EuroAtlantic structures. However, bilateral cooperation with Serbia was halted. The traditionally intensive
cooperation with the USA was based primarily on the fulfilment of various cooperation programmes
(IMET, Mil to Mil, equipping programmes) with the commands and units of the US Army in Europe.

Slovenia strengthened bilateral cooperation with the United Kingdom in the area of cooperation
between Officer Candidate Schools, and in the area of functional firing weeks. Cooperation with France
was focused on the navy. With Italy, Slovenia cooperates in international operations and missions, and
the Multinational Forces (MLF). Italy, which is Slovenia’s key strategic partner, is also an important
nation within Slovenia’s contribution to the NATO Framework Nation Concept (FNC).

###### 6.4 Multilateral Cooperation

In the area of multilateral cooperation, 104 events were planned in 2017. SAF members carried out a
total of 88 events, of which 65 were planned and 23 were unplanned.

The SAF participated in the regional initiatives of the Western Balkans (A-5), the SEDM (South-Eastern
Europe Defence Ministerial Process), and the DECI (Defence Cooperation Initiative). Expert meetings
were carried out for further development of the Balkan Medical Task Force (BMTF).

In 2017, the Slovenian Air Ground Operations School (AGOS) carried out its first course with a wider
international participation, which was attended by 10 foreign students. Part of the course was carried
out at a training area in the Republic of Austria, which also provided air support. Such cooperation
raises the visibility of the AGOS in the region. The school has thus practically already achieved three
out of four milestones (school – accredited – regional – multinational). The AGOS will continue its
successful work in 2018, particularly by training new JTAC instructors; by receiving confirmation of its
accreditation by the USA and NATO; by introducing a new JTAC simulator; and by continuing regional
integration with regard to JTACs.

The SAF actively participated in the regional initiatives of the Western Balkans (participation in the
meetings of the Adriatic Charter, the SEDM, and others), and the DECI (Defence Cooperation Initiative)
at the level of Chiefs of General Staffs or their deputies. Numerous expert meetings were carried out
for the further development of the Balkan Medical Task Force (BMTF), which is progressing towards the
establishment of a regular structure.

The SAF’s Verification Centre carried out a total of 19 activities in the area of arms control, related to
the OSCE Vienna Document 2011, the international Treaty on Open Skies, and the Dayton Agreement.


-----

In the area of multilateral forms of cooperation, the further active development of the Centre of
Excellence for Mountain Warfare was very important for the SAF.
Slovenia continued its participation in the Balkan Medical Task Force (BMTF) initiative, and is expected
to assume the role of lead nation in 2022.

###### 6.5 Military-Technical Cooperation

In the area of military-technical cooperation, six events were planned and seven were carried out.
The number of events was limited to the most important ones due to the financial situation. In 2017,
in this category among others, activities were carried out and efforts were made for the upgrade of
Cougar helicopters in self-protection against threatening missiles.

###### 6.6 Sports – CISM

In 2017, the SAF was actively engaged in the activities of the International Military Sports Council (CISM),
which is the leading world organization in the field of military sports.

With regard to CISM, 23 events were planned in 2017. The SAF carried out 19 planned events, and 4
additional events as a substitution for the events which were not carried out. The events were planned
in accordance with PosP 2017/18, Annex: Sports Plan in the SAF-CISM Plan.
Important CISM activities in 2017:

–– Participation in the 3[rd] CISM Winter Military World Games in Russia, where SAF athletes achieved

excellent results and won five medals;

–– Participation in the World Military Parachuting Championship (Germany), a triathlon competition

(Germany), an orienteering competition (Finland) and a marathon championship (Canada);

_Participation in CISM activities_


-----

–– Attendance at the CISM General Assembly and Congress in Greece;
–– Organization of a CISM indoor football regional competition in Postojna in May, which was attended

by delegations from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia;

–– Organization of a CISM regional competition in orienteering in Ajševica in March, which was

attended by delegations from Belgium, Poland and Latvia.

###### 6.7 Other

Other cooperation includes the participation of the aide-de-camp to the President of the Republic of
Slovenia and Commander-in-Chief of the Slovenian Armed Forces in two visits of high-level delegations
of the RS abroad.

_Members of the Protocol Unit in front of the President’s Office, and the President’s visit to the Ministry of Defence_


-----

##### RISK MANAGEMENT

The risk register is a set of anticipated risks that could have a negative influence on the economical use
of the fiscal resources and the attainment of the MoD’s goals, and the set of all measures prepared in
advance and applied to the preventive and timely reduction of the negative consequences of risks.

Based on the MoD’s risk register, 158 risks were anticipated in 2017. The level of risk is determined based
on the estimate of the risk probability and the estimate of the consequences, graded by numbers from
one to three; a higher value means a greater probability of occurrence or greater consequences should
the risk occur. The product of both estimates signifies the level of risk. Depending on the value of the
product, four levels of risk are determined:

 - Level 9 – very high probability of the occurrence of the risk and its consequences (red);

 - Level 6 – high probability of the occurrence of the risk and its consequences (orange);

 - Levels 3, 4 – medium probability of the occurrence of the risk and its consequences (yellow);

 - Levels 1, 2 – low probability of the occurrence of the risk and its consequences (green).

Of all risks, 12 risks or 8% were assessed with the highest level of risk, 50 risks or 32% with a high level
of risk, 64 risks or 40% with a medium level of risk, and 32 risks or 20% with a low level of risk, as
depicted in the histogram below.

Structure of Risks with Reference to the Levels of Risk


45%

40%

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%


8%

2%

1 2 3 4 5


40%


32%


18%


-----

The chart below depicts the realization of risks with reference to individual levels of risk. With very
high and high probability risks, namely levels 9 and 6, the realization was 50% and 34%. This means
that with these risks, the assessment of the level of probability was correct, and that consequently,
measures in response to the incurred risks were prepared and implemented on time. The level of
realization of medium level risks was 37%, and of low level risks (1-3) 0%, 36% and 43%.

Realization of Risks with Reference to Individual Levels of Risk


100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%


57%
66% 63% 64%

100%

50%

43%
34% 37% 36%

9 6 4 3 2 1


50%


NO

YES


66%


100%


66%


64%


50%


57%


37%


34%


34%


The prevailing risks with a very high probability of occurrence are procedural in nature and refer to the
management of the main processes, especially the inability to carry out tasks. The prevailing risks with
a very high probability of occurrence are also project- and personnel-related in nature and refer to the
late implementation of orders, an inadequate increase in the personnel plan, and the lack of human
resources.

In 2017, 58 anticipated risks or 37% occurred, and appropriate measures were applied to the majority of
them. Measures were successfully implemented for 71% of all the risks that occurred.


63%


63%


64%


36%


-----

The Level of Implementation of Measures for Realized Risks


###### NO 29%


###### NO 29%

 YES 71%


The structure of risks with reference to their type (procedural, project-related, personnel-related,
regulatory, financial or security) shows that half of risks (50%) are procedural in nature, as depicted in
the circular diagram below.

Structure of Risks with Reference to their Type


Security;

Regulatory;

Financial;

Personnel
related;

Procedual;

Project-related;


-----

The predominance of procedural and project-related risks is a warning that processes and project
management should be given more attention in future, as they directly influence the effectiveness and
efficiency of operations. In a metaphorical sense, this means that the MoD’s priority in the short-term
must be to further strive for the effective use of the limited financial, personnel and material resources,
and systematically direct them towards the implementation of the key long- and medium-term
objectives.

Effective implementation of measures for the management of risks and the prevention and mitigation
of their consequences greatly contributes to the further development of the defence system, which is
extremely important in the ever more complex, changing and unpredictable security environment.


-----

