THE REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA
**MINISTRY OF DEFENCE**

Vojkova cesta 55, 1000 Ljubljana

# ANNUAL REPORT OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR 2013

Number: 0100-127/2013-34
Date: 27 May 2014

1/106


-----

### TABLE OF CONTENTS

#### MINISTER’S ADDRESS...........................................................................................................4

 MILITARY DEFENCE ..............................................................................................................7

 1 SCOPE AND STRUCTURE OF THE SAF .................................................................................. 7

 2 SAF MILITARY TRAINING AND EXERCISES ........................................................................... 8

 3 DEVELOPMENT AND BUILDING OF SAF CAPABILITIES ...................................................... 12

 4 MAINTAINING THE LEVEL OF READINESS OF THE SAF ..................................................... 13

 5. MODERNIZATION OF THE SAF ......................................................................................... 14

 6 SAF OPERATION IN SUPPORT OF THE SYSTEM OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS ....................................................................................................... 15

 7 SAF CONTRIBUTION TO INTERNATIONAL PEACE, SECURITY AND STABILITY.................... 17

 8 INVESTIGATIONS OF AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS AND MILITARY AIRCRAFT INCIDENTS .......... 21

 9 THE IMPACT OF THE REDUCTION OF FINANCIAL PLANS ON THE DEVELOPMENT AND FUNCTIONING OF THE SAF .................................................................................................. 23

 PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS ................................................... 25

 1 PREVENTION ACTIVITIES ................................................................................................... 25

 2 PREPAREDNESS OF THE SYSTEM OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS AND PROTECTION, RESCUE AND RELIEF FORCES .............................................. 27

 3 DISASTER RESPONSE AND DAMAGE ASSESSMENT ........................................................... 38

 4 EDUCATION AND TRAINING ............................................................................................. 44

 5 INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION ....................................................................................... 55

 6 INSPECTION ACTIVITY IN THE FIELD OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS ............................................................................................................................ 58

 DEFENCE SYSTEM AND CRISIS MANAGEMENT .................................................................... 60

 1 DEFENCE POLICY ............................................................................................................... 60

 2 SLOVENIA’S CRISIS PREPARATIONS AND RESPONSE MEASURES ...................................... 65

 3 DEVELOPMENT OF CIVILIAN CAPABILITIES ....................................................................... 67

 4 INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY OPERATIONS ..................................................................... 69

 5 EQUIPPING, REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT, STANDARDIZTION AND CODIFICATION ........ 70

 6 COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SYSTEM (CIS) ..................................................... 73

 7 INSPECTION AND INTERNAL AUDIT ACTIVITIES IN THE AREA OF DEFENCE ..................... 74


-----

#### 8 STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION ......................................................................................... 75

 9 NORMATIVE ACTS ............................................................................................................. 78

 10 RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGICAL PROJECTS .................................................................. 80

 IMPLEMENTATION OF RESOURCE PLANS ............................................................................ 81

 1 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FINANCIAL PLAN ................................................................... 81

 2 PERSONNEL PLAN IMPLEMENTATION .............................................................................. 87

 3 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLAN FOR THE ACQUISITION OF THE STATE’S PHYSICAL ASSETS ................................................................................................................................. 93

 4 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE PLAN FOR THE SALE OF STATE PROPERTY ................................................................................................................. 98

 5 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EDUCATION, TRAINING AND ADVANCED TRAINING PLAN . 100

 6 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION PLAN ............................... 102

 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RISK REGISTER ........................................................................ 104


-----

### MINISTER’S ADDRESS

_Roman Jakič, Minister of Defence_

Ladies and gentlemen!

This is the Report of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) for 2013 which, in a transparent manner,
covers its functioning in the previous year. Despite the difficulties and challenges associated
with the very limited financial resources, the list of successfully accomplished tasks and
achievements in the area of defence and protection against natural and other disasters is
extensive, which we can all be rightly proud of.

The consequences of the economic and financial crisis were observed throughout the defence
area, and had an impact, in particular, on the most important element of the defence system the military defence - since they affected the readiness of its main body, the Slovenian Armed
Forces (SAF). Nevertheless, the SAF successfully continued with its reorganization. Combining
the strategic and operational levels, it attempted to establish a more rational structure, whereas
at the tactical level, it established two infantry brigades and a logistics brigade and transformed
the aviation and maritime units and special forces. In the area of training and exercises, which is
associated with one of its most important tasks, the SAF was focused on maintaining the
achieved level of training and readiness.

The SAF continued to successfully meet its responsibilities in international operations and
missions (IOM), under the auspices of various international organizations (UN, NATO, and EU),
of which the Republic of Slovenia (RS) is a member. In 2013, the activities of the SAF in the
IOM were also focused on the Western Balkans. On an annual basis, on average 402 SAF
members participated in IOM, mostly in the Allied KFOR operations in Kosovo and ISAF
operations in Afghanistan. The size of the SAF contingent in Afghanistan gradually reduced,
and the nature of its tasks was also partly changing, while respecting the principle of Allied
solidarity. At the end of 2013, in the spirit of neighbourly solidarity, a SAF contingent
participated with a multi-purpose military boat Triglav 11 in a humanitarian operation of the
Italian Security and Defence Forces called Mare Nostrum - Lampedusa. In this way, Slovenia
provided assistance to the friendly and Allied country, with which it cooperates closely in IOM,
whereas the boat Triglav 11, for the first time, demonstrated its multi-functionality in an
operation on the high seas and thus justified its purpose.


-----

With its capabilities, the SAF also intensively participated in the field of protection against
natural and other disasters, with an emphasis on the helicopter rescue, emergency medical aid,
response to natural disasters, and fire-fighting.

In the system of protection against natural and other disasters, significantly less financial
resources were available for the maintenance, renovation and modernization of its key
capabilities. The main focus was, therefore on maintaining the readiness to respond to natural
and other disasters, as well as on preventive activities and planning, especially raising public
awareness in the field of fire protection. Priority was given to the supplementation of threat
assessments and the update of disaster response plans, in accordance with the new bases
related to normative law. In spite of the harsh economic circumstances accompanying
operations, the competent services and units quickly and appropriately responded and
demonstrated their willingness and dedication, especially after heavy winter snowfall, summer
fires and autumn floods. Again, the 13 regional notification centres operated in all shifts (24/7),
which enabled a more effective response to emergency calls to the telephone number 112. The
average operators response time after calls to 112 was a bit more than four seconds, which
means that 90 per cent of all those who called received operator response in less than nine
seconds. An international system for the automatic emergency call from vehicles (i.e. e-Call)
began to operate for a trial period; the system is designed in such a way that in the event of a
traffic accident, after which the injured driver is unconscious, the e-Call system is activated,
sending information automatically to the competent service receiving emergency calls.

In the framework of five out of a series of Protection and Rescue Days carried out in
cooperation with the Municipality of Velenje, the national and local as well as professional and
voluntary forces presented themselves, as usual, and their protection, rescue and relief
equipment. Moreover, national aptitude tests for the first aid teams of the RS Civil Protection
and the Slovenian Red Cross were conducted.

International activities in the field of protection against natural and other disasters were primarily
focused on the strengthening of bilateral cooperation and regional integration of countries, the
provision of development assistance to the Western Balkan countries, and the ensuring of an
active role of Slovenia in international organizations.

In the area of defence policy, the MoD continued its activities in the framework of NATO, EU's
Common Security and Defence Policy, as well as bilateral and multilateral international
cooperation. One of the important decisions taken at the NATO ministerial meetings was that
the NATO common funds, which had so far been dedicated to the operation in Afghanistan, be
channelled into the financing of the Allied infrastructure. An important part of activities in the
area of international cooperation was the support provided to the countries of the Western
Balkans, especially to Montenegro, in their implementation of defence reforms and efforts to join
the Euro-Atlantic structures. In this respect, it is important to point out the first comprehensive
regional ministerial meeting, which was held in October at Brdo pri Kranju and was dedicated to
the harmonisation of the defence and security cooperation in the Western Balkans and in
South-Eastern Europe. The meeting was attended by 11 Ministers of Defence, 3 Deputy
Ministers, Deputy Secretary General of NATO, Secretary General of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, 28 delegations and a total of 150 representatives of
countries and international organizations. In the context of this event, the MoD representatives
conducted more than 50 high-level bilateral meetings.

Noticeable progress was made in the fields of crisis management and crisis response
measures, as their most important normative bases were updated. With the rationalization of its
contents, the defence planning was adapted to the level of threat to the country, whereas the
national and NATO crisis response measures were standardized, allowing for a more effective
response in crisis situations.

In the field of equipping, purchases were mainly focused on the equipment for ensuring the
safety of the SAF members and their regular operation and training, along with some small
purchases of light infantry weapons and combat equipment. Investment funds were further
reduced by as many as 41 per cent (12 million EUR), so that the investment cycle was
suspended. Due to the increasing age and wear of equipment, the cost of its maintenance went


-----

up sharply. The upgrade of the second Cougar helicopter was carried out, as well as
preparations for the start of the upgrade of the third helicopter of this type in 2014. In addition to
the multi-purpose military boat Triglav 11, the aircraft Falcon 2000 EX was introduced into
operational use, performing 25 flights for government bodies, as well as the mobile hospital
Role 2 LM, which was handed over for use for two years to the General Hospital Jesenice for
the needs of the medical care of local population. 2013 also saw a successful continuation of
modernization of the Cerklje military airfield, which is partly financed by NATO. Greater
emphasis was also placed on the registration of real estate managed by the MoD in the land
register, which resulted in a decrease in the proportion of unregistered flats and parcels.

With regard to the provision of financial resources, the MoD had to again face the fact that the
trend of reducing the scope of the financial plan continued in 2013. Since 2009, the scope of the
MoD financial plan had been reduced in nominal terms by almost 200 million EUR, or 37 per
cent. In 2010, the share of the realised expenditure for defence in the gross domestic product
was still 1.64 per cent, whereas in 2013 it was 1.09 per cent, which is the farthest away from the
target of two per cent. At the MoD level, the total amount of funds for salaries went down by 9
per cent (22.8 million EUR) in 2013, and current expenditure was further reduced by 14 per cent
(11.5 million EUR).

During the implementation of the MoD personnel plan, the number of civil servants in its
administrative part decreased by 27 persons or two per cent, which is within the agreed social
dialogue between the Government of the RS and the public sector trade unions. The number of
SAF members decreased by 123 or 1.7 per cent. Thus, during the implementation of the
financial and human resources plans, the MoD mainly relied on the search for internal reserves.

According to my estimation, the functioning of the MoD in 2013 can, in spite of these problems
and challenges, generally be judged quite successful, since all the most important tasks were
carried out. The merit goes mostly to the employees, who, in these difficult times, with their
enthusiasm, knowledge and experience, significantly contribute to the successful meeting of
challenges of the defence system and the system of protection against natural and other
disasters. However, due to drastic budget cuts in the last five years dedicated to the areas of
defence and protection against natural and other disasters, one cannot avoid making the
conclusion that the risk for timely and comprehensive response to potential threats to national
security in the areas of defence and protection against natural and other disasters increases,
and that our ability to participate in IOM and to fulfil other assumed obligations towards
international organizations, to which Slovenia is member, is approaching a critical point.

Roman Jakič, Minister of Defence


-----

## MILITARY DEFENCE

### 1 SCOPE AND STRUCTURE OF THE SAF

In 2013, the Slovenian Armed Forces (SAF) introduced a more rational organizational structure
by joining the strategic and operational levels of command, and by reducing the number of
mostly branch commands. Through the establishment of two infantry brigades at the tactical
level, it balanced the structure and ensured the creation of four infantry cores for the
development of joint warfare of branches in battalion battle groups. In the logistics brigade, the
SAF integrated its logistics capabilities and enabled their sharing. In addition, an air force unit, a
navy unit and a special forces unit were transformed and strengthened at the tactical level.

On the basis of medium-term planning documents, the scope of the SAF was set at 7600
members of the active component and 1500 members of the contract reserve component. The
government measure aimed at reducing the number of employees in the state administration
was also reflected in the SAF, since the number of its members reduced based on the
government personnel plan. The continuation of the reduction trend will have a negative impact
on the functioning of the SAF at home, as well as on its ability to meet the obligations of
Slovenia towards the Alliance.

_Organisational Structure of the SAF_


-----

### 2 SAF MILITARY TRAINING AND EXERCISES

**2.1 Overview of Important Training Courses of SAF Members and Units**

Training and exercises of SAF units were, also due to transformation, rather dynamic and
focused on the training of individuals for obtaining the relevant competencies, and for
maintaining the achieved level of training and readiness of the SAF. The SAF commands and
units were trained in performing the tasks arising from the SAF mission, which are to ensure the
ability to perform national defence tasks, participation in international operations and missions,
operation in the system of protection against natural and other disasters, task-based training of
units for their operation within the Alliance and the achievement of planned operational
capabilities.

At the SAF Initial Training Centre, basic military training was carried out for individuals who had
signed up for voluntary military service. In the end, a total of 198 candidates were employed for
voluntary military service. It was performed at four locations in Slovenia (Vipava, Murska
Sobota, Bohinjska Bela and Novo mesto).

The SAF units and commands participated in 40 international exercises and collective training
courses abroad (Italy, Germany, Poland, Croatia, Hungary, Slovakia, USA, Romania,
Macedonia, Montenegro, Turkey, Belgium, Greece, Serbia, Denmark and Lithuania).

In Slovenia, 28 major exercises and collective training courses for maintaining readiness and
building capacities were carried out, attended also by members of other armed forces of the
Alliance. In total, more than 2,500 SAF members participated in exercises in Slovenia and
abroad.

Due to budget cuts (four revised budgets) in recent years, we had to reduce the number of
already planned exercises and training courses. For this reason, only 74 per cent of planned
exercises and training courses were carried out in 2013. Some ambitions for the development
and establishment of planned capabilities also needed adjustment according to the available
funds. The reduced number of exercises and training courses in Slovenia and abroad affects
the level of training, particularly for performing combat operations. Priority was given to the
provision of training and exercises for maintaining the level of readiness of SAF units for
carrying out basic tasks arising from the mission.

_Reduction of Resources for Training and Exercises_


#### mio EUR


-----

Important exercises which the SAF organised or participated in in 2013:

  - Central tactical exercise of the SAF commands and units MOVEMENT 2013 (PREMIK
2013), in the framework of which the international military exercise ADRIATIC STRIKE
2013 (JADRANSKI UDAR 2013) took place and in which the SAF, in cooperation with
the Allied countries, trained forward air controllers/joint terminal attack controllers, and
exercise KARST 13 (KRAS 13), where the attainment of capabilities of companies
organic to an Infantry Regiment was verified.

  - International exercise of the US response forces in Europe, in which the SAF
participated with the command and company battle group of a Mountain Regiment
which was preparing for operation in the KFOR forces.

  - Exercise STEADFAST JAZZ, in which the SAF cooperated with forces constituting the
NATO Immediate Response Force. The exercise was participated by representatives of
special forces and a group of joint terminal attack controllers.

  - Training of Slovenian contingents in the joint multinational training centre in Hohenfels,
Germany, before departing to KFOR and ISAF missions.

  - Exercise CRYSTAL EAGLE 13 lead by the NATO Multinational Corps Northeast (NATO
MNC NE) in Poland;

  - Exercise COMBINED ENDEAVOR 2013 organised by the United States European
Command.

  - Fire-fighting and rescue exercise AIRCRAFT 2013 (LETALO 2013) in Krško.

  - Central protection and rescue exercise VELENJE 2013.

In the area of individual training, 40 different training courses were planned for military
occupational specialties (MOS), and it was estimated that 455 members would participate in the
courses. 36 training courses were carried out, with the participation of 424 members.

**2.2 Training of Aviation Units**

In 2013, aviation units trained in the provision of air support to the SAF commands and units,
with the emphasis on the training in close air support, airspace interception and the provision of
air and medical transport.

In the area of individual training, courses for military occupational specialty "aviation soldier"
were planned and carried out for 15 members who successfully completed the training.

Members of aviation units were sent to various specialist and functional training courses
abroad, especially to Great Britain (tactical simulator Cougar), the Czech Republic (simulator for
the renewal of license for the aircraft L-410) and France (crew training for the vessel FALCON
2000SX).

Aviation units participated in 13 important exercises in Slovenia and abroad. In addition to the
above-mentioned exercise ADRIATIC STRIKE 2013, these particularly include exercises
TANGO SCRAMBLE, AIR DEFENCE TRAINING ACTIVITY 2013, RAMSTEIN GUARD 2013
and BROKEN WING 2013 (ZLOMLJENO KRILO 2013).


-----

_Participation of the SAF Helicopters at an Exercise_

**2.3 Important Training Courses of the Naval Unit**

In the field of naval unit training, focus was on the preparation and participation in the exercise
ADRION LIVEX 2013, on the attainment of operational capabilities of individual units and on the
training of the crew of the multi-purpose boat Triglav 11 before its departure to the mission
MARE NOSTRUM – Lampedusa.

In the area of individual training, courses were planned and carried out for the training of seven
members for the military occupational specialty "sailor", as well as of two members for the
military occupational specialty "diver". All the members successfully completed the training.

In addition, members of the 430th Naval Division participated in various functional training
courses.
Naval units also participated in ten important exercises in Slovenia and abroad.

**2.4 Training of the SAF Contract Reserve Component**

In 2013, 68 call-ups were planned for 257 days. Eight call-ups for 22 days were actually carried
out. The reason for such a low number of call-ups was the cancellation of all training courses in
the second half of 2013 due to the reduction of the SAF financial resources. Consequently,
members of the contract reserve component, who are deployed to individual SAF units, do not
reach the planned level of training.


-----

_The Training of SAF Members_

**2.5 Practice and Military Camps**

In 2013, professional practice in the SAF was successfully completed by 17 participants.

The military camp was attended by 81 university and secondary school students. The camp
took place from 1 to 13 July 2013 at the following locations: Kadetnica (former officer candidate
school) Maribor, Bohinjska Bela Military Post, the Mačkovec firing range and training area, and
the surroundings of the Bohinjska Bela Military Post. Professional practice at the camp was
successfully completed by 13 students of the Faculty of Criminal Justice and Security. The MoD
and Youth Camp was attended by 40 secondary school students. In the framework of the study
programme, Military Practice III was attended by 10 students, whereas Military Practice IV was
attended by 26 students of the Faculty of Social Sciences.


-----

### 3 DEVELOPMENT AND BUILDING OF SAF CAPABILITIES

In accordance with the Resolution on General Long-Term Development and Equipping
Programme of the Slovenian Armed Forces up to 2025 (ReSDPROSV 2025) from 2010 and
through the process of defence planning in NATO, the Medium-Term Defence Programme of
the RS for the Period 2013–2018 (SOPR 2013–2018) was prepared as well as endorsed by the
Government.

The Medium-Term Defence Programme of the RS for the Period 2013–2018 is in line with the
Resolution on General Long-Term Development and Equipping Programme of the SAF up to
2025, as well as with the agreed NATO capability goals. With these goals, Slovenia assumed,
on the basis of the principle of just burden-sharing, obligations in the development of certain
capabilities and in the contribution of the RS to collective security. Slovenia aims at maintaining
the achieved level and eliminating shortcomings in the quality of already developed capabilities
(Light Battalion Battle Group (LBBSK), CBRN Defence Battalion), and forming a medium
Battalion Battle Group (SRBBSk), which will, in the next medium-term planning period, through
the purchase of additional equipment, develop into a mechanized battalion battle group
(MEHBBSk), capable of operating in all potential Alliance operations. The trend of several years
of cuts in defence budget and thus the funds for the operation and development of the SAF
already has a significant impact on the SAF capabilities and reduces the capability of Slovenia
in the area of defence. With the gradual reduction of the SAF financial resources from 2010 to
2013 and continuing of this trend in the years 2014 and 2015, it is clear that Slovenia will not
achieve the development of SAF capabilities and its commitments towards the Alliance planned
in the Medium-Term Defence Programme of the RS for the Period 2013–2018 and in the
Resolution on General Long-Term Development and Equipping Programme of the SAF up to
2025.

The reduction of resources affects the functioning of the SAF and brings about the increase of
national defence risks in the provision of the planned defence capabilities and interoperability,
due to technological lag and the decreased ability of operation of the RS in Slovenia and within
the Alliance. Such risks cannot be completely avoided; however, the SAF has to restrict them to
the greatest possible extent. The transformation of the SAF aimed at limiting the negative
impacts of the reduction of resources on its operation. Nevertheless, the consequences of
several years of reduction are becoming more and more visible.


-----

### 4 MAINTAINING THE LEVEL OF READINESS OF THE SAF

The SAF provided and maintained capabilities for its operation in IOM and fulfilled other
obligations towards the Alliance. It supported the system of protection against natural and other
disasters and was willing to assist other state bodies and organizations in ensuring the safety
and welfare of citizens of the RS.

Economy measures, which were implemented primarily in the areas of modernization and
maintenance of infrastructure and vehicle fleet, and provision of working conditions,
accommodation and personal equipment of the SAF members, had an important negative
impact on ensuring the required level of readiness.

To a limited extent, the SAF provided the available capabilities for the provision of military
defence of the RS within the framework of the Alliance.

The available financial resources did not enable the building and development of the SAF
capabilities, planned in the medium-term and long-term planning documents.

The effects of further reductions in funding could no longer be mitigated without detriment to the
readiness of the SAF. The impact of budget cuts on the maintenance and development of
capabilities is reflected in the reduction of the ability of the SAF to provide military defence of
the RS within the framework of the Alliance. In the long term, the budget cuts jeopardize the
provision of the required and necessary readiness of the SAF and its development in
accordance with the Resolution on General Long-Term Development and Equipping
Programme of the SAF up to 2025.

_Preparation of the SAF Units and Members for Operation in IOM_


-----

### 5 MODERNIZATION OF THE SAF

The equipping of the SAF was conducted in accordance with the equipping plans and the
available financial resources. In 2103, the following important projects were thus carried out:

  - Purchase of 16 new 7.62 mm machine guns for the equipping of units and operational
reserve.

  - Purchase of 1500 sets of new battle dress uniform.

  - Purchase of 1200 patrol rucksacks.

  - Purchase of 2446 combat helmets.

  - The planned quantities of ammunition and training resources were acquired for the
preservation of stocks and training.

  - Within the project of upgrading the Cougar transport helicopters, the upgrade of the
second helicopter with the systems for communication, navigation and protection and
systems for minimization of thermal images was completed, and the third helicopter
was prepared for the start of upgrades in 2014.

  - Purchase of demolition sets, as well as mining and demining sets.

Introductions were completed and orders were issued on the introduction into operational use of
the following important capabilities and resources:

  - COPAS training simulation system.

  - SAF security and control centre.

  - Falcon 2000FX aircraft.

  - Drager X-am stethoscope and detector.

  - Modular Armoured Tactical Shoot Combat House.

In the framework of the U.S. military assistance programmes, spare parts for 4x4 HMMWV light
wheeled armoured vehicles were supplied, as well as camouflage nets, helicopter crew helmets
and a shoot house for the Škrilj training area.

The revitalisation of the Cerklje ob Krki military airfield, which is scheduled for completion in
2016, was also carried out as planned.

Information systems to support the functioning of medical units, and an application for the
planning of meals and monitoring of business operation of kitchens in the SAF were introduced
into operational use. The information system for monitoring the training of units was upgraded
with a module for keeping an electronic logbook for shooting in the SAF. In 2013, the operating
system Windows XP was replaced with Windows 7 on workstations that were suitable for the
new operating system. The most urgent modernisation works and replacements of equipment
on the server infrastructure were also carried out.

Due to the significant reduction in funding in recent years as well as in 2013, tactical military
communication and information systems could not be modernised. For several years already,
due to the lack of financial resources, the equipping of a mobile computer centre could not be
conducted. In 2013, no money was dedicated to the modernisation of the data network.

The required investment documentation for the start-up of purchase projects is ready for other
key projects, the implementation of which is planned in the Medium-Term Defence Programme
of the RS for the Period 2013–2018 (equipment of forward air controller/joint terminal attack
controller groups, equipment of the UXO disposal unit, drones, and mortars).


-----

### 6 SAF OPERATION IN SUPPORT OF THE SYSTEM OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS

The SAF actively supported the operation of the system of protection against natural and other
disasters and participated in it with its capabilities, with an emphasis on the helicopter rescue,
emergency medical aid, response to natural disasters, and fire-fighting. Intervention forces,
which are properly trained and in constant readiness for operation in Slovenia, were available
for immediate assistance. With respect to the performance of already defined military tasks in
Slovenia and in international operations and missions, the SAF could, in the event of an
emergency, help to mitigate the consequences of natural disasters with more than 1500
members and the available material resources.

**6.1 Helicopter Rescue and Assistance**

In the military part of the Jože Pučnik Airport in Brnik, a SAF helicopter is in a 15-minute
standby each day during the day for mountain rescue. In addition to the rescue in the mountains
and hard to access areas, the duty crew also performs emergency helicopter transports in the
framework of helicopter emergency medical assistance. For putting out large-scale forest fires,
the SAF forces provide a Bell 412 helicopter with a 1000-liter, and a HE AS532 AL Cougar
helicopter with a 2500-liter basket for transporting water, as well as drinking water road tankers
with the capacity of 79,000 litres of water.

_Overview of the Participation of the SAF Helicopters in Rescue and Assistance in 2012 and_
_2013_

**Number of Rescue Operations/Injured**
**2012** **2013** **Change Index**
**Persons and Total Flying Hours**

Mountain Rescue 97 85 88

Helicopter Emergency Medical
85 56 66
Assistance

Wildfires 19 14 74

Total Number of Rescue Operations 202 155 77

Total Number of Helicopter Flying Hours 339:10 257:12 76

Total Number of Injured Persons 180 145 81

In 2013, the duty crew of the 151 Helicopter Squadron carried out 155 rescue operations, out of
which 85 were mountain rescue operations, 56 were operations for the provision of emergency
medical helicopter assistance, and 14 were operations in response to wildfires in the areas of
Rogatec, Trstelj, Mali Grintovec and Poljanska dolina. The crew transported 145 injured or sick
persons, 368 emergency responders, 20 tons of first aid equipment and 800,000 litres of water,
which totalled in 257 flying hours.


-----

_Participation of a SAF Helicopter in Putting out Wildfires_


-----

### 7 SAF CONTRIBUTION TO INTERNATIONAL PEACE, SECURITY AND STABILITY 

The SAF activities in international operations and missions (IOM) were conducted in line with
the RS Government decisions, MoD guidelines, and plans for the SAF operation abroad. During
the planning of the participation of the SAF forces in IOM and the preparation for and
deployment of the SAF contingents to IOM, great emphasis remains on lessons learned, which
contributed to the preparation and operation of the Slovenian contingents in IOM.

_Overview of the SAF Member Deployments to IOM in 2013_


**International**
**Operation**

**Force**


**Area of**

**Operations**


**Operational**

**Rotation**
**Leadership**


**Number of**

**Members**


**in 2013**


**UNTSO** UN Middle East UN 12 months 4

**UNIFIL** UN Lebanon UN 6 months 14

KFOR Kosovo NATO 6 months 306


**Joint**
**Enterprise**


HQ NATO
NLO, MLO


Sarajevo,
6 months/
Skopje, NATO 5
12 months
Belgrade


**ISAF** ISAF Afghanistan NATO 6 months 57

**ATALANTA** EU NAVFOR Northwood EU 6 months 1*

**ALTHEA** EUFOR BiH EU 6 months 11

**EUTM** EUTM Mali EU 6 months 3**


**Mare**
**Nostrum –**
**Lampedusa**


1.5 months
Italy and
Sicily Italy 15 December 2013–
Slovenia
31 January 2014)


42


**Total on**
**402**
**Average**

_* Participation ended in June 2013._
_** Participation started in March 2013._

**7.1. NATO Operations**

Activities of the SAF were focused on KFOR forces in Kosovo and ISAF forces in Afghanistan.
In addition, the SAF participates in the NATO HQ in Sarajevo, in the NATO military liaison office
in Belgrade and in the NATO liaison office in Skopje.

_KFOR (Kosovo)_

In accordance with the fundamental strategic interests of the Republic of Slovenia pertaining to
areas such as foreign affairs, security and others, the majority of the SAF members participating
in IOM performed their duties in the Western Balkans. There, the emphasis was laid on the
operation of the KFOR Allied Forces in Kosovo, in which over 300 SAF members and one
civilian functional expert took part.

Under the KFOR mandate, Slovenian members' activities were focused on maintaining a secure
and stable environment and freedom of movement, protecting facilities of special importance,
monitoring security and general conditions in the area of operations, providing helicopter
transport, rapid response forces and tactical reserve, and performing staff duties. Members of
the Slovenian contingent also provided support to the development of Kosovo security forces
and the Ministry for the Kosovo Security Forces. The contingent operated mostly in the area of
central Kosovo, whereas a part of operational activities of the SAF units were also carried out in
the North of the country.


-----

At the end of September 2013, a SAF brigadier general, who had successfully carried out duties
of the KFOR Deputy Commander for more than one year, completed his term. The post
represents the highest position ever assumed by a SAF member in the NATO command
structure. The assumption of this duty was recognition of endeavours Slovenia had made and
the activities it had performed in support of peace, security and stability in Kosovo or the
Western Balkans.

In addition, the MoD provided air transport with an aircraft of the national air carrier at the July
visit of the delegation of the North Atlantic Council (NAC) and operational partner countries in
the KFOR operation in Kosovo. The MoD also participated in the preparation of information and
promotion materials for delegation members, whereas SAF members were actively involved in
the conduct of the event.

With its visible enthusiasm in the organization of the visit, Slovenia again proved to be a
credible and reliable ally that plays a special role in Kosovo and the wider region. Due to the
fragility of the security situation in Kosovo, especially in its northern part, the MoD, at the
international level, continuously defended Slovenia's position that it is necessary to prudently
and gradually address the issue of further reduction and changes in the posture of the KFOR
forces, taking into account the security situation on the ground and all the other relevant factors
and conditions.

_Training of SAF Members in KFOR Forces in Kosovo_

_ISAF (Afghanistan)_

In 2013, Slovenia continued its efforts to stabilize and rebuild Afghanistan (AFG) with its military
and civilian capabilities, in accordance with its international commitments and the principles of
Allied solidarity. The SAF continued with the training of Afghan Security Forces (ANSF). The
gradual handing over of the responsibility for security to the ANSF and the reduction of
international forces were reflected in the progressive reduction of the scope of the Slovenian
Contingent (SVNKON) and partial change in the nature of its duties.

At the beginning of the year, the Slovenian contingent numbered approximately 78 members.
As part of two Military Advisory Teams (MAT), the members trained an infantry battalion and a
combat support battalion in Farah, whereas some of the members worked in the ISAF
command structure (RC-C Kabul, RC-W Herat), in the Afghan army (ANA) military police school
in Kabul and in Special Police Training Centre in Wardak. In April, the Slovenian contingent was
further reduced to approximately 60 members (omission of manning the MAT for combat
support, participation in the military police school and some support elements). Since
September, Slovenia participates in ISAF with approximately 34 members who operate in the
engineering Military Advisory Team advising to ANA, train special forces or carry out duties in


-----

the ISAF command structures. In 2013, four civilian functional specialists joined the Slovenian
contingent. Two of them carried out duties in the Provincial Reconstruction Team in Herat (until
April) and Farah (until July). Since April, the other two worked in the ISAF Headquarters in
Kabul, with only one of them still present in Kabul (since November). The reduction of Slovenian
civilian efforts was influenced by financial constraints, the transformation and the reduction of
the ISAF forces. In 2014, the scope and composition of the Slovenian contingent will adjust to
the dynamics of the mission and will be further reduced.

In January 2013, the RS Government adopted the Amendment to the Strategy of Operation of
the RS within the International Community's Efforts to Stabilise Afghanistan, which represents
the framework for possible participation of Slovenia in international efforts for the stabilisation of
that country in the area of politics, security and development also after the end of ISAF.
Accordingly, and taking into account the Cooperation Strategy of the RS in International
Operations and Missions and the current Alliance's planning dynamics for the setting up of a
new mission in Afghanistan after 2014, intense inter-ministerial coordination at various levels on
possible forms of full participation of Slovenia took place in 2013. Concurrently, transparent
information communication, consultation and exchange of views were carried out with the RS
National Assembly.

_NATO Response Force (NRF)_

Following the proposal of the MoD, the Slovenian Government adopted a resolution in May
2013 defining the SAF participation in the NRF in the next five years. On this basis, the MoD or
the SAF plans to participate, in the framework of NRF, with those units in the future which
contribute the highest added value in the process of the SAF transformation, and in those
"niche" areas that are of greatest importance for the preparedness and further development of
the SAF. In 2013, Slovenia participated in immediate readiness forces (IRF/NRF) with its
motorized SAF company.

_NATO's Peacetime Operation Air Policing in the Slovenian Airspace_

In 2013, the MoD negotiation team harmonised the amended bilateral agreement between the
governments of Slovenia and Hungary on military cooperation in the fields of aviation and air
defence from 1996, which, after its formal ratification by the parliaments of both countries, will
enable the inclusion of Hungary (besides Italy) in the above-mentioned NATO operation.

_NATO HQ in Sarajevo and NATO Liaison Offices in Belgrade and Skopje_

The presence of five SAF members was maintained in NATO HQ in Sarajevo and in NATO
liaison offices in Belgrade and Skopje. Those five members were involved in performing the
tasks that are important in terms of carrying out defence and military reforms and partnership
programmes in host countries, and in terms of their progress towards Euro-Atlantic structures.

**7.2 UN Operations**

_UNIFIL, UNTSO (Middle East)_

Middle East is one of the priority areas of cooperation of Slovenia in IOM. Therefore, the MoD
endeavoured to maintain an appropriate level of contribution of the SAF to the UN missions
UNIFIL (14 members) and UNTSO (4 members), which support the maintenance of peace in
the region. After the deterioration of security situation in the Golan Heights in Syria, the
Slovenian Government, at the proposal of the MoD, adopted a resolution in June 2013 on the
geographical restrictions for the operation of the SAF members in the UNTSO mission.

**7.3 EU Operations**

_EU NAVFOR ATALANTA (Horn of Africa), EUTM Mali (Mali)_

In June 2013, Slovenia completed its participation in the maritime operation EU NAVFOR
ATALANTA in the waters off the Horn of Africa, where the SAF had been present for almost four


-----

years. By participating in the operation, Slovenia had actively contributed to the international
burden-sharing in the fight against piracy, while also gaining valuable operational experience as
a maritime country. Due to the deterioration of the security situation in Mali and its impact on the
wider region, the EU responded by setting up a training mission for Malian armed forces (EUTM
Mali), which indirectly contributes to the improvement of the security situation in the country and
to its stabilization. Despite the complexity of the African environment, Slovenia adopted the
decision to participate in the mission with up to four SAF members, with three SAF members
actually participating in it.

_EUFOR ALTHEA (Bosnia and Herzegovina)_

The SAF continued its participation in the EUFOR operation ALTHEA with approximately 11
members. Slovenia thus continued its military contribution to the strengthening of peace and
security in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to the joint efforts for the establishment of properly
trained, professional and efficient armed forces of that country. Activities of the Slovenian
contingent were primarily focused on the performance of staff and logistics support tasks, and
on gathering information for the operation on the situation on the ground. During the year,
several training courses were also conducted for members of the engineering battalion of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Armed Forces. By the end of June 2013, a motorized SAF company
with 120 members became a part of the regional reserve force of the EUFOR operation
ALTHEA. In the second half of 2014, a decision was adopted on the resumption of participation
of the SAF company in the reserve segment of that operation. With the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, the MoD participated in the preparation of a common "non-paper" of eight EU member
states in support of the extension of the operation's mandate.

**7.4 Humanitarian Operations**

_Mare Nostrum – Lampedusa (Mediterranean Area)_

In 15 December 2013, for one and a half months, the SAF participated in the humanitarian
operation of the Italian Security and Defence Forces "Mare Nostrum" (in Slovenian, Naše morje
– Lampedusa) with its multi-purpose boat Triglav 11 and a crew of approximately 40 members.
In the spirit of solidarity, the MoD thus quickly and proactively responded to the pressing
problems faced by the neighbouring Italy in relation to the immigration in the Mediterranean
Sea. In this way, Slovenia was the first to provide assistance to that Allied country and received
very positive responses in the Italian and the wider international public.

_Average Participation of the SAF Members in the IOM_

600

**512**

500 **459**

**442**
**424**
**402**

400

300

200

100

0

2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

The SAF is willing and able to support, to a greater extent, the ambitions of the Slovenian
foreign and defence politics. However, due to budget cuts, it is forced to gradually reduce the
participation of its members in IOM.


-----

### 8 INVESTIGATIONS OF AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS AND MILITARY AIRCRAFT INCIDENTS

Based on the findings of investigations of aircraft accidents and incidents, the issuing of safety
recommendations represents the implementation of measures to reduce or prevent new threats
and risks to military air traffic. The investigation of accidents and incidents does not include the
determination of guilt or responsibility of those involved in an accident or incident.

Timely implementation of security measures affects the elimination or reduction of the possibility
of the loss of human lives and material damage to military equipment and facilities on the
ground. In 2013, a total of 33 incidents were recorded, of which 8 were serious. This led to the
instigation of 8 investigations, of which 5 were completed with a final report. Within the system
of reporting on aircraft accidents and incidents, a total of 21 safety recommendations were
issued, which had a direct and indirect impact on greater flight safety. Ten investigations from
the previous years (before 2013) also remained uncompleted. The Service for Investigation of
Aircraft Accidents and Military Aircraft Incidents participated in the investigation of a hot-air
balloon accident.

Individual findings of investigations and the issued safety recommendations were presented to
the inspection bodies, the military aviation body at the SAF General Staff responsible for the
control of flight safety of military aircraft, civilian aviation investigation body, and the RS Agency
for Civil Aviation, as well as members of the NATO organisation AFFSC. The above-mentioned
institutions can, in their professional controls, determine the compliance with safety
recommendations. With the timely implementation of measures, they can improve flight safety
and legality of flight operations in Slovenia and IOM.

The target value of completed investigations in 2013 was not achieved 100 per cent. That was
due to an increase, for nearly a third, of detected aircraft incidents and the reduction of staffing
in the Service for Investigation of Aircraft Accidents and Military Aircraft Incidents resulting from
the absence of a member due to her participation in IOM.


Accidents Incidents


-----

All the new permanent technical assistants were trained in accordance with the annual plan.
Due to the lack of funding, the equipping of permanent technical assistants with personal
protective equipment was not carried out. A pilot from the Service for Investigation of Aircraft
Accidents and Military Aircraft Incidents was entered in the training registry at the SAF Flight
School.

International cooperation activities were carried out as planned and represent a contribution to
flight safety and regulation of formal and legal matters relating to the implementation of
investigation procedures in the event of an accident or serious incident of a military aircraft
outside Slovenia. Members of the Service for Investigation of Aircraft Accidents and Military
Aircraft Incidents are involved in the projects of installation of CVFDRs (black boxes) in the SAF
aircraft and test the proper functioning of such devices on aircraft that have them already
installed.

In the context of the accreditation of the investigation laboratory according to ISO 9001
standards, minor building works were performed, as well as the installation of burglary
protection windows in the forensic laboratory.


-----

### 9 THE IMPACT OF THE REDUCTION OF FINANCIAL PLANS ON THE DEVELOPMENT AND FUNCTIONING OF THE SAF

The consequences of the economic and financial crisis were also very much felt by the SAF,
which, in the past five years, lost EUR 274 million of planned financial resources earmarked for
its functioning, mainly due to the modernization. Based on the adopted economy measures of
the Government, the SAF financial plan decreased by EUR 77 million in 2009, by EUR 93
million in 2011, by EUR 85 million in 2012, and by EUR 25 million in 2013, depending on the
adopted financial plan.

_Adopted and Realised Financial Plan of the SAF_

### 600

 500

 400

 300
 518
 442 447 453 451
 200 397
 357 312 301 276
 100

 0
 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

 Adopted SAF financial plan Realised SAF financial plan

Due to the deepening of the financial and economic crisis, the SAF financial plan for 2013 was
the lowest in the last five years.

Taking into account the realization from previous years, the SAF had to carry out the following
actions in 2013: further lowering of labour costs in the framework of the measures of the RS
Government, reduction in the recruitment of soldiers, reduction of the SAF participation in IOM,
and selective extensions or early terminations of contracts to members of the contract reserve
component. Fewer resources were also allocated to education and training, the purchase of
uniforms and replacement of worn uniform parts.

In the framework of the financial plan for 2013, the SAF lacked EUR 2.7 million necessary to
fulfil international obligations, such as the payment of contributions to the budgets of NATO and
the EU, and the payment of contributions to joint international projects within the Alliance. The
funding allocated to the cooperation with the local environment and co-investment in the local
infrastructure was also reduced. Consequently, the total of less than EUR 200,000 was
allocated out of the necessary approximately EUR 1.1 million.

For the second year in a row, the available financial resources failed to enable the development,
planned in the framework of the strategic guidance and planning documents as well as of
international commitments defined in the Resolution on General Long-Term Development and
Equipping Programme of the Slovenian Armed Forces up to 2025, the Medium-Term Defence
Programme of the RS for the Period 2013–2018, and the agreed NATO capability objectives for
Slovenia. Insufficient allocation of funds for the operation and modernisation of the SAF is
already affecting its ability to fulfil its basic mission and perform statutory duties, build the
planned capabilities, maintain the appropriate level of their readiness, provide military defence,
fulfil international commitments, pursue national interests through the participation in IOM,


-----

provide dual-purpose capabilities to participate in the tasks of protection and rescue, and
provide support to other government authorities.

According to NATO standards, member states should allocate 50 per cent of defence spending
to the costs of staff, 30 per cent to operations and maintenance, and 20 per cent to acquisition
and construction. Given the fact that the RS National Assembly approved the Resolution on
General Long-Term Development and Equipping Programme of the Slovenian Armed Forces up
to 2025, and the RS Government adopted the Medium-Term Defence Programme of the RS for
the Period 2013–2018, which provides for 7600 members of the active component and 1500
members of the contract reserve component, we should be aware that personnel costs
according to current laws amount to EUR 210 million for members of the active component and
EUR 5.5 million for members of the contract reserve. The calculation according to the
methodology shows that the financial plan of the SAF should amount to at least EUR 380
million, with 55 per cent allocated for personnel costs, 25 per cent for the area of operations and
20 per cent for equipping and modernization. Of the last five years, Slovenia was close to this
ratio in the years 2009 and 2010, whereas in 2011–2013, the ratio was thrown out of balance,
mainly in the area of equipping and modernization.


-----

## PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS

### 1 PREVENTION ACTIVITIES

The basic focus of prevention activities in the field of protection against natural and other
disasters, including fire protection and protection against drowning, is on the system-wide
measures as well as regulatory framework for the systematic implementation of individual
activities of the broadest spectrum of professional and lay public.

Several changes were introduced in the field of fire protection at the regulatory level in the
context of the proposal for the Decree on Wildfires, such as the redefinition of measures for the
protection against wildfires during the declared fire hazard, and the determination of basic
principles for the introduction of on-call fire-fighting service during the declared very high fire
hazard in the natural environment in certain areas, etc. With the introduction of these changes,
an updated application will also be available in the context of geographic information system
(GIS), as an aid in making decisions on the declaration of fire hazard to the natural
environment. In the field of fire protection, the Rules on Fire Safety Concept and Studies
introduced system-wide changes related to fire safety concept and studies, whereas some
system-wide changes related to the maintenance of fire extinguishers are being prepared.

In the area of protection against drowning, the Rules Amending the Rules on Measures against
Drowning in Public Bathing Areas introduced system-wide amendments, taking into account the
prescribed technical or technological equipment of public bathing areas, which in turn affects
the potential reduction of the number of lifeguards present at public bathing areas. In the area of
protection against drowning, periodic checks of competence of lifeguards were continuously
conducted, as well as activities associated with the regulatory requirements.

In 2013, priority was given to the amendment of threat assessments and preparation of disaster
response plans, also in conjunction with the implementation of the new Regulation on the
Subject Matter and Preparation of Disaster Response Plans.

In the field of planning and preparation of threat assessments, the new Seismic Threat
Assessment for Slovenia and the new National Threat Assessment for the Occurrence of
Communicable Diseases in Humans were prepared, and the Treat Assessment for Nuclear or
Radiological Accidents in Slovenia was updated. The Government adopted the National
Disaster Response Plan for Outbreaks of Trans boundary Animal Diseases and the Slovenian
Civil Protection Headquarters considered the proposal of the National Disaster Response Plan
for the Occurrence of Earthquakes, which will be sent to the Government for adoption in 2014.
The National Disaster Response Plan for Nuclear and Radiological Accidents was also updated.

As regards the implementation of the National Disaster Response Plan for Nuclear And
Radiological Accidents, potassium iodide (KI) pills are still being distributed, on a preliminary
basis, in the area of ten kilometres around the Krško Nuclear Power Plant, and coordinated
action associated with the implementation of the Plan for the Distribution of Potassium Iodide
Pills is being carried out.

As regards the implementation of the new European legislation (Decision on an EU Civil
Protection Mechanism) at the normative level, basic principles for the development of risk
assessments for disasters are being prepared, following the guidelines of the European
Commission for developing risk assessments. Activities will continue in 2014, with the opening
of a wider inter-ministerial debate.

On the basis of fire protection public interest,122 administrative cases for the implementation of
fire protection measures were resolved (inspection and testing of the installed active fire
protection systems, maintenance of fire extinguishers, inspection and testing of hydrant
networks, implementation of fire safety, implementation of fire protection measures). 179
guidelines were issued, as well as 178 opinions on spatial planning documents in the field of


-----

protection against natural and other disasters and fire protection. As regards fire protection, the
Administration for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief (ACPDR) participated in 68 procedures
for issuing operating permits for facilities for it which gave its consent to the building permit
documents up to 2013.

In the field of fire protection and protection against drowning, preventive activities, with a variety
of materials, consultations and seminars, were aimed at both the professional public as well as
the broadest target group, i.e. the population. Particular emphasis was placed on raising the
awareness of the population in the area of fire protection and protection against drowning and
permanent training of the professional public. To this end, several activities taking different
approaches were carried out for different target groups. In particular, recommendations and
guidance for carrying out personal and mutual protection to deal with natural and other
disasters, fire, and in the field of protection against drowning, were issued online and on the
television, in publications, competitions, leaflets, web applications, during Protection and
Rescue Days, etc.

In the framework of the Protection and Rescue Days, the ACPDR conducted a consultation for
the expert public on the topic of installed active fire protection systems, as well as a consultation
on fire extinguishers. The consultations were primarily aimed at technical examiners and
persons authorized to carry out fire protection measures. The general public was also able to
test the use of fire extinguishers. In the framework of the Protection and Rescue Days, two
consultations in the area of protection against drowning were carried out for the expert public:
one was on the topic of safe bathing and the other one on protection against drowning in white
water.

Consultations in the area of planning were carried out for target groups from local communities,
for operators who are subject to provisions of the Seveso Directive, and for employees of the
ACPDR and Inspectorate of the RS for Protection against Natural and Other Disasters
(IRSPANOD) branch offices, with the aim of exposure to specific topics, presentation of
novelties, etc. A consultation on nuclear accidents was organised for first responders, titled
Protection Measures and Monitoring after Nuclear and Radiological Accidents. Consultation
materials are available on the ACPDR website at: _http://www.sos112.si/slo/_
_page.php?src=sv11.htm._

The leading topic of the Fire Safety Month, which took place in the month of October, was fire
extinguisher. Activities were carried out in cooperation with the Fire-Fighting Association of
Slovenia and the Slovenian Fire Protection Association. Many other organizations and
institutions were also present, according to their subject area. The report is available on the
ACPDR website at: _http://www.sos112.si/slo/page.php?src=sv114.htm. The purpose of the_
activities was to raise the awareness among various population target groups about the fire
hazards and the benefits of fire extinguishers in putting out the initial fire, to systematically
motivate the population for the introduction of fire extinguishers into residential buildings and
private vehicles, and to train different target groups in the proper selection and effective use of
fire extinguishers.

The ACPDR also carried out other preventive activities to raise the awareness of the population
through the preparation of various materials, publications, and advertising campaigns aimed at
children and teenagers on the topic of the 112 telephone number, in relation to the provision of
fire safety during the Christmas and New Year celebrations, preventive measures during floods
and storms, and activities at the event called Children's Bazaar, etc.


-----

_Leaflet for Raising the Awareness of the Population_

Advertising campaigns were carried out for the general public on the topics of chimney fires,
carbon monoxide, preventive measures during the Christmas and New Year celebrations and in
the time of declared fire hazard in the natural environment, and on protection against drowning,
fire protection for children, etc., in order to raise the awareness about the hazards and the
implementation of preventive measures in the context of personal and mutual protection.

### 2 PREPAREDNESS OF THE SYSTEM OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS AND PROTECTION, RESCUE AND RELIEF FORCES

**2.1 Operational Planning and Preparedness**

Operational preparedness of the system of protection against natural and other disasters is
provided through continuous operation of notification centres and public rescue services, and
through the preparedness of other rescue services, commissions, units and civil protection (CP)
headquarters. Trained, equipped and motivated members of rescue services, commissions,
units and CP headquarters ensure an adequate and coordinated response to natural and other
disasters. Due to several cuts in resources in 2013, the focus was on maintaining the previously
achieved preparedness to respond to natural and other disasters. Of particular importance was
the purchase of decontamination trailers and equipment for radiological detection, electronic
and personal dosimetry and decontamination for fire-fighting forces of general importance,
which will undoubtedly affect the preparedness and responsiveness of the system in the event
of accidents with dangerous substances.

Through the implementation of the Programme for the Formation of National Material Reserves
for Protection, Rescue and Relief during the Period 2009–2015, the materiel and equipment are
provided from the state reserves to help the population at risk and the affected people after
natural and other disasters, as well as personal and collective equipment for the operation of
the protection, rescue and relief (PRR) forces.

The ACPDR provides a comprehensive and responsive logistics system of 13 regional logistics
centres to support the protection, rescue and relief forces at the regional level, and of the
National Logistics Centre to support the national civil protection units.


-----

_Testing of First Aid Teams_

**2.2. Monitoring, Notification and Warning**

With regard to emergency calls to 112, the introduction of new technologies continued. The
ACPDR re-established the SMS112 service, which did not work in the first half of 2013 due to
the implementation of the decision of the previous Minister in 2012. Consequently, a decision to
start the procurement procedure for the selection of a contract maintainer was approved, with a
six-month delay.

The ACPDR also carried out all the activities for the start of a trial operation of the automatic
emergency call from vehicles, called e-call. The introduction of trial operation will represent the
achievement of the first goal planned under the project Heero, in which Slovenia participates
since September 2012 as an associate member. The achievement of the goal is also a
condition for the regular functioning of the system at the beginning of 2015.

In 2013, all the regional notification centres together received more than 500,000 calls, of which
the majority was for the emergency medical assistance. 789 SMS messages to 112 were also
received, which is 258 less than in 2012. The average response time of operators was a bit
more than four seconds, which means that 90 per cent of callers to 122 got through to the
operator in less than nine seconds. The average duration of the call was a bit less than half a
minute, and 90 per cent of all the calls were shorter than one and a half minute.

In the framework of the Sub-Commission for 112, the Permanent Slovenian-Croatian Joint
Commission for Protection against Disasters, the agreement was reached on the switching of
calls to 112 between the two countries, and on the enhanced cooperation of the border call
centres for receiving calls to 112.

The ACPDR also participated in the preparation of amendments to the Rules on the Quality of
Service for the Single European Emergency Call Number 112, which set the criteria for
determining the quality of SMS messages to the 112 call number.

On 11 February, the day of the 122 emergency call number, a well-recognised press
conference was organised in the regional notification centre in Nova Gorica. In other regions,
visits of students from individual schools to notification centres were organised. Visits of
emergency medical assistance teams to schools were also organised, including the
demonstration of the application of the 112 call number in the event of the need for reanimation
of injured persons.


-----

The Spin application (system for reporting on interventions and disasters), which is available on
the website spin.sos112.si/spin2/javno, was updated with new reviews and analyses of data on
events, disasters and interventions, which are available to the public. An automatic transfer of
individual data on accidents to the social network Facebook was enabled, and the application
for the reception of micro locations after large-scale events was prepared.

For the purpose of preparing analyses, the ACPDR set up a 2D GIS display of data from the
current 3D GIS display. The ACPDR also prepared a web application SMOK, the purpose of
which is to monitor the water status, fire hazard, weather and the risk of avalanches.

_Regional Notification Centre_

**2.3 Informatics and Communications of the System of Protection against Natural and**
**other Disasters**

As far as the taking over and renewal of the public warning system at the local level is
concerned, the ACPDR continued with the renewal of sirens. Of the planned 93 renewals, 33
sirens were actually renewed. The low realisation is due to the reduced financial resources. In
accordance with the Protection against Natural and Other Disasters Act, the renewal and taking
over of the public warning system at the local level should have been completed in 2011.
However, due to insufficient financial resources, the process was prolonged. Up to now, 799
sirens have been renewed out of the total of 1496, which is approximately 53 per cent.

The Regional Notification Centre Celje was moved to a new location. During the movement
process, all radio links to repeaters and the "paging" transmitters of the ZARE communications
system were re-established, the radio access points of the public warning system were moved,
the functioning of the protection and rescue computer system and all applications was ensured,
the telephone switchboard with all the lines was moved, and the reception of emergency calls to
the 112 number at the new location was ensured.

The functioning of the protection and rescue computer network and all the applications that run
on the network, including an application for paperless operation (information solution for the
management of documents), was ensured, and technical assistance to users was provided. The
functioning of all communication systems in the field of protection against natural and other
disasters was ensured.


-----

During the Protection and Rescue Days in Velenje, access to the Internet and live Internet
coverage of the activities in the tent were provided. Demonstrations of the functioning of
applications, such as the system Video Karst, the mobile siren and communications, were also
carried out.

Within the cross border exercise of the protection and rescue forces "Karavanke 2013", the
possibility of wireless transmission of images and data from the tunnel at greater distances was
tested. The experiment confirmed the theoretical models developed within the framework of the
international project MONET. For the first time, an image was successfully transmitted at a
distance of 4000 metres, i.e. from more than half of the 7864 metre-long Karavanke tunnel. The
experiment was successful, as it was possible to watch the transmission of the entire exercise
in the tunnel without problems and interruptions. An additional camera was placed on the
platform in front of the tunnel, so that due to the projection of images on the screen in the
premises of the motorway base in Hrušica, the professional public was able to watch the
activities taking place at two exercise venues. On the basis of attempts made so far to transmit
images and data in tunnels, it is estimated that such equipment would be very suitable for
installation in tunnel ambulances. In the tent in front of the tunnel, the incident commander could
monitor the rescue and all other activities in the tunnel without interruptions. He could follow the
movement of emergency responders, which would enable a faster and more appropriate
command of the intervention and easier decision-making.

**2.4 Protection, Rescue and Relief Forces**

In 2013, 13,429 different events happened in Slovenia (natural and other disasters, traffic
accidents, fires and explosions, pollution, accidents with dangerous substances, nuclear and
other events, findings of unexploded ordnance, supply disruptions, damage to facilities and
technical and other assistance). In addition to other services, the protection, rescue and relief
forces also responded to those events.

_Protection and Rescue Forces – Training of the Urban Search and Rescue (USAR) Units_


-----

_Events in 2013_

**Event** **Number**

Natural Disasters 544

Other Disasters 1178

Traffic Accidents 2361

Fires and Explosions 4161

Pollution, Accidents Involving Dangerous Substances 629

Nuclear and other Events 7

Findings of UXO, Supply Disruptions and Damage to Facilities 780

Technical and other Assistance 3769

**Total** **13,429**

A closer look at the events reveals that the accidents resulted in 1620 interventions with 11,244
members of various protection, rescue and relief forces. The majority of interventions took place
in November (393), followed by July (367), February (169) and March (132). Timely and
effective response and help to the affected population by the protection rescue and relief forces
undoubtedly contributed to the mitigation of damage and other consequences caused by these
disasters.

_Natural Disasters and Interventions in 2013_


**Number of**
**Events**

**Interventions**


**Number of**

**Participants**


**Number of the**

**Injured**


High Sea Tide 21 60 0

Floods 571 3483 1

Avalanches 119 723 0

Deep Snow 138 860 0

Hail 19 316 0

Strong Wind 725 5660 3

Lightning Strike 14 89 0

Drought 2 4 0

Intense Heat 3 16 0

Disruptions of Traffic due to
7 24 0
Natural Phenomena

Epidemics and Infections of
1 9 0
People, Animals and Plants

**Total** **1,620** **11,244** **4**

The major part of problems was caused by strong wind, floods, deep snow and avalanches.
These disasters affected the entire country. Strong wind, which occurred in two periods
(January/February and September/November) affected 125 municipalities and caused material
damage (fallen trees, uncovered roofs) and difficulties in the supply of electricity. Floods and
avalanches, which occurred throughout the year, affected 121 municipalities and caused
considerable material damage (buildings, watercourses). Heavy snowfall throughout the winter
and material damage (trees, power lines) lead to the increased consumption of salt and grit for
salting and gritting the roads, and high costs of winter services. An analysis of data from 98
municipalities revealed that the costs of winter services along with the grit materials increased
by 70 per cent as compared with the average of the last four seasons.


-----

In accordance with the regulatory framework for civil protection units, services and bodies and
the Rules on Registration, Allocation and Calling-up of Members of Civil Protection Service and
other Protection, Rescue and Relief Forces, the development of the application Civil Protection
Record aimed at keeping records of persons involved the protection, rescue and relief forces,
continued in 2013. The main objective of the administrative body responsible for the protection
against natural and other disasters is to prepare and manage a friendly application aimed at
regulating the keeping of records of Civil Protection members, public employees in the area of
protection, rescue and relief, citizens who perform professional protection, rescue and relief
duties and who, during the performance of these duties, have the status of Civil Protection
members, as well as citizens who perform voluntary and non-professional protection, rescue
and relief tasks and have the same rights and obligations as Civil Protection members. The
tasks were focused on the upgrading of the application with a software module enabling the
calculation of payments to contract members.

Based on the Decree on Civil Protection Service, the ACPDR, as the founder, organizes Civil
Protection units, services and bodies at the national and regional levels, and prepares plans for
the conclusion of contracts of service in the Civil Protection, in accordance with the decision
stipulating priority manning with contract Civil Protection members. Budgetary constraints and
the reduction of resources for the field of protection against natural and other disasters affected
the manning of Civil Protection with contract members, and influenced the decision on the
reduction of the on-call allowance for 10 per cent (from 1 July 2013). In 2013, conditions were
thus created for further manning of Civil Protection units, services and bodies. As a priority,
contracts of service in the Civil Protection were concluded for the manning of the mobile
dispensary, NBC decontamination unit, unit for search and rescue in urban areas, medical
treatment team, logistics and catering teams, and notification centres. Together with 24 new
contracts, the ACPDR has concluded 115 contracts of service in the Civil Protection for the
most critical duties, which is far from covering all the needs and thus from reaching the planned
capabilities.

At the end of the year, the Civil Protection records listed a total of 43,675 members of
protection, rescue and relief forces, of which 25,560 were members of duty units and 18,115
were volunteers. The protection, rescue and relief forces at the state level included 840
professional members, 1200 voluntary members, 1505 members of duty units and 115 contract
members.

**2.5 Protection from Unexploded Ordnance (UXO)**

Among protective measures, the most important was protection from unexploded ordnance
(UXO), which is organized as a single measure throughout Slovenia and comprises detection,
identification, disposal, transportation, storage and destruction of UXO, and the training of the
National Unit for Protection from UXO. In 2013, the National Unit for Protection from UXO
carried out 453 interventions, in which the voluntary Civil Protection members disposed of 3635
pieces or 6744.91 kg of various UXO. In addition to regular destructions of UXO at the Poligon
208 protection and rescue training range, it is important to point out the emergency destruction
of an air bomb in Silova near Velenje, removal of a 305 mm cannon shell from the Soča
(Isonzo) River near Solkan, emergency destruction of four large-calibre cannon shells (210 mm,
2 x 149 mm and 105 mm) on Mount Sveta Gora near Nova Gorica, and emergency destruction
of two 220 mm mortar mines in the area of Mount Rombon at an altitude of 1950 meters.
Preventive examinations of certain areas at risk from UXO were carried out, with the purpose of
ensuring a safe execution of construction works. For the destruction of UXO, the National Unit
for Protection from UXO used 550 kg of TNT, 45 kg of PEP (plastic explosives), 160 kg of the
ERGODYN 30E and 10 kg of the LADIN commercial explosives. For each destruction, an
expert report and a summary report were produced. The measures of protection from UXO
were carried out by 29 contract Civil Protection members.


-----

**2.6 Provision of Conditions for the Operation of Protection, Rescue and Relief Forces**

The operational part of the system of protection against natural and other disasters is primarily
based on voluntary rescue services and other structures organised by associations and NGOs.
The subsidy provided by the ACPDR, which was reduced for three per cent as compared to
2012, represents over 75 per cent of the total funds required for the operation of individual units.
Such operation includes continuous training of unit members, medical examinations and
insurance policies for their members, payment of salary refunds and reimbursements for the
loss of income to employers at the call-up of members, purchase and maintenance of their
collective and personal protection and rescue equipment, and material costs of interventions.

_Co-Funding of Rescue Services, Associations and Other Organisations_

Co-funding of the activities of services, associations, units, companies, institutes and other
organisations active in the field of protection, rescue and relief was carried out on the basis of
the established criteria and provided funds, through the conclusion of annexes to current
contracts for co-financing the protection, rescue and relief activities amounting to EUR 6.2
million.

Annexes to contracts were concluded with the Mountain Rescue Association of Slovenia, Cave
Rescue Service of the Speleological Association of Slovenia, Slovenian Kennel Club, Slovenian
Diving Federation, Slovenian Red Cross, Slovenian Catholic Girl Guides and Boy Scouts
Association, Scout Association of Slovenia, National Institute of Biology, Institute of
Occupational Safety, Faculty of Medicine – Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine – Forensic Identification Unit, Veterinary Faculty – Institute of Microbiology and
Parasitology, Jožef Stefan Institute, Velenje Coal Mine, TKI Hrastnik (chemical products
factory), Institute of Public Health Maribor, Slovenian Professional Fire-Fighter Association,
Association of Societies and Clubs of Rescue Dog Handlers of Slovenia, Association of Radio
Amateurs of Slovenia, and the following flying clubs: Josip Križaj Ajdovščina, Postojna, Tolmin,
Zagorje ob Savi, Coastal Flying Centre Portorož, Slovenj Gradec Airport, and Karst Flying
Centre Divača.

These funds ensured the operational preparedness of professional rescue services, fire-fighting
forces of general importance, associations and other organizations, and rescue services and
structures which operate on the voluntary basis. Part of these funds was dedicated to ensuring
a coordinated development of fire-fighting forces within the voluntary fire-fighting societies,
namely the modernization of protection and rescue equipment.

_Co-Funding of the Fire-Fighting Association of Slovenia_

Based on the annual programme of activities and tasks of the Fire-Fighting Association of
Slovenia, such as organisational activities, prevention activities, fire-fighter training, and
publication of professional literature in accordance with the Fire Service Act and the Fire
Protection Act, an annex to the contract was concluded with the Fire-Fighting Association of
Slovenia in the amount of EUR 527,600.

In addition, the ACPDR allocated EUR 97,500 for anniversaries of voluntary fire-fighting
societies, and EUR 109,012 to assist fire-fighting forces in the purchase of protection and
rescue equipment.

_Programme of Co-Funding Fire-Fighting Forces of General Importance_

The programme for co-funding of fire-fighting forces of general importance was fully
implemented: authorisations, mostly for tunnels, were complemented (Voluntary Fire-Fighting
Society Gornja Radgona, Voluntary Fire-Fighting Society Murska Sobota, Novo mesto Fire and
Rescue Centre), and new data on influence factors in operational areas (new roads, tunnels,
etc.) as well as dual activation areas of the fire-fighting forces of general importance were
updated and complemented, taking into account double-overlap areas. Moreover, plans for
2013 and reports on the utilisation of funds for 2012 were evaluated and 90 annexes to
contracts and 2 additional annexes for preparedness for the Cenkova tunnel were prepared.


-----

The co-funding of fire-fighting forces of general importance was fully implemented and
amounted to EUR 2.74 million.

_Emergency Rescue in Long Road and Motorway Tunnels_

On the basis of contracts for the performance of operational tasks in the event of road tunnel
accidents, concluded between the Motorway Company of the Republic of Slovenia, the MoD
and individual fire-fighting units (Jesenice Fire and Rescue Service, Domžale Fire Safety Centre
and Celje Professional Fire Brigade), a total of EUR 65,499 was paid to co-finance the
maintenance and restoration of personal protective equipment, insurances and transport costs
for tunnel fire-fighters.

Criteria for the organisation and equipping of fire-fighters carrying out protection and rescue
tasks after accidents in long tunnels were prepared and approved. In cooperation with the FireFighting Association of Slovenia, a purchase was made of a part of the collective equipment of
such fire-fighters in the amount of EUR 101,000.

_Co-Funding of Fire-Fighting Protection and Rescue Equipment_

In 2013, the ACPDR continued with the modernisation of protection and rescue equipment of
fire-fighting forces in voluntary fire-fighting societies, and thus with the provision of harmonious
development of these units. A total of 525 applicants responded to this tender notice. A total of
422 co-funding contracts were concluded, amounting to EUR 900,000.

_Protection and Rescue Operations at Sea_

A contract on co-funding protection and rescue operations at sea was concluded with the
company Adria Tow d.o.o., (towing services and assistance to ships and vessels) in the amount
of EUR 28,724.

**2.7 National Material Reserves for the Event of Natural and other Disasters**

In previous years, Slovenia started to establish national material reserves, primarily for largescale disasters, wildfires, floods, major hailstorms, communicable diseases, etc. The
implementation of the Programme of Establishing National Material Reserves for Protection,
Rescue and Relief in the Period 2009–2015 ensures materiel and equipment from national
reserves to help the affected population and the population at risk after natural and other
disasters, as well as personal and collective equipment for the activities of the protection,
rescue and relief forces.

The reduction of funds for the replenishment of dedicated stocks of equipment from national
reserves in 2013 thus results in a slower pace of providing and maintaining basic conditions for
the accommodation and survival of the population at risk due to natural and other disasters.

The ACPDR allocated a total of EUR 477,938 for national material reserves, the purchase of
equipment and tools for national units, and for the maintenance of assets. The following items
were purchased: required equipment for four trailers for large-scale disasters, inflatable tent (40
m[2]), lighting set for tents, three-part ladders, personal equipment for technical rescue unit
MUSAR (Medium Urban Search and Rescue), medical equipment for the medical team of the
Rapid Emergency Response Unit, equipment for the technical diving unit of the Rapid
Emergency Response Unit, clothes for water rescue units, rubber rescue boat with hard bottom,
motor and trailer, hydraulic rescue equipment set, PVC foil and various small equipment and
tools for the maintenance of DIA-AVS pumps, electric submersible pumps and electric
generator sets.

Other maintenance (containers, mobile dispensary, inspection and calibration of radiological
detectors, maintenance of tents, air blowers etc.) was postponed to 2014 due to the revised
budget. The revised budget also resulted in the cancellation of the purchase of CP uniforms. As
no uniforms have been in storage since 2010, new Civil Protection and contract Civil Protection
members could not be equipped with the associated personal equipment.


-----

**Commodity Reserves**

The Agency of the Republic of Slovenia for Commodity Reserves cooperated with the MoD in
the preparation of the annual programme for the purchasing of protection and rescue equipment
in the context of commodity reserves. The proposal of the Programme for the Establishment of
National Reserves with Means of Personal and Collective Protection was prepared pursuant to
the Decree on Means and Equipment for Personal and Collective Equipment (Official Gazette of
the RS, no. 116/03). Article 7 of the Decree stipulates that with the reserves of protection and
rescue means, in accordance with national disaster response plans, the ACPDR provides
certain means and equipment for personal and collective protection, especially after nuclear
accidents or other accidents involving radiological, chemical or biological substances, and
based on plans for the protection and rescue of population in the event of accidents involving
dangerous substances (accidents at the Krško Nuclear Power Plant, accidents involving
chlorine or other dangerous substances) and in the event of terrorist operations.

Personal and collective protection equipment, included in the Commodity Reserve Programme,
was selected and planned to be used in the shortest time possible and suitable for mass use.
For 2013, the Agency's Board of Directors adopted a work programme and a financial plan for
the purchase of that equipment in the amount of EUR 903,604 (excl. VAT). A total of EUR
417,170 was spent for the purchase of gas masks, protective gowns, dosimeters with readers,
decontamination assets, devices and tools, radiological detectors, mobile dispensary equipment
and other means of protection.

_Civil Protection – the Inspection of Avalanche and Preparations for the Protection of the Area_

**2.9 Delivery of Fire Fund Assets and Vehicles to Voluntary Fire-Fighting Societies**

In the area of logistics, pursuant to the Law on Physical Assets of the State, Regions and
Municipalities (Official Gazette of the RS, Nos. 86/10, 75/12 and 47/13) and with the purpose of
fulfilment of public interest in the area of protection against natural and other disasters, nine
vehicles intended for the regular write-off in 2011 were transferred to the organisations
operating in the area of protection, rescue and relief (mostly voluntary fire-fighting societies). In
2013, in line with the decision of the Committee for the Management of the Fire Fund Assets, a
total of 2604 pieces of various fire-fighting equipment and communication resources, purchased
in the past years through the Fire Fund, were transferred to the Fire-Fighting Association of
Slovenia.


-----

**2.10 Fire Tax**

Eligible use of fire tax funds is laid down in Article 59 of the Fire Protection Act. The use of
funds for general social importance is in the hands of the Committee for the Fire Fund
Management, in accordance with the annual plan for the use of the fire tax inflow, which in 2013
amounted to EUR 7.7 million. The Fire Fund resources ensure better fire safety in local
communities. The share of fire tax funds for local communities in the amount of 70 per cent was
determined by a Government decision and totalled in EUR 5.68 million.

In accordance with the plan for spending the fire tax funds inflow adopted by the Committee and
based on the decision of the RS Government, 30 per cent of fire tax revenue was allocated to
the tasks of general importance: co-financing of equipment, upgrading and maintenance of
application for fire-fighting forces of general importance, co-financing of operation and equipping
of fire-fighting forces, co-financing of research in the field of fire protection, and education and
training for fire protection. The purchase and distribution of means and equipment upgrades and
improves the equipping of fire-fighting forces. Part of the means was also dedicated to the
protection, rescue and relief activity in the field of fire protection, carried out by the Fire-Fighting
Association of Slovenia, which is the provision of and care for further development and
education and training of voluntary fire-fighting forces in Slovenia.

In 2013, 93 per cent of the Fire Fund Annual Plan was realised. As administrative support to the
Committee, the ACPDR placed particular emphasis on the realization and preparation of
technical characteristics or specifications of equipment intended for purchase through the public
procurement system.

In 2013, several high-value and several low-value public procurement procedures were carried
out for the purchase of communication resources, thermal video cameras, barriers to prevent
marine pollution on the reels, oil containment boom, SCBA training area, equipment for the
elimination of the consequences of major floods, compressor stations, equipment for NBC
protection (decontamination stations, radiological detectors, commander dosimeters,
decontamination kits), fire-fighting equipment for wildfires (Karst) and metal pressure vessels
and valves.

A public call for the co-funding of fire-fighting vehicles for Karst was made, totalling in EUR
190,000. Eight contracts were signed, namely with the following municipalities: Hrpelje-Kozina,
Izola, Koper, Nova Gorica, Pivka, Sežana (two contracts) and Tolmin.

The co-financing was carried out for the training of operational voluntary fire-fighters,
maintenance and upgrade of the information system Vulkan, medical examinations of firefighters before the training in the use of self-contained breathing apparatuses (SCBA),
equipment of regional commanders and participation of young firemen in Fire-Fighting Olympics
in France, totalling in EUR 843 645. The Fire Fund resources were also used for regular
maintenance of equipment for the Ig Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief and
the Sežana Training Unit, amounting to the total of EUR 106,219.


-----

**2.11 Research and Development in the Field of Protection against Natural and other**
**Disasters**

Following a call for proposals for titles of research and development projects, several proposals
were submitted in 2013, of which the Commission selected five projects for research and
development work. These projects were focused on the analysis of the formation of toxic gases
from combustion of fuels, production of software and hardware to simulate the burning of
wildfires, monitoring of fire engines and teams during interventions, development of a device for
the implementation of complex scenarios related to fire-fighting and rescue in difficult areas, and
preparation of programme learning tool for exercises in the context of forest fires. Public tender
was not carried out for the projects selected in 2013, as well as for the projects selected in 2012
(approved in 2013). For these projects, the beginning of the procedure for their publication on a
public portal is in preparation. Currently, the technical specifications are being supplemented for
projects aimed at the preparation of fire plans in electronic form (application), implementation of
preventive fires (measures against wildfires), fire safety in residential buildings, protection of
cultural heritage, evacuation of mobility-impaired persons, definition of the way how to use
thermal insulation façade systems with combustible insulation and testing of the ejection of
concrete in fire conditions.

In the area of fire protection, five projects were underway – four projects were completed,
whereas the last is still in the implementation phase:

  - Tyre fires – emergency response instructions.

  - Preparation, implementation and analysis of evacuation from school premises.

  - Development of technological equipment for an operational fire engine for the time
monitoring of procedures and use of equipment.

  - Necessary conditions for the development of internal fires.

  - Fire construction products and materials after a real fire (still being implemented).

_Training of Protection and Rescue Units_


-----

### 3 DISASTER RESPONSE AND DAMAGE ASSESSMENT

In 2013, protection, rescue and relief forces were activated and responded to 13,429 events.
18,616 structures of protection, rescue and relief (PRR) forces were activated. Thus, the total of
117,098 members of various units participated in the activities.

_Overview of the Number of Interventions of PRR Forces in 2013_


Number of Activated
Type of Unit

PRR Structures


Number of Participating

Members


Rescue Dog Units 71 368

Mountain Rescue Service 541 3560

Cave Rescue Service 8 34

Voluntary Territorial Fire-Fighting
10,799 82,706
Societies

Professional Fire-Fighting Units 7128 30,154

Voluntary Industrial Fire-Fighting
39 148
Societies

Underwater Rescue Service 30 126

**Total** **18,616** **117,096**

**3.1 Snowfall**

Abundant snowfall, as this winter, in itself does not mean that condition is fulfilled for the
activation of the mechanism of damage assessment after a natural disaster. The Protection
against Natural and Other Disasters Act (Official Gazette of the RS, no. 51/06 – official
consolidated text, and 97/10) defines deep snow as one of natural disasters if the life or health
of people or animals is under threat and if it requires special forces and resources. The ACPDR
had to deal with heavy snowfall which was promptly removed by the regular services.

In relation to that, the ACPDR organised a consultation at the Ig Protection and Rescue Training
Centre in April 2013 on landslides and abundant snowfall. The consultation was attended by
representatives of the Association of Municipalities and Towns of Slovenia, Association of
Municipalities of Slovenia, Ministry of Agriculture and Environment, Ministry of Infrastructure and
Spatial Planning, the municipalities, Anton Melik Geographical Institute of the Research Centre
of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Geological Survey of Slovenia, ACPDR and
the companies DRI, Hidrotehnik and EHO Projekt. The meeting on 13 June 2013 was also
attended by representatives of the Association of Municipalities and Towns of Slovenia,
Association of Municipalities of Slovenia, Slovenian Roads Agency and the Ministry of
Infrastructure and Spatial Planning. It was agreed that a joint information on the problems of the
increased costs for carrying out winter service in the season of 2012/2013 should be prepared.
Unique methodology of data collection, carried out by municipalities (nature and extent of
costs), was prepared by the Slovenian Roads Agency and sent by the ACPDR to the
Association of Municipalities and Towns of Slovenia, Association of Municipalities of Slovenia
and Association of Urban Municipalities of Slovenia. On the basis of the information received,
the ACPDR prepared summary information and convened another meeting, to which
representatives of the Ministry of Finance were also invited. The ACPDR prepared information
for the RS Government.


-----

**3.2 Major Fires**

_Waste Collection and Processing Site of the Company Gorenje Surovina in Maribor_

A strong fire broke out on Sunday, 21 July 2013, around 1 p.m. at the waste collection and
processing site of the company Gorenje Surovina in Maribor. The fire was put out as late as on
Monday, 22 July, late at night. In the following days, the extinguishing of individual smouldering
parts took place at the waste disposal site. Fire-fighting ended on 24 July 2013, when the
company organised a fire watch in order to prevent re-ignition of waste.

More than 300 voluntary and professional fire-fighters of public fire-fighting services from
Maribor and the neighbouring municipalities participated in the activities aimed at the
extinguishment of fire. At around 18 p.m., the fire-fighters managed to localize the fire.
However, at night, secondary ignition occurred at the waste disposal site outside the industrial
buildings, resulting in the rekindling of fire. Fire-fighters limited the fire as late as on Monday at
around 3 a.m. On Monday, the situation at the site began to settle down. However, about 50
fire-fighters continued extinguishing fire at fire hot spots throughout the day. The employees of
the Gorenje Surovine Company also took part in the activities aimed at the removal of fire
remains.

_Forest fire at Mt Veliki Rogatec in the Municipality of Luče_

Forest fire at Mt Veliki Rogatec in the Municipality of Luče lasted from 10 to 21 August 2013. Mt
Veliki Rogatec or Mt Mrtvi Menih is a 1557-metre high peak in the Kamnik-Savinja Alps.

_Forest Fire at Mt Veliki Rogatec_

With the help of the reporter and the commander of the Voluntary Fire-Fighting Society Luče, it
was found out that the extent of the initial fire was about 0.5 ha, occurring in a very steep, rocky
and impassable area defined as protected forest. Due to the difficulty of access to the terrain,
wind and the plant cover in the area, the fire initially extending over the area of 0.5 ha spread
out. On the second day, 11 August 2013, the fire extended over the area of 1.5 ha, on the third
day, 12 August, over the area of 15 ha, reaching the extent of 17 ha on 13 August, when the
further spread of fire was limited. On 19 August 2013, the remaining fire at fire hot spots was
finally extinguished.


-----

The fire extended over the area of 17 ha, with the lowest point of burnt area laying at 1205 m
above sea level and the highest point at 1535 m above sea level. The fire-extinguishing
activities were carried out by fire-fighting forces from the Upper Savinja Valley and the SAF
helicopters. Representatives from the Slovenia Forest Service, Nazarje Regional Unit, Civil
Protection Headquarters of the Municipality of Luče and the Mountain Rescue Association of
Slovenia participated in those activities. Notification, activation and other support was provided
by the Regional Notification Centre Celje and Notification Centres of the RS.

_Fire on the Hill Trstelj_

On Sunday, 11 August 2013, at 3:13, a fire broke out directly next to the local road Dornberk–
Lipa at the foot of the eastern slopes of the hill Trstelj and near the area called Železna vrata.
The fire was slowly spreading west and southwest up the slope of the hill and caught a forest
consisting of black pines with some thermophilic deciduous trees. Despite the extreme dryness
of the habitat and a strong undergrowth of grass and shrubs, there was mainly ground fire.
Crown fire caught only individual trees and small groups of hornbeam and black pine. According
to the information of the Slovenia Forest Service, the fire spread over the area of 28,7 ha, of
which over 22 ha is forest.

The National Disaster Response Plan in the Event of Large Wildfire was activated. Due to the
very demanding and inaccessible terrain, fire-fighting forces from other regions also participated
in the fire-fighting activities. Since the area is under threat of unexploded ordnance, the
intervention also included members of the National Unit for Protection from UXO. On 12 August
2013, 180 fire-fighters from the Notranjska and Ljubljanska regions and 40 fire-fighters from the
Primorska region provided help in the extinguishing of fire and clearing of the burnt area
between Trstelj and the village of Škrbina, whereas four employees of the Slovenia Forest
Service took pictures of the edge of the burnt area, inspected the state of the forest and
prepared the final map of the burnt area. The data obtained were used as the basis for giving
information about the burnt area and damage assessment. All the activities aimed at the
protection of the burnt area ended on 12 August 2013 at 7 p.m. On the following two days,
occasional monitoring of the burnt area was carried out.

_Fire Area_


-----

**3.3 Hailstorms**

On 4 May 2013 in the afternoon, a heavy storm with wind and hail as big as walnuts broke out
in the area of the municipalities of Ljubno, Mozirje, Rečica ob Savinji, Šoštanj, Šmartno ob Paki,
Braslovče, Vransko, Žalec, Tabor and Kamnik. Due to hail, drivers in the tunnel Ločica stopped
their vehicles, and consequently the tunnel was briefly closed in both directions for safety
reasons. Because of the large amounts of hail on the road, the workers of the Motorway
Company of the Republic of Slovenia ploughed the Štajerska motorway section between
Vranjsko–Trojane twice in both directions. The area was again hit by hail at around 10.10 p.m.,
when the Ločica tunnel was closed again in the direction of Trojane–Vranjsko due to stopped
vehicles and for safety reasons. Because of hail on the road, the workers of the Motorway
Company of the Republic of Slovenia ploughed the Štajerska motorway again, this time the
section between Vranjsko–Šentrupert.

Hail caused considerable damage on crops and fruit trees and damaged a considerable number
of vehicles and roof structures on residential houses. Rainwater also broke into the basement
rooms of residential houses in Šoštanj and triggered a minor landslide. Hail was also falling in
some areas of the Dolenjsko region, in the area of Ljubljana and in the Gorenjsko region
(Kokrica pri Kranju, Preddvor, Potoče pri Preddvoru). However, no major material damage
occurred.

Fire-fighters pumped rainwater and covered the damaged roofs with a PVC foil, which was
delivered from the Regional Logistics Centre of the Celje ACPDR Branch Office.

337 fire-fighters participated in interventions.

**3.4 Storm with Strong Wind**

The storm that swept through Slovenia on 29 July 2013 primarily blew off roofs, fell trees and
damaged power lines in the areas of the companies Elektro Maribor and Elektro Ljubljana. 502
buildings were damaged.

The strongest gusts were between 80 and 95 kilometres per hour, at higher altitudes even
more. The fastest gust of wind at sea coming from the West was blowing at the speed of 95
kilometres per hour. In Ljubljana, the fastest gust of wind was caught at the speed of 83
kilometres per hour. In Celje, wind gusts blew at around 90 kilometres per hour, in Krško at 82
kilometres per hour, whereas in Prekmurje, the gusts achieved around 72 kilometres per hour.


-----

_Radar Rainfall Image on 29 July at 5 p.m._

According to the RS Notification Centre, more than 190 events due to storms were identified in
Slovenia. 390 units with 3008 fire-fighters participated in interventions. On 29 and 30 July 2013
until 3 p.m., the Regional Notification Centres received approximately 5000 calls to 112. The
majority of the calls, approximately 1500, were received by the largest Regional Notification
Centre Ljubljana. Visits to the webpage www.sos112 doubled, since more than 10,000 visitors
per day searched for information.

**3.5 Damage Assessment**

A sufficient number of qualified appraisers according to the prescribed methodology and the
regular maintenance of the AJDA application ensured that high-quality damage assessment
after natural and other disasters was also carried out in 2013. To this end, there were several
consultations on damage assessment after drought and flood in 2012 in all 13 ACPDR branch
offices, attended by 357 members of regional and municipal commissions for damage
assessment. The data assessment application AJDA was upgraded with a new price list for
agricultural products and new returns per administrative units, with the purpose of quality
collection and processing of data for reporting.

On 13 September 2013, in accordance with the prescribed methodology, Rules of Procedure for
the Assessment of Damage and the Rules of Procedure on the Work of Regional Damage
Assessment Commissions after Natural and other Disasters, and based on the Decision on the
Assessment of Damage in the Current Agricultural Production due to the Consequences of
Drought in 2013, damage assessment commissions at the local, regional and national levels
assessed the damage which affected Slovenia in July and August. In all 13 regions – or in 194
municipalities – it affected about 185,459 hectares of land. The estimated damage, which was
reported by 25,742 parties suffering damage, amounted to EUR 106.152 million, which
significantly exceeds 0,3 per mil of the planned state budget revenue for 2013. The handover of
minutes and other documentation on the assessment of damage to the Ministry of Agriculture
and Environment will be carried out by the end of February 2014.


-----

_Mitigating the Consequences of a Natural Disaster_


-----

### 4 EDUCATION AND TRAINING

In line with the annual education and training plan in the area of protection against natural and
other disasters, education and training took place at the Training Centre for Civil Protection and
Disaster Relief in Ig and at the Centre's training units in Pekre, Sežana and Logatec Training
was provided to Civil Protection (CP) members, members of units, services and other
operational structures of associations and other non-governmental organizations, commercial
companies, institutes and other organizations.

A total of 34,337 participants attended the various forms of education, training and other
activities (19,934 persons at the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief in Ig,
11,118 persons at the Centre’s training unit in Pekre, 2446 at the Logatec training unit and 839
at the Sežana training unit).

_In 2013, the following target groups were trained:_

**Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief in Ig** **Number of**
**(Target Groups)** **Participants**

Training Programmes for CP Members 417

Fire Service and Qualification Programmes 754

Programmes for public employees in the field of protection and rescue 25

Programmes for lecturers 15

Programmes for Foreign Participants 397

Programmes of Societies – Fire-Fighters 7145

Joint Programmes for Several Target Groups (performance of protection,
rescue and relief tasks using aicraft, leadership – group dynamics, public 1226
relations in the event of disasters etc.)

E-education 76

Programmes of Societies – Dog Handlers 3972

Programmes of Societies – Divers, Cave Rescuers, Mountain Rescue
995
Service

Programmes of Societies – Others (Red Cross, Slovenian Fire Protection
355
Association, Scout Association of Slovenia)

Other ACPDR Training and Activities 1683

Other MoD, SAF and IRSPANOD Training and Activities 593

Training of External Users 2281

**Total** **19,934**


**Pekre Training Unit**


Programmes of Societies – Fire-Fighters 7038

Programmes from the Field of Natural and Other Disasters 1045

Other Training Courses and Activities of the MoD and External Users 3035

**Total** **11,118**


**Logatec Training Unit**


Programmes of Societies – Fire-Fighters 125


-----

**Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief in Ig**
**(Target Groups)**


**Number of**

**Participants**


Programmes from the Field of Natural and Other Disasters 450

Other Training and Activities of the MoD and External Users 1871

**Total** **2446**


**Sežana Training Unit**


Fire Service and Qualification Programmes 335

Programmes from the Field of Natural and Other Disasters 200

Other Training and Activities of the MoD and External Users 304

**Total** **839**

**Total** **34,337**

**4.1 Preparation of Training Programmes**

In 2013, three new programmes were prepared:

  - Programme of supplementary training for emergency responders for the rescue from
behind the sumps of underground caves.

  - Programme of supplementary training for heads of First Aid teams.

  - Programme of introductory training on psychosocial support.

Four programmes were updated:

  - Programme of supplementary training of PRR forces for diving with autonomous diving
equipment – diver rescuer.

  - Programme of supplementary training of PRR forces for diving with autonomous diving
equipment/diver rescuer – according to specialties.

  - Programme of training on post-traumatic stress.

  - Programme of training for rescue from water for the needs of protection, rescue and
relief.

In 2013, 11 programmes were finalised and signed by the Minister (five from 2012 and six from
the current year). Four new programmes were still in preparation, whereas nine programmes
were updated. The final review of the applicable training programmes was prepared. In
cooperation with the competent service, information on the ACPDR website was updated.

In the field of proficiency examinations of professional fire-fighters, a draft detailed review of the
contents of the proficiency examination and professional literature for a professional fire-fighter
was prepared, as well as a detailed review of the regulatory framework in the field of final and
proficiency examinations for professional fire-fighters. The implementing documents for
proficiency exams were prepared (contents for publication on the website, application form for
proficiency examination and detailed review of the content and literature for proficiency
examinations for professional fire-fighters). The form was also prepared for the certificate on
passing the proficiency examination prescribed by the Director-General. The Minister appointed
a commission for the proficiency examination of professional fire-fighters. Draft reviews of the
detailed contents of the proficiency examination for the commander or operational head of a
fire-fighting unit and the head of a fire-fighting unit were prepared.

**4.2 Conduct of Education and Training Courses**

According to the Plan of Education and Training in the Field of Protection against Natural and
Other Disasters, the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief published 56
training programmes for different target groups for 2013. Those planned training courses which
had a sufficient number of enrolled candidates were also conducted.


-----

The training of the 20th generation of candidates for the profession of fire-fighters was
conducted according to the appropriate training programme. In 2012, the training programme
was updated with the purpose of harmonising its contents with the occupational standard for
professional fire-fighters, and with the methodology for the preparation of educational
programmes for protection, rescue and relief. Of the 51 enrolled candidates, 48 successfully
completed the training.

The training took place from 7 January 2013 to 20 June 2013. 55 contracts for a copyrighted
work and 7 work contracts were concluded for the purpose of implementing the training
courses:

  - 31 contracts with instructors for the implementation of the practical part of training.

  - 9 contracts with lecturers and

  - 15 contracts with lecturers who also participated as instructors in the practical part of
training.

The employees of the Training Centre (four from the Fire-Fighting School and one from the
department of Education and Training) were also involved in the implementation of the
programme, either as lecturers or as instructors.

_Protection and Rescue Forces – Training of the USAR (Urban Search and Rescue) Units_

The ACPDR continued with the training of confidants in the framework of psychological support
to emergency responders in fire-fighting units and notification centres, and started with the
training in the area of psychological support for the target group of operators in notification
centres. Supervisions were carried out regularly for the confidants in the framework of the
psychological support.

For primary school teachers who wanted to teach the elective subject on protection against
natural and other disasters, distance training was carried out in the e-classroom. Throughout
the year, teachers also exchanged information and read about the new developments in the eclassroom for teachers on the website of the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster
Relief. Teachers were also offered professional support in the conduct of the subject. In the
school year 2012/13, the subject on protection against natural and other disasters was
conducted in 27 primary schools, with 331 pupils involved.


-----

In the area of protection against unexploded ordnance, data was regularly exchanged with the
Bomb Disposal Section of the Police. Permanent cooperation was established with the 430[th]
SAF Naval Division in the field of the exchange of information on unexploded ordnance at sea.
Several presentations of the system of protection against unexploded ordnance were carried
out in primary schools and other events in Slovenia. The Training Centre for Civil Protection and
Disaster Relief hosted 22 presentations of protection against unexploded ordnance for various
target groups, showing a collection of unexploded ordnance.

Training courses were carried out for members of water rescue units. It turned out that training
is of higher quality when carried out in difficult weather conditions similar to real conditions
facing the members of water rescue units in the event of floods and other water disasters. Due
to the difficulty level of the training, only those participants with the proper physical and mental
fitness were able to attend and successfully complete the training.

_Overview of the Training Courses Organised and Carried out_


**Number**
**Type of Training**

**Events**


**Number of**

**Participants**


The Programme of Introductory and Supplementary Training to
Perform the Tasks of Protection, Rescue and Relief Using Aircraft,
Modules A, A/1, B, C, and C/1 (Cave Rescue Service, Mountain
Rescue Service, Kennel Club, Helicopter Emergency Medical Aid Unit,
Fire-Fighting Association of Slovenia)


28 684


Basic and Supplementary Training Programme for Fire-Fighters for the
18 144
Use of a Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus

Training Programme for Fire-Fighting and Rescue in Double-Tube
3 101
Road Tunnels

Training Programme for the Use of Hydraulic and Rescue tools 3 62

Training Programme for Extinguishing Fires in Closed Spaces, Module
3 65
A and B

Training Programme for Carrying out Interventions after Disasters with
3 79
Dangerous Substances

Training Programme for High and Low Altitude Rescue in Urban
4 43
Environments

Leadership and Group Dynamics 2 38

Public Relations 14 129

Introductory and Basic Training for the Civil Protection Commissioners 7 198

Introductory and Basic Training of Civil Protection Headquarters in
1 15
Companies

Supplementary Training of Civil Protection
1 17
Headquarters/Communicable Diseases

Supplementary Training of Civil Protection Headquarters/Earthquake 1 14

Incident Command for Cave Rescue Service and Mountain Rescue
1 27
Service

Basic Training for International Rescue Operations in Slovenia and
1 20
Abroad

Training for Drivers with Dangerous Goods (ADR) 1 10

Supplementary Training of Members of Units for Protection against
3 76
Unexploded Ordnance – e-learning

Supplementary Military Professional Training of Aviation and Technical
1 12
Personnel for Aviation Armament, Phase 1

Supplementary training of members of units for protection against
2 13
unexploded ordnance – training level testing

Supplementary Training of Protection, Rescue and Relief Forces for 1 12


-----

**Number**
**Type of Training**

**Events**


**Number of**

**Participants**


Diving with Autonomous Diving Equipment

Training for Water Rescue for the Needs of Protection, Rescue and
3 45
Relief

Periodic Training Level Testing According to the Training Programme
2 28
for Water Rescue for the Needs of Protection, Rescue and Relief

Introductory Training for the Employees of Notification Centres 1 6

Basic Training for the Employees of Notification Centres 1 6

Training of Radio Stations Users and Custodians of Communications
2 62
Systems ZA-RE and ZA-RE +

Training of the New ACPDR Employees 1 11

Supplementary Training on Mental Characteristics Related to the
2 71
Experience of Disasters – Coping with Injuries and Death

Training Programme for Providers of the Elective Subject on
Protection Against Natural and other Disasters in Primary Schools in 1 14
an e-classroom

Supervision for Confidants according to the Basic Training Programme
2 34
for Coping with Stress

Training of Confidants according to the Programme of Supplementary
1 19
Training on Psychosocial Support (Module 2 – Advanced Training)

Training of Operators in Notification Centres according to the Basic
2 56
Training Programme for Coping with Stress

Training of the Employees of the Ministry of the Interior and the Police
on the System of Protection against Natural and other Disasters – for 1 38
Multipliers on Protection against Inflammable Substances

Training on English Terminology for the ACPDR Employees 2 20

**Total** **119** **2169**

In 2013, the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief organised and carried out a
workshop on removing smoke and heat in the event of fires in closed spaces. In cooperation
with the SAF, presentation of methodology for the assessment of leadership potential was
carried out. The system of protection against natural and other disasters was presented to SAF
members in the Moste Military Post, with the emphasis on the preparedness for the demolition
of buildings.

In the Sežana Training Unit, a national training course was carried out in November for work
with volunteers who would participate in the cleaning of the coast and oily birds in the event of
the pollution of the sea coast with oil and its derivatives. The training was conducted as part of
an international project Preparedness for Oil-Polluted Shoreline Clean-up and Oiled Wildlife
Interventions (POSOW), aimed at the training for rescue and the development of regional
cooperation in the event of such pollution in European Mediterranean countries (Croatia,
Cyprus, France, Greece, Italy, Malta, Spain and Slovenia). The project LIFE+SIMARINENATURA involved the Regional Marine Pollution Emergency Response Centre (REMPEC) from
Malta, Institute for Environmental Protection and Research (ISPRA) from Italy, ACPDR and Bird
Watching and Bird Study Society of Slovenia, with the support of several environmental
organisations.

Training participants were shown three different methods of removing spilled oil from the sea
surface using special machines (overflow, vacuum suction and use oil skimmer discs, cleaning
with sorbent materials). Bird Watching and Bird Study Society of Slovenia presented its
equipment available for searching, collecting, cleaning and transport of oily birds.

The demonstration of cleaning oil-polluted coast and oily birds was carried out at the
headquarters of the Office for the Protection of Coastal Waters in Koper. It was attended by
approximately 30 volunteers and professional responders. The employees of the DRAVA


-----

Vodnogospodarsko podjetje Ptuj d.d. water management company having a state concession
showed ways of cleaning sand and shingle as well as rocky coasts. Due to the
geomorphological characteristics of the Slovenian coast, most of the work in the event of
pollution should be done by hand, and therefore the participation of volunteers is very important.

_Ensuring the Conditions for the Operation of the RS Training Centre for Civil Protection and_
_Disaster Relief_

Conditions for conducting training were improved through the following measures:
modernisation of information and other equipment in classrooms in Ig (computer equipment),
Logatec (wireless connection) and Pekre, purchase of classroom equipment (chairs, desks),
construction of the area for the training of fire-fighters in the use self-contained breathing
apparatus in Pekre, replacement of the compressor station and the associated equipment in Ig,
purchase of training equipment for high and low altitude rescue in urban environments (rope
technique) and equipment for the training of fire-fighters in conducting interventions after
accidents with dangerous substances, and purchase of portable intervention case for the UXO
unit.

Working conditions for the staff improved through the replacement of kitchen equipment, and
greater security of facilities was ensured through the installation of technical security and video
surveillance equipment in Logatec.

At the end of 2013, the construction of the new training facilities in Ig in the size of 3500 m² was
in the final stages. The facilities will be used for all the training in extinguishing fires in closed
spaces (modules A, B and C). A multi-purpose building for carrying out technical rescue in the
event of a collapse and realistic interventions on the roofs was also built at the new training
range.

**4.3 Assessment of Training Level and Exercises**

Exercises were conducted in accordance with the Plan of Exercises in the Defence System and
the System of Protection against Natural and other Disasters in the Years 2013 and 2014,
which was adopted by the Slovenian Government. For each exercise, a decision, organization
and implementation plan, analysis and/or report on the exercise were prepared.

Exercises of national importance:

  - A one-day combined exercise for the comprehensive assessment of preparedness for
response to traffic accidents in the single-tube tunnel Karavanke was conducted in
October 2013. Due to the participation of Slovenia and Austria in the international
project GOAL, it was performed as an international exercise, with the involvement of
Slovenian and Austrian units.

  - In the framework of the event Protection and Rescue Days 2013, a one-day combined
exercise was carried out in Velenje. The exercise tested the capabilities and training
level for response to accidents with dangerous substances in the event of terrorist acts
in large settlements.

The following exercises were planned and carried out at the regional level:

  - A one-day small-scale practical exercise named Evacuation 2013 for the assessment of
the implementation of an evacuation measure in the event of a nuclear accident at the
Krško Nuclear Power Plant. Within the exercise, the evacuation of a part of the
population of the municipality of Krško to the location of an evacuation reception point
was carried out. The exercise was organized by the Municipality of Krško in September
2013, within the framework of the project PFE (Preparedness for Evacuation). The
exercise involved the Brežice and Novo mesto ACPDR branch offices, as well as forces
for protection, rescue and relief provided for in the municipal and regional plans.

  - A one-day small-scale practical exercise named Aircraft Accident 2013 for
comprehensive assessment of the preparedness for response to aircraft accidents. The
exercise tested the preparedness and coordination of operation after an aircraft
accident at an air show. It was organised by the Trbovlje ACPDR Branch Office in May.


-----

It involved regional and municipal protection, rescue and relief forces, determined in the
plans.

  - A one-day theoretical exercise named Port 2013 for comprehensive assessment of the
preparedness for response to the discovery of dangerous substances (radiological
source) in the port of Koper. The exercise tested staff procedures in the region,
municipality and the company Luka Koper d.d. It was carried out in October by the
Koper ACPDR Branch Office. It involved the Civil Protection Headqarters for the Obalna
region, as well as regional and municipal units, determined in the plans.

_Protection and Rescue Forces – Training of the USAR (Urban Search and Rescue) Units_

The exercise Kanin 2013 in the Nova Gorica ACPDR Branch Office was cancelled due to
damage to the Kanin cable car, and the one-day theoretical exercise Earthquake 2013 in the
Postojna ACPDR Branch Office for comprehensive assessment of response to earthquakes
was cancelled due to organizational problems.

_Testing of the Training Level of the Civil Protection and Red Cross First Aid Teams_

Testing the competence of Civil Protection and Red Cross first aid teams at the regional and
national levels is aimed at refreshing practical knowledge, maintaining skills and competence,
operating in different situations, and introducing and presenting activities to the widest range of
people. The theme of the trials was rescue and relief after disasters with dangerous substances.

The regional trials for testing the training level of Civil Protection and Red Cross first aid teams
took place on Saturdays from 11 May to 22 June 2014 in Brežice, Žalec, Ajdovščina, Tržič,
Grosuplje, Lenart, Murska Sobota, Novo mesto, Cerknica, Ormož, Zagorje and Dravograd. The
testing was attended by a total of 130 first aid teams, which is 8.24 per cent of all the first aid
teams in Slovenia:

  - 38 Civil Protection teams from local communities, companies, institutes and
organisations,

  - 60 Red Cross teams,

  - 27 teams from fire-fighting and other non-governmental organisations,

  - 5 teams from the neighbouring countries (Croatia and Hungary).


-----

The national training level testing for Civil Protection and Red Cross first aid teams took place
on 5 October 2013 in Velenje, in the framework of the Protection and Rescue days. A total of 14
first aid teams participated in the trial (8 Red Cross teams, 4 Civil Protection teams and 2 firefighting teams). The winner was the first aid team of the Slovenj Gradec Regional Red Cross
Association.

Approximately 2500 members of units, services and organisations involved in the system of
protection, rescue and relief participated in the preparation and conduct of the 12 regional and
one national trial. The broader purpose of the trials was to bring the activities closer to the
people, to involve the youth (active participation of pupils), to demonstrate protection, rescue
and relief forces and to raise the awareness of the population (the importance of first aid skills,
willingness to help one's family and friends and promotional material).

The 27[th] First Aid Convention in Europe, which took place in Wels in Austria was, among others,
attended by the first aid team of the Municipality of Nova Gorica Regional Red Cross
Association, which took an excellent third place among 20 teams.

_Paradana 2013 Exercise_

Based on the Plan for the Implementation of the National Programme of Protection against
Natural and other Disasters in 2013 and 2014 and the Rules on the Exercises in the Field of
Protection against Natural and other Disasters, the Slovenian Government adopted the
Decision on the Preparation and Execution of the Exercise Paradana 2013. As a three-day
international, scheduled and combined exercise, the Paradana 2013 exercise was carried out
from 30 August to 1 September in an underground cave Velika ledena jama in the Paradana
reserve in the area of the Trnovski gozd plateau, in the cadastral municipality of Nova Gorica. It
was planned in such a way that the training participants knew the basic premise (accident of a
caver during the exploration of the cave who got injured while crossing the abyss depression at
a depth of 505 metres), time, purpose and course of the exercise. 165 members of units,
services and organisations, participated at the exercise of which 21 emergency responders
were from the Croatian Mountain Rescue Service, the Cave Rescue Commission.

_Protection and Rescue Days 2013_

The fifth Protection and Rescue Days took place from 3 to 5 October 2013, in cooperation with
the Municipality of Velenje. The activities at the national and local levels were aimed at
presenting the forces and means of protection, rescue and relief and various professional and
volunteer rescue services and structures, organized by non-governmental organizations (units
and services of societies and other non-governmental organizations), units of companies,
institutes and other organizations and Civil Protection (CP). The SAF, Ministry of the Interior,
the Police and the neighbouring countries also presented their activities and organisation. The
numerous activities particularly include expert workshops and consultations, Velenje 2013
national exercise, joint exercise of the Slovenian mining rescue units, international competition
of fire-fighting forces and national-level testing of the Civil Protection and Red Cross first aid
teams.


-----

The ACPDR tent was put up at the Titov trg square, which was the centre of activities.
Throughout the Protection and Rescue Days, the tent had many visitors. It hosted the
presentation of activities of protection, rescue and relief forces, and CP representatives from
Austria, Italy, Croatia, Hungary and the ACPDR. The INFO point was the central point for all
information related to the events, and also used for all the information related to the protocol, as
well as for the direct implementation of other activities (announcements, confirmations,
cancellations VIP-guests, and notification of the needs for additional equipment, resources, and
teams). Different exercises and events were also shown on TV screens.

From 30 September to 12 October 2013, there were 45 reports on the event in the media. The
majority of them were in the media covering the local community and region. Among the
national media, TV and Radio Slovenia, Večer, Slovenske novice and Radio Ognjišče reported
on the activities.

During the event, several consultations were organised for the expert public, with the visit rate
above average: (1) Consultation for Mayors, (2) Active Fire Protection (AFP), (3) Fire
Extinguishers, (4) Fire Watches (Fire-Fighting Watch), (5) Dangers in Caves and the Cave
Rescue Methodology and the Conclusion of the EU Project (International Cooperation in
Practice), (6) Unexploded Ordnance (UXO), (7) Consultation on Programmers Related to First
Aid, Blood Donation, Preparedness and Response in the Event of Accidents, Red Cross
Movement, (8) Consultation of the Slovenian Cave Rescue Units – with the Cooperation of the
Energy and Mining Inspectorate of the Republic of Slovenia, (9) Fire Safety in Tunnels, (10)
Understanding and the Use of Hydrological Forecasts and Products, (11) Technical Diving and
Rescue from behind the Sumps in Short Caves, (12) Safe and Healthy Bathing, (13) White
Water Safety and Rescue and (14) Role of a Social Work Centre in the Event of an Accident.

The 2013 Protection and Rescue Days were visited by a total of 55 foreign citizens from 13
countries (Austria, Croatia, China, Italy, France, Hungary, Germany, Netherlands, Poland,
Russia, Switzerland, Sweden and the USA) and two international organizations (DPPI SEE and
Red Cross), who participated as guests. The representatives of national or provincial protection
and rescue authorities from the neighbouring countries Austria, Croatia, Italy and Hungary also
participated as exhibitors who presented the work of their organizations. The Velenje 2013
Exercise and the exhibition part of the event were also seen by military attachés from France,
Netherlands, Poland, Switzerland, Russia and the United States.


-----

_Protection and Rescue Days – the Velenje 2013 Exercise_

The purpose of the exercise was to test the preparedness and relevance of the concepts of
action in the event of different threats and incidents with dangerous substances, and practically
to test the preparedness of the competent services and bodies responsible for response to
incidents and accidents involving dangerous substances, practically and theoretically test the
procedures for action of the competent services, and demonstrate the protection and rescue
activities in the event of such incidents.

The main aims of the exercise were to (1) test the capabilities and response to an accident with
a dangerous substance in a larger settlement, (2) evaluate technical solutions and assumptions
of responses provided for various incidents involving dangerous substances (notification, Rules
of Procedure) (3 ) test the participation of various services and units involved in carrying out
protection, rescue and relief activities, (4) test the preparedness of incident commanders, as
well as Civil Protection commanders and staffs, (5) test the performance of tasks of rescue
services and the treatment of a large number of injured people at the Celje General Hospital, (6)
with reference to the results of the exercise analyses, improve response and, if necessary,
supplement the rules of procedures and plans to be used during the response to incidents and
accidents involving dangerous substances and (7) carry out psychological assistance for
emergency responders and people involved in an accident.

Inspectors for protection against natural and other disasters as well as health care, police and
fire service experts were appointed as assessors, with the task of monitoring and evaluating the
effectiveness of the implementation of the planned tasks. The exercise was evaluated according
to the programme prepared by the IRSPANOD.

The exercise was conducted at four worksites in Velenje. All the exercise participants had the
appropriate personal protective equipment and the necessary collective equipment. All
procedures performed in the exercise were directly commented.


-----

A collective exercise of the mining rescue units of Slovenia SRRES Velenje 2013 was planned
for and carried out on 4 October 2013. The purpose of the exercise was to test the functioning
and coordination of certain legally responsible stakeholders in the event of a mining accident in
a pit of the Premogovnik Velenje, d. d. coal mine. The aim of the exercise was also to test the
professional training level of rescue teams. Two rescue teams from the Velenje coal mine were
formed, and two teams from the Rudnik Trbovlje-Hrastnik d.o.o. coal mine and teams from Idrija
and the Nafta Lendava company also participated in the exercise. The folowing entities also
took part in the exercise: the Velenje Coal Mine Rescue Headquarters (some members were
observers of the rescue teams), Energy and Mining Inspectorate of the RS (mining inspection),
six mining rescue teams, Voluntary Industrial Fire-Fighting Society of the Velenje Coal Mine,
and a doctor. The reports revealed no peculiarities or shortcomings, the teams did a good job.
The work in the rescue base and leadership was also evaluated as successful. The aims and
the purpose of the exercise were achieved.

The international fire-fighting competition on the city stadium involved 46 units, of which three
were foreign (from Austria, Czech Republic and Croatia). An exercise competition with a motor
pump and a 400-metre hurdle relay race was organized by the Fire-Fighting Association of
Slovenia, under the auspices of the ACPDR Over 600 fire-fighters were involved in the
preparation and execution of the competition. The first prize of the fire-fighting competition, a
portable motor pump, was received by members of the Šentjošt 1 team from the Dolomiti FireFighting Association. The prizes for the first place in the categories of male members B, female
members A and female members B were three submersible pumps. All three were received by
fire-fighters from the Hajdoše Voluntary Fire-Fighting Society.

On the initiative of the First Aid Professional Centre within the Slovenian Red Cross
(hereinafter: SRK) the ACPDR, the Central Board of the SRC and the Municipality of Velenje
organised the annual national testing of first aid teams. The preparation and conduct of the
testing involved 473 people from different services, organizations and societies. The purpose of
testing was to strengthen the work in the field of first aid in municipalities, organisations,
institutes and companies (formation of teams, personnel manning, training of members,
equipping) in order to improve the situation in the field of first aid in Slovenia. In line with the
aims, the evaluators tested the level of training and knowledge for the operation in the event of
large-scale accidents, correct response on the accident site and skills in the treatment of injuries
that threaten life. The trials were also aimed at assessing the triage of the injured people and
the emergency first aid measures, evacuation of the injured people and their preparation for
transport, the functioning of team leaders and the equipment of teams. The testing was
attended by 14 first aid teams, and the best was the team of the Slovenj Gradec Regional Red
Cross Association. The Krško Nuclear Power Plant team came second, and the Municipality of
Ptuj team came third.

The 2013 Protection and Rescue Days also featured a presentation of PRR forces and
resources, units, services and other operational structures of societies and other nongovernmental organizations, public services for protection, rescue and relief, companies,
institutes and other organizations, Civil Protection units and services, as well as the Police and
the SAF. The presentation of protection, rescue and relief units and resources took place in the
main exhibition tent. The following entities also participated in the event: flying club AVIOFUN
d.o.o. (Koroška, Libeliče), Meteorological and Hydrological Unit for Support to the Performance
of Protection and Rescue Tasks (Slovenian Environment Agency), Ecological Laboratory with a
Mobile Unit (Jožef Stefan Institute), Mountain Rescue Association of Slovenia, Fire-Fighting
Association of Slovenia, Cave Rescue Service (Slovene Speleological Association), Slovene
Kennel Club, Persons Identification Unit (Faculty of Medicine), Technical Diving Unit (Rapid
Emergency Response Unit), National Unit for Protection against Unexploded Ordnance,
Institute of Microbiology and Immunology (Faculty of Medicine), National Institute of Biology,
Underwater Rescue Service (Slovenian Diving Federation), Cave Rescue Service, Slovenian
Red Cross, Unit for Protection and Rescue in the Event of Accidents with Chlorine and other
Corrosive Substances (TKI Hrastnik d. d.), Veterinary faculty, Association of Rescue Dog
Handlers of Slovenia, Association of Radio Amateurs of Slovenia, Slovenian Catholic Girl
Guides and Boy Scouts Association, Ecological Laboratory Mobile Unit (Institute of Public
Health Maribor), Slovenian Professional Fire-Fighter Association, Scout Association of Slovenia
and Institute of Occupational Safety.


-----

Protection and Rescue Days included various expert consultations as well as supplementary
training of the Rapid Emergency Response Unit and the training of fire-fighting forces of general
importance (Maribor, Koper and Kranj) in the use of a decontamination trailer.

### 5 INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

In 2013, international activities in the field of protection against natural and other disasters were
primarily focused on the strengthening of bilateral cooperation and regional integration, the
provision of development assistance to the Western Balkan countries, and the ensuring of an
active role of Slovenia in international organizations. The most important were the activities for
strengthening the EU Civil Protection Mechanism. Slovenia contributed its own share of
international assistance to the population affected by major natural and other disasters (typhoon
in the Philippines and humanitarian crisis in Syria). The ACPDR also successfully participated in
several European projects in the field of protection against disasters.

**5.1 Bilateral Cooperation**

In 2013, Slovenia continued its strengthened cooperation with the neighbouring countries
Austria, Croatia, Italy and Hungary, particularly in the border area and in the framework of
European projects. All the neighbouring countries participated with their presentations in the
2013 Protection and Rescue Days in Velenje.

_The 2013 Ljubelj Exercise as Part of the GOAL Project_

In cooperation with the Republic of Austria, in the framework of the GOAL project, a major
cross-border exercise Ljubelj 2013 was conducted, focused on tunnel accidents involving
dangerous substances. Joint training courses for rescue units were carried out. The work of the
Permanent Mixed Commission for Protection against Disasters with Croatia, and of its four subcommissions (for education and training, fire protection, coordination of disaster response plans
and cooperation in the field of emergency call number 112) was successfully completed. An
important achievement of cooperation with Italy was the signing of a Memorandum of
Understanding on cooperation in the field of disaster management, which provides opportunities
to strengthen further cooperation. In cooperation with the Italian region of Friuli - Venezia Giulia,
the European project AlpSAR was completed, the purpose of which was the development of
communication and information solution for support to mountain rescue. Activities with Hungary
took place mostly within the Sub commission for Cross-Border Cooperation which provided
support to the cross-border project titled Let's Rescue Together. The permanent mixed
commission prepared proposals for the improvement of operational cooperation after accidents.

Special attention was devoted to the transfer of knowledge and experience to the Western
Balkan countries in the form of development aid, cooperation in the preparation of legislation
and joint trainings. In February 2013, the ACPDR hosted a visit of the Director-General for Civil
Protection and Disaster Relief of Serbia, confirming the intention to conclude a bilateral
agreement in the field of protection against disasters.


-----

In the context of successfully implemented programmes of bilateral cooperation with France and
Sweden, the Slovenian representatives gained a lot of expertise. Cooperation with Germany in
the framework of several European projects was also successful. In cooperation with the United
States, a seminar on civil-military cooperation in the event of major accidents was conducted,
whereas in July 2013, the ACPDR delegation participated in the major practical exercise
Vigilant Guard 2013 in Colorado. Bilateral activities were also carried out with China, Russia,
Estonia and other countries.

In 2013, gold RS Civil Protection badges in recognition of several years of excellent bilateral
cooperation were received by the German Federal Agency for Technical Relief (THW), the
Croatian State Administration for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief (DUZS) and the Italian
Civil Protection of the Italian region of Friuli - Venezia Giulia.

**5.2 Regional Cooperation**

The ACPDR continued intensive work in the context of the key regional Disaster Preparedness
and Prevention Initiative for South Eastern Europe (DPPI SEE). In November 2013, eight
countries, including Slovenia, signed a new Memorandum of Understanding for the institutional
framework of the DPPI SEE, which constitutes the legal basis for further operation and activities
of the initiative. In addition to providing professional support to the Initiative members in the
development of disaster management systems and its annual financial contribution, the
ACPDR, in cooperation with Croatia, organised two training courses in 2013.

The one-week course on minimizing the risks of disaster in September 2013 involved three
Slovenian lecturers. It was attended by a total of 22 representatives from 10 DPPI SEE
countries. Cave rescue training was conducted by the Slovenian instructors in cooperation with
the Croatian colleagues in the Paklenica National Park in Croatia. The training was attended by
20 participants from 10 countries.

In March 2013, in the framework of the Slovenian presidency of the Adriatic-Ionian Initiative, the
ACPDR organised the Seminar on Protection against Forest Fires in Sežana. Over 30
representatives of all the eight countries of the initiative participated at the seminar. The final
initiative for annual meetings on forest fires in the region was adopted. In the framework of the
South-East European Cooperation Process (SEECP), the Ministers of Foreign Affairs adopted a
joint declaration, in which they expressed a positive assessment of the regional cooperation in
the field of protection against disasters and supported its further strengthening. In the context of
the Alpine Convention, the ACPDR professionally contributed to disaster protection activities.

**5.3 European Union**

The European Union represents the fundamental and priority multilateral framework for
cooperation in the field of protection against natural and other disasters. The ACPDR provided
its professional contribution and represented the national views in the discussions of the Council
Working Group on Civil Protection (PROCIV) regarding the preparation of the European
Parliament and Council Decision on an EU Civil Protection Mechanism. The new legislative act
entered into force on 1 January 2014. The most important novelties are a greater emphasis on
disaster prevention, the creation of a voluntary pool of pre-allocated capabilities of member
states, increased role of the European Emergency Response Coordination Centre, and greater
possibilities for the participation of candidate countries and potential candidate countries.
Council Decisions on the mass evacuation in the event of a disaster were also adopted. The
ACPDR participated in discussions on the new legislation in related areas (implementation of
the solidarity clause, establishment of the European humanitarian aid units, and the reform of
the Solidarity Fund).

In 2013, the ACPDR maintained an active role in the EU Civil Protection Mechanism, which is
the main instrument for the coordination of member states' assistance in the event of major
disasters. The Notification Centre of the Republic of Slovenia is involved in the Common
Emergency Communication and Information System (CECIS). In accordance with national
quotas, Slovenian representatives attended trainings, participated in the working groups for
modules, risk assessment and mapping as well as for the preparation of scenarios for risk


-----

management. The National Rapid Response Unit participated in the 2013 EU MODEX exercise
in Bulgaria. The ACPDR also participated in the response to major accidents involving
dangerous substances, intentional sea pollutions, single European emergency call number and
elsewhere. As the national point of contact for the GIO EMS mapping system (the Copernicus
Initiative), the ACPDR is involved in and, if necessary, activates the system for rapid mapping of
satellite imagery in the event of a disaster.

An ACPDR delegation attended the semi-annual meetings of the EU Civil Protection Directors
General in Dublin and Vilnius as well as in Brussels (May 2013), 4[th] Civil Protection Forum and
the ceremony at the opening of the new premises of the European Emergency Response
Coordination Centre (ERCC). The ACPDR representatives also actively participated in the
European Commission Civil Protection Committee.

In October 2013, the Commissioner responsible for Civil Protection visited Slovenia. She
emphasized and supported the continued leading role of Slovenia in the field of Civil Protection
in the Western Balkans and joint efforts for strengthening the EU Civil Protection Mechanism.

**5.4 European Projects**

In May 2013, the EU Programme for Strengthening the Cooperation with Candidate Countries
and Potential Candidate Countries in the Area of Civil Protection was completed. The
programme was carried out in the context of the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (the
IPA CP programme), under which Slovenia, together with its consortium partners, conducted
two regional practical exercises in 2011 and 2012. In 2013, in the framework of the European
Commission's Invitation to tender, the ACPDR successfully tendered for the implementation of
the second phase of the above-mentioned programme. The two-year program, which started in
November 2013, is aimed at further strengthening of the capabilities of the Western Balkans
countries and Turkey for disaster management, and enhanced cooperation within the EU Civil
Protection Mechanism. The programme comprises the performance of training courses,
exchange of experts, conduct of staff exercises and two regional practical exercises as well as
technical assistance.

The ACPDR was also involved in other European projects financed by different financial
instruments or funds. Within the framework of the European Territorial Cooperation, the project
GOAL is conducted, with the aim of strengthening cross-border cooperation with Austria. Within
that project, a large cross-border exercise called LJUBELJ 2013 was conducted, with the
scenario of an accident in the Ljubelj road tunnel. The exercise involved Slovenian as well as
Austrian protection and rescue forces. The ACPDR cooperated with Hungary in the projects
called SEERISK and Let's Rescue Together. It also provided professional support to the GEP
project - the Joint Geo-Information System for Emergency Protection of Drinking Water
Resources in the border area between Slovenia and Italy.

Within the framework of the Financial Instrument for Civil Protection, the ACPDR, together with
its partners, continued to provide courses for modules and technical experts (in 2013, seven
courses were conducted) and started to conduct practical and staff exercises for modules. The
ALPSAR project, which developed communications and information solutions to support
mountain rescue, was successfully completed. In addition, the ACPDR provided technical
assistance in the EU projects PROTEUS, which was aimed at raising the awareness and
effectiveness of cave rescue and completed in 2013 with the PARADANA 2013 exercise, and in
the PFE project titled Preparedness for Evacuation in the Event of Nuclear Accidents, which
also concluded with a protection and rescue exercise. In 2013, the ACPDR, as a partner,
successfully applied for the project MURA 2015 to be launched in 2014. In the framework of the
7[th] EU Research Framework Programme, the ACPDR, as an associate partner, participated in
the HeRO 2 project (2013–2015), which was designed to support the EU countries in the
mandatory introduction of the e-Call service by 2015. As a consortium partner, the ACPDR also
conducted activities within the QuestCity project (2013–2014), which is designed to train young
people in protection against disasters. In 2013, the European Space Agency IDRC (Improve
Disaster Response Capacity) project related to the upgrading of satellite services and
communications started. The ACPDR participates in the project as the representative of end
users.


-----

**5.5 UN**

The ACPDR participated in UN activities for the implementation of the Hyogo Framework for
Action (HFA) for the period 2005-2015. In addition, it prepared the national report on the
implementation of HFA for a two-year period and participated in discussions on the UN priorities
in the field of disaster risk reduction beyond 2015. It started to carry out activities for the entry
into force of the INSARAG (International Search and Rescue Advisory Group) Guidelines in
Slovenia. In accordance with its competence, it fulfilled its obligations in the framework of the
Hague and Barcelona Conventions and the Mediterranean Action Plan under the auspices of
the United Nations Environment Programme.

**5.6 NATO**

In the context of NATO, the ACPDR participated in the competent working bodies in the field of
Civil Protection and Civil Emergency Planning, in accordance with the 2013 work plan. It
actively participated in discussions on the host nation support in the event of natural and other
disasters and on the further role and development of the Euro-Atlantic Disaster Response
Coordination Centre (EADRCC) in its support to countries in the field of natural and other
disasters. In March 2013, in the framework of the NATO Science for Peace and Security
Programme, the ACPDR hosted a technical visit of a delegation of the GEPSUS project experts.

**5.7 Assistance in the Event of Disasters Abroad**

In 2013, through the Monitoring and Information Centre of the European Commission, the
ACPDR monitored all the major natural and other disasters throughout the world. Following the
decision of the Government, Slovenia provided international assistance three times. In February
and November 2013, it provided humanitarian (financial) assistance to the affected population in
Syria and to Syrian refugees in the neighbouring countries. In October 2013, following
Bulgaria's request through the EU Civil Protection Mechanism, Slovenia sent material
assistance (2000 sets of cutlery with billycans) for the provision of basic living conditions of the
Syrian refugees in accommodation centres in Bulgaria. In November 2013, Slovenia provided
financial assistance to the people of the Philippines affected by the typhoon Haiyan.

### 6 INSPECTION ACTIVITY IN THE FIELD OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS

The Inspectorate of the Republic of Slovenia for Protection against Natural and other Disasters
(IRSPANOD) performs inspections of the implementation of regulations in the area of fire
protection, fire-fighting, protection against natural and other disasters and protection against
drowning. In compliance with the Minor Offenses Act, the IRSPANOD also performs the
function of a law-enforcement authority in the above-mentioned fields.. The IRSPNOD
inspectors participate in interventions during natural and other disasters, as well as in the
investigation of the causes of fires. As evaluators, they participate in national and regional
emergency response exercises as well as in NATO and EU crisis management exercises.

In 2013, inspectors in the field of protection against natural and other disasters carried out 5013
inspections Fire protection inspections were carried out in buildings with a large number of
people and in facilities in which activities that may endanger workers and nearby residents take
place. Inspectors also supervised the construction of buildings and performed inspections on
the basis of reports. They participated in a number of joint actions of different inspection bodies
on the regional level and in the Inspection Board. Control was enhanced during increased fire
risk to the natural environment. Moreover, inspectors participated in fire-fighting interventions
and in determining the causes of fires. Fire-fighting forces were primarily inspected with regard
to meeting the prescribed medical fitness standards for operational fire-fighters and for personal
protective equipment.

In the area of protection against drowning, inspections of swimming pools, equipment lenders
and water activity organisers were carried out. Of particular importance were the enhanced joint
inspections on the Soča river.


-----

In the field of protection and rescue, inspections of companies representing a major source of
environmental risk were carried out, as well as inspections of unexploded ordnance (UXO)
storage sites. Moreover, inspections were carried out in municipalities and primary schools.
Inspections of some shelters were also conducted.

On the basis of inspections, a total of 870 regulatory decisions were issued. In addition to
issuing regulatory decisions, inspectors assigned corrective actions within reports on the
completion of inspections.

Based on the Minor Offences Act, the IRSPANOD performed 1343 tasks and issued 54
payment orders. Moreover, it introduced 73 procedures for the issuing of offence decisions, and
issued 1216 offence warnings.

In 2013, the IRSPANOD monitored and evaluated exercises of national importance in the field
of protection and rescue. Inspectors from the management of the IRSPANOD and its branch
offices, together with the other competent inspectors and experts from the field of health care,
fire-fighting and the Police, participated in various exercises of national and regional
importance: Ljubelj 2013, Karavanke 2013, Evacuation 2013, Velenje 2013, Kočevje 2013,
Aircraft Accident 2013, and Port 2013. They also took part in the assessment of the
international exercise Paradana 2013.

They actively participated in the Inspection Board and in regional coordination.


-----

## DEFENCE SYSTEM AND CRISIS MANAGEMENT

### 1 DEFENCE POLICY

**1.1 NATO**

The focus of work in 2013 was the three meetings of NATO Defence Ministers. The topics of the
meetings were the financing of capability development during the reduction of defence
expenditure of member states, with an emphasis on the development of capabilities for missile
and cyber defence, the planning of NATO's mission in Afghanistan after 2014 and the vision
and role of NATO after the end of the combat part of the mission in the country at the end of
2014. The latter topic highlighted the need for a fairer distribution of the burden due to the
growing gap in capabilities between the US and the European part of the Alliance. A decision
was taken on the conduct of a NATO Summit to be held in September 2014 in the United
Kingdom.

One of the important decisions of ministers was that the NATO common funds, which had so far
been dedicated to the operation in Afghanistan, be channelled into the financing of the basic
Alliance infrastructure. In the context of the Connected Forces Initiative, the NATO will increase
the scope of joint trainings and exercises, so that in the light of changes in the strategic
environment, financial constraints and reduction of the planned operational tempo in
Afghanistan after 2014, the Alliance will maintain the interoperability which has developed
between the allied countries. Ministers endorsed a new package of capability goals for the
period 2013–2019 for the Alliance as a whole and separately for each ally and noted the report
on the implementation of the Cyber Defence Action Plan. They also discussed the defence
aspects of the topics at the NATO Summit. In the framework of the partnership forums, the
Ministers meet separately with their counterparts from Russia, Ukraine and Georgia.

**1.2 Common Security and Defence Policy of the European Union (CSDP)**

The MoD actively contributed to the development and implementation of the EU Common
Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) and, by providing specific initiatives, represented
Slovenia's interests in the EU institutions, bodies and working bodies. In the framework of the
Common Security and Defence Policy, the most important activities were those related to the
future development of military capabilities in conditions of the economic and financial crisis,
defence budget reductions, capability pooling and sharing (P&S), and a more flexible use of the
EU battle groups.

During the year, preparations were underway for the European Council meeting on 19
December 2013, which was dedicated to the European defence. The European Council
underlined the importance of effective Common Security and Defence Policy in ensuring greater
security of EU citizens and its contribution to peace and stability in the neighbourhood and
beyond. The European Council identified a series of priority actions, divided into three topic
areas: 1) improving the efficiency, visibility and impact of the CSDP, (2) strengthening of
capability development and (3) strengthening of the European defence industry.

Informal meetings of EU Defence Ministers on 12 and 13 February 2013 in Dublin and on 5 and
6 September 2013 in Vilnius were devoted to the preparations for the December European
Council meeting on CSDP. On 22 and 23 April 2013, a formal meeting of EU Defence Ministers
took place in Luxembourg. The Ministers discussed the activities of the European Commission
in the strengthening of the European defence market and industry, and paid attention to the
development of the EU defence capabilities. They debated on the situation in Sahel and on the
establishment of the EU Training Mission (EUTM) in Mali.

At a joint meeting of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Ministers of Defence on 18 November
2013 in Brussels, the Ministers discussed the conclusions of the CSDP and the strengthening of
the European defence capabilities. They took note of the report of the High Representative
Catherine Ashton on CSDP, and of the proposals of the European External Action Service


-----

(EEAS) on Rapid Reaction force and EU battle groups (EUBG). The EU remains committed to
working with strategic partners. In developing the capacities, it advocates a more systematic
and long-term cooperation with NATO.

**1.3 International Operations and Missions (IOM)**

MoD was actively involved in the national decision-making processes and also participated in
the co-decision processes at the international level regarding the participation in IOM. In its
activities, it took into account the principles of the Cooperation Strategy of the RS in IOM and
promoted enhanced inter-ministerial cooperation, more intense public diplomacy and
appropriate adaptation of the working and coordination processes in the field of IOM. At the
highest level of decision-making, the MoD continued with the practice of regular consultations
and coordination on participation in IOM. In line with the strategy of participation of Slovenia in
IOM, the MoD participated in the preparation of the annual report of the Slovenian Government
to the Slovenian National Assembly on the participation in IOM and issued several internal
guidance documents in this field. The new Rules on the Planning and Implementation of
Participation in IOM detailed the responsibilities and tasks of the constituent bodies and internal
organizational units of the MoD in the planning and execution of the deployments of SAF
members, units, commands and capabilities, civil functional specialists and other civilian
personnel and capabilities to IOM.

**1.4 Bilateral Cooperation**

On the basis of annual programs, more than 300 activities of bilateral defence and military
cooperation were carried out. For the purpose of rational use of human and financial resources,
these activities were planned as projects and were focused mainly on areas of mutual interest
and expected mutual benefits. The most intense bilateral cooperation was established with the
neighbouring countries, strategic partners within the Alliance and the countries of the Western
Balkans.

The Agreement between the MoD and the Ministry for the Kosovo Security Forces on
Cooperation was signed and the final text of the revised Agreement between the MoD and the
Ministry of National Defence of Lithuania on Defence Cooperation (which is expected to be
signed in the first quarter of 2014) was coordinated. An agreement with the US was reached
and, through the exchange of diplomatic notes, the procedure was completed for raising the
legal status of the Memorandum on Cooperation in the Field of Defence and Military Relations
between the MoD and the US Ministry of Defence to the level of an international treaty. The
process of coordination of the text of the umbrella agreements on defence and military
cooperation with Brazil and Argentina continued.

In the framework of official bilateral ministerial meetings in Slovenia and abroad, the views and
opinions on the current defence and security challenges were exchanged, the emphasis being
on the strengthening and development of bilateral cooperation, cooperation in international
operations and missions, defence reforms and the security situation in the Western Balkans
region. During official or working visits to Slovenia, the Ministers hosted the Defence Ministers
of China, Macedonia and Hungary and the Minister for the Kosovo Security Forces. Abroad, the
Defence Minister met with the US Secretary of Defence and Defence Ministers of Austria,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Russia, Azerbaijan, Italy, Serbia and Montenegro and the Minister for
International Security Strategy at the Ministry of Defence of Great Britain. During the
preparations for the organization and conduct of the Comprehensive Regional Ministerial
(CRM), which took place in October 2013 in Brdo pri Kranju, the Minister also met with the
Secretary General of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). In the
framework of his visit to the American Federal State of Colorado, the twentieth anniversary of
the partnership programme between the SAF and the Colorado National Guard was solemnly
celebrated.

A large number of bilateral discussions were also carried out in the margins of international
security forums and visits to the SAF members in IOM, and especially in the margins of the
CRM, when the minister held short working discussions with the majority of Defence Ministers
from the countries of the Western Balkans and South-eastern Europe.


-----

**1.5 Multilateral Cooperation**

One of the most important events for the MoD in 2013 was certainly the preparation,
organization and conduct of the Comprehensive Regional Ministerial (CRM), which took place
from 1 to 3 October 2013 in Brdo pri Kranju. With the purpose of financial and conceptual
rationalization, the CRM combined working and ministerial meetings in the formats of the
Initiative for Cooperation of Defence Ministries of South Eastern Europe (SEDM), the Adriatic
Charter (A5) and the Forum for Western Balkans Defence Cooperation (SEEC). The success
of the meeting was confirmed by the high participation of countries and international and
regional organizations (NATO, OSCE, RACVIAC, and RCC), commendations from numerous
participating delegations, as well as the fact that the same project will be carried out by
Montenegro in 2014.

In 2013, in the context of the Multinational Land Force (MLF), the member countries (Slovenia,
Italy and Hungary) continued the procedures for the revision and renewal of legal documents
and the coordination of the text of the renewed umbrella MLF Agreement. Slovenia actively
participated in the process of affiliating the MLF to the NATO’s corps structure (NATO Rapid
Deployable Corps Italy, NRDC-ITA), and between April and September to the ISAF forces in
Afghanistan. Some attention was also paid to examining the possibility of setting up an EU
Battle group on the basis of MLF and DECI (Defence Cooperation Initiative) in the first half of
2017.

As an associate member, Slovenia actively participates in the Centre for Security Cooperation –
RACVIAC. Since 2011, the MoD contributes a civilian to perform the tasks of the head of the
pillar for the reform of the security sector. In the light of Slovenian membership in the SEECP
and the importance of the international organization, the MoD is considering taking up full
membership.

_Disarmament and Arms Control_

Consistently and in accordance with the set deadlines, the MoD reported on the fulfilment of
obligations arising from international agreements on disarmament and arms control. Ten
contributions were prepared and included in the national reports as well as sent to the
competent international organizations (UN, OSCE, and EU).

In June 2013, Slovenia signed the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) in New York. The MoD prepared
an initiative for the signature and ratification of the treaty, which was also completed in the
National Assembly at the end of the year.

In 2013, in accordance with the obligations assumed by Slovenia with the accession to the
Convention on the Prohibition of Anti-Personnel Mines (Ottawa Convention), the MoD destroyed
the planned amount of the excess of such weapons (2480 pieces). The SAF still has about 500
anti-personnel mines, which will be used for training. Slovenia reported on the destruction at the
13[th] meeting of the Parties to the Ottawa Convention, which took place in December 2013 in
Geneva.

In the framework of the MoD, a Commission for the Control of Military Weapons and Equipment
Trade and of the Transfer of Defence Products is active, coordinating and monitoring the trade
of defence products in Slovenia. In 2013, the Commission conducted 17 correspondence
sessions, during which it gave 37 preliminary opinions on the export of weapons and equipment
with the total value of approximately EUR 5.7 million.

**1.6 Defence Diplomacy**

Given the geo-strategic position and rapid economic, political, military and other growth of the
country, a resident Slovenian defence attaché to Turkey was accredited (with accreditation also
to Azerbaijan and Lebanon). In order to meet the conditions for the entitlement to old-age
pensions, the defense attaché in the US was replaced. The mandate of the Slovenian visiting
defence attaché in Austria, Greece and Switzerland expired.


-----

By the end of 2013, 32 military diplomatic representatives were accredited in Slovenia (and 31
by the end of 2012). In 2013, the defence attaché of the Czech Republic completed its
mandate, whereas military diplomatic representatives of Brazil and Iran were reaccredited.

At the end of September, Germany closed its defence attaché office in Ljubljana. The remaining
resident attachés in Slovenia are the defence attachés of the US, Russia, China and
Montenegro. Also, an increasing number of resident as well as non-resident defence attachés
has their accredited deputies in Slovenia.

**1.7 Strategic Planning**

_Medium-Term Defence Programme 2013-2018_

The Mid-Term Defence Programme 2013–2018 (SOPR 2013–2018) which was adopted by the
Slovenian Government on 1 February 2013, is the most important defence planning document.
It defines the objectives and key guidelines for operation and development of the Slovenian
defence system in the medium term. The Programme was prepared on the basis of the
Resolution on the Strategy of National Security of the Republic of Slovenia (ReSNV) and the
Resolution on General Long-Term Development and Equipping Programme of the Slovenian
Armed Forces (ReSDPROSV 2025), NATO Political Guidelines of March 2011, the RS Defence
Strategy and the RS Doctrine of the Military Strategic Reserve adopted in 2012, as well as the
NATO capability goals in 2013 for Slovenia.

The Mid-Term Defence Programme 2013–2018 serves as a basis for reorganization and
transformation of the SAF and the MoD. It also presents a link between the national defence
planning and the planning in NATO and the EU (NATO capability goals, response to NATO’s
Capability Survey (DPCS), EU Headline Goal, etc.).

Capabilities which are not essential and exceed the personnel, financial, material and other
resources of the country will not be developed, which will release resources for the maintenance
of important military and civilian capabilities. Most of the priorities of the Mid-Term Defence
Programme 2013–2018 are thus related to the realization of the NATO's capability goals in
2013. The Alliance agrees that these represent a fair share of Slovenia's contribution to
collective defence and a reasonable challenge.

_NATO Capability Goals for Slovenia in 2013_

With the endorsement of NATO political guidelines and thus the level of ambition of the Alliance
in 2011, a new cycle of defence planning in the Alliance began, in order to provide the
appropriate military and non-military capabilities necessary to achieve the level of ambition of
the Alliance.

On the basis of the political and military guidelines and security assessment, a set of minimum
capability requirements (MCR) was prepared. Further on in the process, the set of capabilities
was distributed and translated into collective, multinational and national capability goals. The
Alliance capability goals were endorsed by the Defence Ministers at the meeting which took
place on 4 and 5 June 2013 in Brussels. In this way, member countries committed themselves
to the development and maintenance of capabilities for the Alliance.

The 2013 NATO capability goals for Slovenia reflect the minimum share that, in accordance
with the burden-sharing principle, is assumed by Slovenia in order to achieve the Alliance's
common level of ambition. In accordance with the long-term guidelines for priority provision of
defence capabilities in the context of the collective defence system, capability goals are a
priority in the field of the development of military and civilian capabilities, which is also reflected
in the Mid-Term Defence Programme 2013–2018.

In comparison with the previous force goals package from 2008, the 2013 NATO capability
goals are better adapted to the national requirements, since Slovenia became relieved of some


-----

of the capabilities which were too extensive for the SAF, as well as of some capabilities, the
realization of which would not be feasible due to the substantial reduction of funding.

_NATO Defence Planning Capability Review for Slovenia_

As member of the Alliance, Slovenia is directly involved in the NATO defence planning process
(NDPP), which takes place in five steps. The fifth or the last step is the review of the fulfillment
of goals in which, by means of a special Defence Planning Capability Survey (DPCS), NATO
members report on the national goals, priorities and ambitions in the medium term (2013–2021),
inventory of military and non-military capabilities that could be used by the Alliance, financial
plans in the field of defence and the achieved results. Based on their answers, the Alliance will
conduct a comprehensive review of the state of the members' defence systems and evaluate
their effectiveness in achieving the assigned capacity goals.

A bilateral meeting with NATO took place from 24 to 25 October 2013 in Ljubljana. The basis for
the discussions at the meeting was the NATO assessment proposal regarding the 2013/2014
Defence Planning Capability Review for Slovenia, which was prepared on the basis of
Slovenia's answers to NATO's Defence Planning Capabilities Survey 2013 (DPCS) sent to
NATO in July 2013.

The Alliance estimates that in spite of the financial crisis, Slovenia meets the assumed
obligations within the international community. However, it drew attention to the fact that the 40per cent reduction in the defence budget over the last three years is alarming, especially since
the share for investment in the defence budget is only two to three per cent, while in the NATO
member countries; the overall average is approximately 20 per cent.


-----

### 2 SLOVENIA’S CRISIS PREPARATIONS AND RESPONSE MEASURES

In 2013, a new Regulation on Defence Planning (Official Gazette of the RS, no. 51/13) was
adopted, which has significantly reduced the extent of defence planning in peace. This ensures
the performance of tasks related to crisis management in the field of defence and at the same
time enables the planning of the establishment of increased defence capabilities for operation in
the event of a sharp deterioration of conditions in the international security environment.
Defence planning in peace is adapted to the real security threats and risks to national security.
In accordance with the Regulation, the contents of the defence plans are structured in two parts.
The first part relates to the planning in peace, while the second part concerns the planning in
the event of a sharp deterioration of security conditions and the adoption of the assessment of
threat to the country from attack.

Upon the entry into force of the Regulation on Defence Planning, the authorities responsible for
the defence planning at the national level were given directions for individual planning areas on
the adjustment of the defence plans. Specific guidelines were also sent to those entities who,
after the entry into force of that Regulation, were no longer obliged to prepare defence plans.
The legal bases and individual acts related to the definition of the tasks sent to them before the
adoption of the Regulation on Defence Planning were also repealed. The reduced number of
the authorities responsible for the defence planning was also reflected in the Register of
Citizens Deployed to Work Duties in Slovenia, since the schedule for citizens already deployed
by that time was cancelled.

The annually planned coordination and amendments of defence plan documents were also
carried out within the context of providing expert assistance. In cooperation with the ministries
and certain government services and partly based on the opinions acquired at consultations and
other forms of cooperation, the MoD prepared proposals of new defence planning acts or
amendments and to applicable regulations developed at the MoD and approved through interministerial coordination, e.g. on the topic of readiness measures.

Constant supplementation and coordination of the contents of the MoD Defence Plan was
ensured, as well as the updating of registers within the competence of the MoD. Some of the
contents in the MoD Defence Plan were carried out and improved. In cooperation with other
authorities responsible for the defence planning, solutions for planning at the national level were
complemented.

The time schedule for the implementation of the Doctrine of the Military Strategic Reserve was
adopted, including the tasks and authorities responsible for their performance. In accordance
with the time schedule, the implementation of tasks started in December 2013 and continues in
2014. The result of the doctrine, which represents the operational guidance and doctrinal
document of Slovenia in the area of defence, will be solutions and operational documents for
the creation of the military strategic reserve, the purpose of which is the provision and
maintenance of SAF's sustainability in the military defence of Slovenia and the fulfilment of
international commitments under Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty. The solutions will
represent a part of the contents of defence plans, especially that of the MoD.

Rules on the Exercises in the Defence System (Official Gazette of the RS, no. 100/13) were
adopted. The Rules re-regulate the tasks, responsibilities, preparation procedures and the
contents of the exercises in the defence system. Exercises were conducted in accordance with
the Plan of Exercises in the Defence System and the System of Protection against Natural and
other Disasters in the Years 2013 and 2014.

The NATO Cyber Defence Exercise CC13 (Cyber Coalition 2013) was organised and
conducted, with Slovenia actively participating for the first time.

In accordance with the applicable NATO policy, the North Atlantic Council (NAC) prepares and
conducts regular annual Crisis Management Exercise (CMX). In addition to the key NATO
bodies, member countries are also involved in the exercise, and, depending on the content of
the exercise, also the invited partner countries. In the framework of the preparations for an


-----

individual exercise, NATO organises planning conferences, which are carried out in the Allied
countries. Experts from the member countries who have professional knowledge of the areas
related to the overall contents of the exercise are also present at the conferences.

For the first time in Slovenia, a planning conference for the NATO Crisis Management Exercise
CMX 14 took place in Portorož from 30 September to 4 October 2013. The conference in
Portorož was attended by approximately 160 experts from the Alliance as well as
representatives of Finland, Sweden, Australia and Japan who are engaged in the exercises and
participate in their planning within NATO and their own countries. At this coordinating
conference, participants prepared the contents for the CMX 14 Exercise. The exercise is aimed
at testing the readiness in the decision-making procedures of countries and the Alliance for
responding to various forms of crisis, as well as the adequacy of cooperation and coordination
of measures in a crisis, and the ability to exchange information, the purpose of which is to
establish as comprehensive and realistic picture of events as possible. The planning conference
in Slovenia was the third in the cycle of preparations for the CMX 14 Exercise, which will be
carried out in autumn 2014.

In the framework of the activities of the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Group for the Coordination
of Preparations for the Protection of Critical Infrastructure in Slovenia, the leadership of which is
the responsibility of the MoD, the basic and sectorial criteria for determining the critical
infrastructure of national importance were supplemented, cross-sectorial impacts on the
functioning of critical infrastructure were defined, and priorities for criticality were set. The
proposal for the determination of critical infrastructure of national importance in Slovenia was
prepared and coordinated on the inter-sectorial level, including the authorities responsible for
the sectors of critical infrastructure determined by the Slovenian Government. Upon Croatia's
accession to the EU, bilateral dialogue for the protection of critical infrastructure was
established, due to the start of the process of identifying potential European critical
infrastructure. The MoD also ensured the participation of the Slovenian contact point for the
protection of European critical infrastructure at meetings, workshops and presentations
organized by the European Commission, and responded to its proposals and initiatives.

A couple of years ago, an independent communication and information (CIS) network was
established within the National Crisis Management Centre (NCMC) for the purposes of
implementation of all the required communication and information links. The network connects
the most important state authorities, government offices and companies of special importance
for defence as well as the Defence Administrations. The NCMC CIS network includes the
application of the Information System for Decision Support for fast, safe and effective
communication and coordination of activities in the decision-making process between the key
crisis management entities in the country in times of crisis. In 2013, the MoD carried out all the
appropriate procedures and activities, so that the acquisition of the national, NATO and EU
permission for the operation of the NCMC CIS up to and including the level of classified
information RESTRICTED two years ago facilitated work as well as enabled faster and more
appropriate communication for all the actors involved in the network.

The Plan of Administrative Communications serves as the basis for the planning of
organization, preparations and operation of administrative communications in peacetime and in
all security circumstances and is prepared on the basis of the Decree on the Administrative
Communications which regulates the organisation and operation of administrative
communications. The Plan was continuously adapted to individual changes relating to the
contents of the plan.


-----

### 3 DEVELOPMENT OF CIVILIAN CAPABILITIES 

**3.1 Civilian Functional Experts**

In 2013, Slovenia held bilateral talks with representatives of the NATO on the assumed
capability goals in the field of stabilization and reconstruction (S&R). In the final document, the
NATO and MoD Working Group noted that the activities in the field of S&R are conducted in
accordance with the time schedule and without major problems. In accordance with the tasks
arising from the capability goals, a decision was also prepared on the appointment of an interministerial coordination group for the field of stabilization and reconstruction in IOM. Civilmilitary cooperation is one of the three most important areas of the new NATO strategic plan
and is an important tool in a comprehensive, integrated and synchronized response to modern
crises and conflicts. Trained civilian functional experts (CFE) are an important support element
of each IOM; their integration into the military environment increases the capabilities of the
military component and decreases possibilities for conflicts with civilian participants involved in
a crisis or conflict. For smaller NATO and EU members, this is one of the niche areas that
should be especially carefully developed in the future.

Based on the experience gained from the preparation for participation and from the actual
participation of civil functional experts in previous IOM, guidelines for further development and
operation of CFEs are constantly updated. A proposal for the updated Regulation on the
Cooperation of Civilian Experts was prepared. At the appropriate time, depending on the
amendments to the Defence Act, the proposal will be submitted for inter-ministerial coordination
and approval.

In 2012, five Slovenian CFEs participated in IOM. Four of them were deployed to Afghanistan in
the framework of the ISAF operation: one to the Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) Herat,
one to the PRT Farah, and two to the ISAF Headquarters in Kabul. One CFE was deployed to
the NATO Advisory Team (NAT) in Kosovo. Unlike the larger countries which allocate much
greater defence and development resources to this end, the Republic of Slovenia does not
develop independent forms of operation that could unify and support a larger group of CFEs.

The work of CFEs in Afghanistan is deliberately oriented towards the building of capabilities of
the national and regional administration, which is one of the fundamental tasks of the PRTs. For
the most part, the efforts of civilian experts in the PRT Farah – a highly rural area with a small
number of educated or schooled inhabitants and an even lesser percentage of schooled or
educated women – were oriented towards the counselling and the provision of expert
assistance to the establishment of the regional administration’s capabilities in the field of
finance, customs duty and the legal system. In the PRT Herat, the most developed part of
Afghanistan, efforts were mainly oriented towards the support to the empowerment of women,
especially by promoting women's crafts initiative and the training of female officials in the field of
agriculture (preparation of the training programme), raising the awareness of women about
gender equality and human rights, and promoting the involvement of women in public life. Much
of the effort was also focused on the support to projects of Slovenia's international development
assistance to Afghanistan.

Slovenian contribution to the ISAF Headquarters was focused on the reintegration of insurgents
in the community and on the development of education and training of the Afghan security
forces and the appropriate funding mechanism in this area.

Slovenian CFEs in Afghanistan operate in accordance with the Afghan National Development
Strategy (ANDS), provincial development plans and the Slovenian plan of operation of CFEs in
the ISAF operation. The main objectives that the CFEs pursue in their operation are the transfer
of knowledge to the staff of the Afghan provincial institutions, investments in knowledge and the
building of Afghan capabilities for a more independent operation after the completion of the
ISAF operation.

In 2013, a CFE operated in Kosovo as part of the NATO Advisory Team which plays a key role
in establishing and providing the maximum effectiveness of operation of the system of security


-----

forces under the Ministry for the Kosovo Security Forces. The CFE offered expert counselling in
the field of budget and finance, related to the defence policy and defence planning.

In 2013, the MoD continued recruiting new candidates for CFEs, in conjunction with the annual
professional training, in accordance with the Regulation. Moreover, the training course titled
Cooperation of Civilian Functional Experts for Civil-Military Cooperation in International
Operations and Missions and in Missions in the Defence Field was also carried out and was
successfully completed by 18 new CFEs.

An electronic register of civilian functional experts was established and an active website was
created.

Prior to their deployment to IOM, the chosen civilian functional experts underwent special
training with the emphasis on particularities of the IOM environment.

**3.2 Cartographic and Geospatial Support to the Defence System**

In the area of mapping and geospatial affairs, for the purpose of providing mapping and
geospatial support to the SAF, the MoD continued with the development and maintenance of
the mapping system coordinated with the Slovenian military and NATO standards and the
NATO geospatial policy.

In cooperation with the Surveying and Mapping Authority of the RS and the Geodetic Institute of
Slovenia, the contents of four systemic sheets of the national and military topographic map of
Slovenia with a scale of 1: 50,000 was renewed: NL 33-05-13 Jesenice, NL 33-05-19
Radovljica, NL 33-05-25 Škofja Loka and NL 33-08-01 Vrhnika. One development project was
prepared, defining the concept of transition from the current way of managing and maintaining
the data of the national and military map with a scale of 1 : 50,000 to the establishment of a
unified relational data base called the National Topographic and Cartographic Model 1 : 50,000
(NTCM50). In cooperation with the Geodetic Institute of Slovenia for the needs of the SAF, a
new orthophoto map of the firing range and training area Bloška polica and the Ulaka area with
a scale of 1 : 5000 was produced.

A new e-mail address geo@mors.siwas activated, to which users can send their comments,
observations, corrections and initiatives on the cartographic material.

The Technical Agreement between the Slovenian and French Ministries of Defence on
Cooperation in the Field of Military Geography was signed. The text of the new annex to the
agreement with the US Geospatial Intelligence Agency was coordinated, as well as the text for
the conclusion of a new memorandum of cooperation with the United Kingdom Defence
Geographic Centre. A meeting was conducted with the management of the Institute for Military
Geosciences of the Austrian Federal Ministry of Defence and Sports. At the meeting, the
Austrian side offered the possibility of a free-of-charge use of the rapid mapping products for
conflict areas.

On the basis of the agreements concluded in the geospatial field, the MoD was provided, free of
charge, with the prescribed cartographic material (Mali, Middle East, Afghanistan) for the
preparation of SAF members for participation in international operations and missions,

Geospatial data and digital maps for installation into the navigation systems of fighter aircraft
Gripen were coordinated with the Hungarian MoD and also provided to the Slovenian MoD, to
be used for the Allied air surveillance over the Slovenia's territory. Navigational naval charts and
software were provided for the multi-purpose boat Triglav in the humanitarian operation Mare
nostrum - Lampedusa.

In addition, the MoD continued with the procedures for adopting NATO Standards (STANAGs)
in the geospatial area for inclusion in the Slovenian Military Standards, in accordance with
NATO's guidance and recommendations. A proposed draft of further development of military
cartography in Slovenia was also prepared.


-----

### 4 INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY OPERATIONS

In 2013, the MoD intelligence and security operations were carried out in line with the Defence
Act, the adopted annual work programme, objectives and tasks. The key tasks and objectives
were linked to the provision of intelligence and security support to the SAF forces in IOM as well
as to other bodies of the national security system.

The priority task in the intelligence area in the period concerned was to assess military as well
as political and security conditions in the area of the Western Balkans, especially in Kosovo and
its neighbourhood, in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the area of Syria and Lebanon.
Intelligence and security operations were also focused on other crisis areas in Africa,
Afghanistan and on the sea area of southern and eastern Sicily (wider area of the humanitarian
operation Mare nostrum - Lampedusa). The MoD monitored above all the indicators that might
threaten the Slovenian defence interests or increase the degree of a military threat to Slovenia.

One of the key priorities of the MoD intelligence and security operations was to provide efficient
intelligence and security support to the SAF members participating in IOM. The Intelligence and
Security Service (ISS) cooperated with all the competent defence system entities within the
Slovenian national security system, as well as with partner intelligence and security services
and with NATO and EU.

In the international field, cooperation continued within NATO, EU and with partner countries.
The Intelligence and Security Service continued with the operation of national intelligence cells
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo as well as those in the framework of intelligence and
security services of international headquarters of operations. It also participated in various
international events related to intelligence and security.

in the period concerned, the implementation of processes of establishing an integrated
intelligence and security system continued, in accordance with the adopted strategic documents
and on the basis of the adopted internal MoD rules.

The focus of security-related tasks in the Intelligence and Security Service was on detecting,
investigating and preventing the security threats to persons, jobs, facilities and areas of special
importance for the defence in Slovenia and abroad. The Intelligence and Security Service also
performed the tasks of detecting and preventing the activities of intelligence services of military
organisations and other bodies and organisations which pose a threat to the defence interests
of Slovenia.


-----

### 5 EQUIPPING, REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT, STANDARDIZTION AND  CODIFICATION

**5.1 Equipping**

in 2013, the implementation of the equipping projects was focused on providing the most urgent
equipment to perform regular activities and to ensure permanent readiness of the SAF in
carrying out their statutory tasks and for the operation and fulfilment of the objectives of the
Alliance. Two major projects are underway: the Cerklje ob Krki airfield and the upgrading of the
Cougar transport helicopters. The dynamics of implementing the projects is slow, and woks will
continue to be performed in the following year. All the investment documentation was prepared
on time and in accordance with the financial capacity of individual budget users. Project groups
achieved the expected professional standards. The time schedule for preparing the investment
documentation provided for several investment projects. However, due to lack of funding, they
were not implemented and were postponed to a later period.

In 2013, no project was implemented within the framework of the Act on the Implementation of
Basic Development Programmes of the SAF in the Period between 2008 and 2015, which
formed the basis for the systematic and continuous provision of key capabilities in the long-term
development of the SAF. Moreover, no funding is provided until the expiry of the programme.

**5.2 Real Estate Management**

The proposal for a Decree on National Spatial Plan for the SAF Central Training Area is in the
process of adoption by the Slovenian Government. The MoD approved the document for the
identification of the investment project for the arrangement of temporary mooring for military
vessels at Pier III in the Port of Koper. The search for a systematic solution for the installation of
solar power stations on facilities under the MoD management came to a standstill due to the
specific operational purpose of military facilities, investment costs and ecological dismantling of
installation elements.

Due to the economic situation of construction companies, certain projects came to a standstill,
which resulted in a failure to meet the deadlines. The construction of a sports facility in the Kranj
Military Post was delayed due to the contractor’s considerable financial problems. The operating
permit was obtained and the facility was handed over to the user for use and management,
without the mobile equipment of the firing range.

In 2013, the MoD ensured the ownership of additional parcels for the reconstruction and
extension of the runway at the Cerklje ob Krki airfield. Moreover, archaeological research was
carried out and in October, the works continued. Works on the runway are fully completed,
including the installation of devices at the eastern end of the airfield. The planned construction
works inside the airfield were also completed: aprons and warehouses for military cargo
logistics, fighter aircraft apron, heliport and technological water supply system with appropriate
devices for the provision of water used for fire-fighting. The construction of the first phase of the
bypass road Drnovo–Črešnjice began. Contracts were concluded for the construction of the
apron for transport aircraft and connecting roads between facilities. Operating permits for the
majority of facilities were obtained. In 2013, EUR 6.78 million were invested in the project of
modernisation of the Cerklje ob Krki Airfield, of which EUR 1.28 million were provided by the
MoD and EUR 5.5 million by the NATO. With the available resources, the first stage of the
planned airfield’s operativeness will be achieved.

In the context of bank guarantees for the correction of defects during the warranty period, the
malfunctions at the Škrilj firing range and training area connected to the work of the main
contractor SCT were corrected. Due to the pollution of water, the connection to the public water
supply system was established, and the heating network was renovated, which already results
in significant savings in the energy feedstock consumption. The project documentation for the
reinforcement of the firing facility's roof support structure was prepared.


-----

The construction or upgrading of the wiring in the SAF facilities was executed in accordance
with plans. Activities for the equipping of SAF facilities with technical security systems were
carried out in accordance with the Plan for the Equipping of SAF Facilities with Technical
Security Systems and the Plan for the Construction and Renewal of Safety Fences for 2013 and
2014. A total of 4050 m of new protection fence were constructed at the following locations: the
Bežigrad pri Celju warehouse, the Celje Military Post, the Škrilj training area and the Kranj
Military Post.

Works aimed at partial removal and partial reconstruction of the facility on Maistrova 5 in Celje
was completed. The facility and the rooms were handed over to the user. Some deficiencies
have been corrected with calling on a bank guarantee.

The maintenance of the MoD facilities and infrastructure, regular monthly service and repair of
elevators in the MoD facilities and regular monthly service and repair of air-conditioning
appliances in the MoD facilities take place in accordance with the needs. The maintenance of
MoD apartments requires increasing financial resources acquired only from rents. In 2013, only
urgent maintenance works were carried out.

Based on the decision of the Slovenian Government, real estate in both former military posts
was transferred to the municipality of Ilirska Bistrica, and all real estate in the Park of Military
History Pivka was transferred to the Municipality of Pivka.

In recent years, the per centage of real estate registered in the Land Register is rising, Of the
1131 apartments managed and used by the MoD, 312 apartments have not yet been registered
in the Land Register, which amounts to 27.3 per cent of apartments. In 2013, 201 apartments
were registered in the Land Register.

In accordance with a decision of the RS Government, 237 apartments are transferred to the RS
Housing Fund and 60 to municipalities. Of the total of 172 apartments which are still in the
process of being transferred to the RS Housing Fund or to municipalities, 124 apartments have
not yet been registered in the Land Register.

Of the total of 6014 land parcels, 155 parcels have not yet been registered in the Land Register,
and 62 proposals for the registration in the Land Register have been submitted. Thus, a total of
3 per cent of parcels are not yet registered in the Land Register.

**5.3 Standardisation and Codification**

The MoD standardisation plan, which includes the adoption and implementation of Slovenian
Military Standards (SVSs) and the certification of NATO standards, was implemented in
accordance with expectations and the available human and financial resources. In 2013, a total
of 42 Slovenian Military Standards were adopted, resulting in 51 per cent realisation of the MoD
standardisation plan. For purposes of the implementation of the Slovenian Military Standards, 9
decisions and orders were issued. In the process of national certification of NATO STANAGs
and STANRECs, 59 national responses were signed, representing less than a third of
Slovenia’s obligations to NATO. In 2013, the improved conditions resulted in the start of the
process of a comprehensive renewal of normative documents (Standardisation Act, internal
legal MoD acts on standardization) which govern the field of defence standardization in
Slovenia.

In 2013, under national jurisdiction, the MoD allocated 25 new NATO codification numbers
(NSNs) to Slovenian products and registered 13 Slovenian companies, which makes 187
altogether. On the basis of the acquisition of new supply resources, Slovenia was registered as
the user of 326 NSNs. 1194 identifications of material resources were carried out in the old
information system. In 2013, the preparation of registration data on all material resources used
by the defence and the protection and rescue systems was successfully completed. Equally
successful was the transfer of code numbers for 91,290 material resources to the new logistics
information system in the SAP environment.


-----

In the field of Government quality assurance, all claims by the NATO members (Turkey,
Germany, and Spain) which purchased the products from Slovenian producers (AREX,
COMTRADE, PRIMAT) were considered. The implemented procedures encompassed analyses
of risks in production and analyses of the final product inspection. The process was particularly
demanding in the event of the requirements for the NATO AGS project. In 2013, due to the lack
of funding and announced changes to ISO 9001, the procedure for the accreditation of the
national authority for Government quality assurance in the framework of the Slovenian
accreditation was interrupted.


-----

### 6 COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SYSTEM (CIS) 

**6.1 Information Security**

Key operational activities were focused on the maintenance of systems and devices for the
provision of information security in the MoD communication and information system (CIS) and in
the CIS which provides interoperability within the Alliance.

With the preparation of the Concept of Cyber Defence in the Defence Area, the MoD provided a
framework for further organizational and technical development of that capability in the defence
area.

For the first time, Slovenia actively participated in the NATO cyber defence exercise (Cyber
Coalition 2013), with the MoD being responsible for the exercise in Slovenia.

**6.2 Communication and Information Infrastructure**

In order to maintain the level of availability of the MoD CIS, the upgrading of the transit
telephone exchange of the private MoD telephone network was completed, access points to the
global network Internet were upgraded, and IPVP were upgraded and re-established. The
upgrade of radio relay communications system was completed due to the spread of the
availability of MoD/SAF CIS.

**6.3 IT Solutions**

The highest priority was given to the provision of availability of information solutions which had
already been introduced into operational use (information system for paperless operations –
IRDG, register of material – SKEV, information system for defence and protection duties –
ISOZD, unified accounting, finance, personnel and costs – MFERAC, the public procurement
information system and a large number of specific applications – ISOJAN). Numerous upgrades
were successfully performed for the information system for paperless operations (for example,
universal interface for service-oriented architecture, scanned invoice, e-invoice, electronic
signing of the ACPDR documents, and mass import of documents in the PDF format). For the
register of material, an online module to support the restoration of equipment according to the
points system was designed, and the IT solution for ammunition and explosive ordnance and
electronic management of stamps were upgraded. For the information system for defence and
protection duties, an upgrade or integration with the information system for paperless operations
(education, contracts for voluntary military service) was performed. For the IS unified
accounting, finance, personnel and costs, many upgrades were performed as a result of the
amended legal bases or increase of functionality. Much functionality has been or is being
introduced also within the MoD. A major upgrade was conducted in the area of e-business (the
budget implementation process – invoice, order).


-----

### 7 INSPECTION AND INTERNAL AUDIT ACTIVITIES IN THE AREA OF DEFENCE 

**7.1 Inspections in the Area of Defence**

In line with regulations, the Defence Inspectorate of the Republic of Slovenia (DIRS), as an
MoD body, performs inspections of the implementation of laws and other regulations as well as
of command and control acts in the area of defence. It reviews, identifies and evaluates the
preparedness and performance of military commands, units and institutions, status of defence
preparations, implementation of military education and training, and resolution of administrative
and technical issues in the area of defence.

In line with the statutory provisions, the DIRS also performs inspections of the implementation of
the Act on the Protection of Classified Information at the MoD and the entire area of defence. It
also inspects the MoD organisational units in the implementation of their administrative and
technical tasks, with the exception of the tasks and activities of the ACPDR and the
IRSPANOD.

Inspectors conduct procedures and decide on the violations in accordance with the Minor
Offences Act.

In 2011, the DIRS had the following key objectives: (1) Provision of effective and impartial
inspection of the enforcement of regulations in the area of defence through thematic and
comprehensive inspections and monitoring of the realisation of measures ordered in inspection
reports; (2) Provision of objective information to the MoD leadership about the observed state of
the implementation of regulations in the area of defence; (3) Preparation of action proposals for
the MoD leadership for the elimination of system deficiencies; (4) Modernisation of inspections
in the area of defence and the promotion of good practice; (5) Achievement of a higher quality
of inspections through the training of inspectors, and systematic care for the integrity of the
DIRS and inspectors.

The DIRS carried out a total of 55 inspections, of which 46 were regular scheduled inspections,
3 were special announced inspections, and 5 were re-scheduled inspections. Inspectors
conducted these 55 inspections over a period of 489 inspection days. Based on the findings, a
total of 259 inspection measures were issued, of which 256 were related to the elimination of
the established deficiencies or non-compliance with regulations, and 3 were on the termination
of activities which could pose a threat to people and property.

Of all the 259 inspection measures imposed in 2013, 152 measures were executed by the end
of January 2014. The deadline for the execution of 50 measures has not yet expired. A
complaint was lodged against 59 measures imposed. The decision on a complaint at the
second instance is not within the competence of the DIRS. However, it has an impact on the
execution of inspection measures.

In accordance with the imposed inspection measures, inspectors regularly monitored their
execution based on the analysis of the notifications on the execution received by the inspected
entities and, if necessary, also with warnings and repeated inspections.

**7.2 Internal Auditing**

In 2013, the internal audit service attained an 83% realisation of the annual audit and
counselling plan. It carried out six audits encompassing the survey of the existence and
operation of internal controls and the correctness or the purpose of operation in areas subject to
audit. The internal audit service issued 31 recommendations for the improvement of operation in
the audited areas. Higher level of successful control over the MoD development and operation
resulted in the improved management of risks and in the functioning of internal control systems,
greater accuracy and/or clearer purpose of the MoD operation.


-----

### 8 STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION 

**8.1 Posts on Websites**

In 2013, a total of 559 press releases were published on the websites of the MoD and SAF (on
average, 1.5 releases a day), which represents 56 per cent in relation to the estimate of the
expected number of published releases for 2013. In addition to the releases, 2862 photos as
well as 176 sound recordings and 75 video recordings were published.

The websites www.postanivojak.si are the central online media for promoting the profession of a
soldier and for the provision and recruitment of personnel as active SAF component members,
contract reserve members, for scholarships, voluntary military service and other opportunities
for cooperation with the SAF (for example military camp, MoD and Youth camp). The websites
are mainly intended for the younger generation, potential candidates for the profession of a
soldier, and for general Slovenian public interested in the life, work, equipment, weapons and
tasks of a soldier.

In 2013, the websites www.postanivojak.si were viewed by over 77,000 different visitors which
opened over 500,000 pages. On average, the visitors viewed 4.5 pages and stayed on a single
page for up to 3.4 minutes.

In the same period, 343 posts were published on the MoD, 207 on the SAF and 302 on the
ACPDR Facebook, whereas 1590 posts were published on Twitter. In 2013, the number of
posts on Facebook and Twitter exceeded the expected number of posts (on the MoD Twitter by
three times).

In 2013, the MoD also started to publish information on the social network Facebook
_postanivojak.si. 270 posts were published, and the Facebook page already has over 2000_
followers. Over 100 short documentaries were published on the YouTube social network.

In the framework of the MoD website, an online magazine of the SAF started to operate in
February 2013, with 71 articles and 460 photos published by the end of 2013.

For the purpose of the Comprehensive Regional Ministerial (CRM), the website crm2013.si was
developed and created, publishing information about the event.

In 2013, 12 per cent less press releases were published on the MoD and SAF websites as
compared to 2012, representing over a half of the estimate of the expected number of published
releases for that period. Releases were accompanied by less sound and video material,
whereas the number of photos went up by 47 per cent as compared to the year before, with the
number of actual releases exceeding the estimate of the expected number of published
releases by 43 per cent.

A lesser number of standard releases, such as press releases, is understandable, given the fact
that in 2013, the activities of the MoD on social networks increased. Thus, in 2013, the posts on
Twitter exceeded three times the posts published in 2012. In addition, since February 2013, an
online SAF magazine is published in the framework of the website _www.mo.gov.si, and the_
website crm2013.si was created for the Comprehensive Regional Ministerial 2013.

The number of posts on the English MoD websites and the number of posts on English social
networks:

  - Releases on the English website: 15 MoD and 34 SAF releases, totaling in 49 releases;

  - Facebook – MoD: 343 posts;

  - Facebook – SAF magazine: 217 posts;

  - Facebook – ACPDR: 302 posts;

  - Twitter – MoD: 1590 posts.


-----

_Posts on the mo.gov.si (MoD) and www.slovenskavojska.si (SAF) Websites in 2011, 2012 and_
_2013_

**Number of**
**Year** **Accompanied by**

**Posts**


Sound
Posts Photos

recordings


Video

recordings


2011 750 2000 153 146

2012 635 1941 137 109

2013 559 2862 176 75

**8.2 Filming Activities**

Review of film production activities in 2013:

   - DVD featuring a concert of the SAF Military Band.

   - Short presentation film on the air defence battery Roland.

   - Technically challenging film presenting military technology, shown at a consultation
meeting in Poljče.

   - Completion of the summary of the Adrion Livex exercise from 2012.

   - Short educational film on a self-standing chemical detector (CBRN defence).

   - Video clip for the central SAF exercise.

   - Presentation of the operation of a group for handling protestors (Joint Multinational
Readiness Centre), prepared for military police (completed at the beginning of 2014).

   - Recordings of current events (75 posts on YouTube).

   - Shots for the film presenting the Officer Candidate School (planned to be completed in
2014).

   - Preparations of a project for a comprehensive presentation of the abandoned air
defence programme Roland.

**8.3 Answers to Questions Brought up by Journalists in 2013**

In cooperation with other professional services, organizational units and bodies within the MoD,
189 answers to questions brought up by journalists were prepared.

_Number of Answers to Questions Brought up by Journalists in 2013 per Month_

**Jan** **Feb** **Mar** **Apr May** **Jun** **Jul** **Aug** **Sept** **Oct** **Nov** **Dec** **Total**

Number of
14 20 22 14 15 14 28 22 5 13 11 11 **189**
Answers


-----

**8.4 Publishing Activities in 2013**

The plan for publishing professional military and other literature for 2013 was implemented to
18.5 per cent – 4.1 per cent for the SAF, 36.8 per cent for the administrative part of the ministry
and 53.3 per cent for the ACPDR.

_Publication of Professional Military and other Literature in 2013_


**Planned**

**Publications**


**Number of**

**Publications**

**Published**


**Realised (in %)**


Administrative Part of
19 7 36.8
the MoD

SAF 97 4 4.1

ACPDR 30 16 53.3

**TOTAL** **146** **27** **18.5**

In addition to publications included in the annual plan of issuing professional military and other
literature at the MoD, two folded leaflets with information from the field of protection against
natural disasters were issued, and a collection of bilingual military mountaineering dictionaries
(Slovene-English, English-Slovene, Slovene-German, German-Slovene).

The issued periodic publications included 12 numbers of the SAF magazine, which in 2013
began to come out as a monthly magazine (before that, 19 magazines a year were issued), and
the volume of the magazine increased by 30 per cent. All the planned numbers (four) of the
publication called "Contemporary Military Challenges" were issued.


-----

### 9 NORMATIVE ACTS

In line with the RS Government Work Programme for 2013, the adoption of 17 implementing
regulations from the area of work in the MoD was planned. One implementing regulation was
adopted and published in the Official Gazette. In 2013, the MoD prepared 12 implementing
regulations which, however, were not included in the RS Government Work Programme for
2013, as the need for their adoption only arose in the course of the year. Concerning the
Government’s Programme, 16 implementing regulations thus remained unrealised.

With the Regulation amending the Regulation on the Salary Compensation and Reimbursement
during the Protection, Rescue and Aid Duties, the period in which a claim for the reimbursement
of salary and reimbursement of compensation for the loss of income resulting from the provision
of protection, rescue and relief tasks can be enforced was extended from 30 days to 60 days.

The amended Decree on Salaries and other Remunerations of Service Members of the
Slovenian Armed Forces when Fulfilling Obligations Assumed in International Organizations
and through International Agreements represented a new and more detailed regulation of
allowances for SAF members for hazardous tasks when deployed to IOM, while reducing the
amount of allowances for the performance of hazardous tasks. In the same year, the Decree
was amended again for the purposes of its coordination with the Amendment of the Public
Sector Salary System Act. Thus, the nominal base for military service or service outside
Slovenia had to be adapted to the modified wage scale in the Public Sector Salary System Act.
On the basis of the Agreement on Further Measures in the Field of Salaries and other Labour
Costs in the Public Sector Aiming to Balance Public Finances in the Period from 1 June 2013 to
31 December 2014, it was agreed with the MoD Trade Union that, inter alia, the amounts of the
allowance for hazardous tasks under Article 9 of the Decree, which were modified on 9 May
2013 and entered into force on 28 May 2013, returned to the amounts that were in force before
the entry into force of the amendment to that Decree.

With the Decree amending the Regulation on Production Consents and Trade Permits for
Military Weapons and Equipment, and on Preliminary Permits for Import, Export, Transit and
Transfer of Defence Products, the Commission Directive 2012/47/EU of 14 December 2012
Amending Directive 2009/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as Regards the
List of Defence-Related Products, which is occasionally amended by the Commission, was
introduced to the legal order of the RS. The new Decree on Defence Planning provided for a
significant reduction in the volume of defence planning in peace and the provision of the
adequate crisis response of Slovenia in accordance with its international obligations, and
allowed for the planning of the establishment of increased defence capabilities for operation in
the event of a sharp deterioration in the security situation in the international environment. The
Decree lays down new solutions related to the defence plan and crisis response measures,
introduces some new defence planning contents and sets out the testing of solutions from
defence plans in exercises. On the basis of the Decision Amending the Decision on the
Appointment of Members of the Committee for the Fire Protection Fund Management and its
Activity, two members representatives of voluntary fire-fighters were deprived of their office and
two new members were appointed.

For the purpose of simplification of procedures for the issuance of building permits and the
elimination of administrative barriers, the new Rules on the Fire Safety Concept and Studies
merged the contents of the Rules on Fire Safety Studies and the Rules on Fire Safety in
Buildings. The above-mentioned Rules, issued by the Minister of Defence in agreement with the
Minister of Infrastructure and Spatial Planning, lays down the contents of a fire safety concept
and fire safety studies, classifies facilities based on the complexity in relation to fire, and sets
out the facilities which require the preparation of a concept or study as well as conditions to be
met by the responsible design engineer preparing the concept or study. In the same year, the
above mentioned Rules were amended for the purposes of a clearer definition of conditions to
be met by the responsible design engineer formulating the concept or study. For entities
responsible for the preparation of fire safety concepts, conditions stayed the same as in the
previous Rules.


-----

With the amendment of the Rules on Measures against Drowning in Public Bathing Areas, the
managers of swimming pools can decide to install video surveillance systems in public bathing
areas (consequently, the number of lifeguards and security guards in public bathing areas can
be reduced subject to certain conditions) and technical solutions for water attractions (automatic
physical barrier or light signalling system at the entrance to water attractions), so that the
presence of a security guard at each water attraction is not necessary subject to certain
conditions. However, managers of public bathing areas must ensure the same level of safety for
the users of water attractions and a flawless operation of the system.

The Rules amending the Rules on Official Passes in the Field of Defence lays down the new
graphic image of official passes of members of the active SAF component and other military
personnel. The image corresponds to the new graphic image of public administration. The
contents of the form of the official pass did not change significantly. However, inadequate safety
features on the pass were modernised. New official passes also fulfil minimum standards for the
identification of the SAF members in NATO. In accordance with Article 32 of the Decree on
Defence Planning, the new Rules on Exercises in the Defence System govern the methodology,
organization, conduct and planning of exercises in the field of the defence system at the level of
regulation, since exercises are not conducted only in MoD, but also include other ministries and
government offices. Up until now, the conduct of each exercise referred to a government's
decision.

Amendments to the Rules on the Awards of the Ministry of Defence refer to the abolishment of
four MoD awards, change of the basic material for the production of awards and the treatment
of painted surfaces of the awards, description of the award for the medal of the SAF Chief of
General Staff, criteria or conditions for granting the award for work in the intelligence and
security fields, medal for achievements or firearms to a SAF soldier, change in the period for
putting forward the proposal for granting an award, a more detailed definition of the provision on
carrying ribbon bars, and a more concrete definition of keeping records of the awards which are
the responsibility of the SAF.


-----

### 10 RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGICAL PROJECTS

In 2013, the reduction of financial resources allocated for the implementation of research and
development activities continued and affected the scope of implementation of those activities.

**10.1 Basic Research**

Resources were allocated for the implementation of applied research for the attainment of
priority defence and protection capabilities. The last five projects, the conclusion of which was
postponed according to reprogrammed contracts due to financial restrictions, were successfully
completed.

**10.2 Technological development**

The projects and activities in this area were intended for the attainment of priority defence and
protection capabilities at higher levels of technological development. Activities were oriented
towards research and development activities, industrial research and technical feasibility
studies. Resources were used for the financing of three projects in the framework of the Orders
for the Increase of Technical Capabilities.

In 2013, in the context of the Programmes for the Development of Key Technologies, the last of
the projects for the development of small fuel cell technology for military purposes titled HighTemperature Polymer Electrolyte Membranes (PEM) Fuel Cells Fund was completed. The
development was conducted up to the basic technological subsystem in a laboratory
environment. However, due to the reduction of funding, the development could not be
continued.

In the context of international activities in the NATO's Science and Technology Organization
(NATO STO), a total of six activities were carried out, of which one began in January 2013 and
one finished in December 2013.

By participating in the NATO STO, the MoD successfully integrated in the international research
environment in the field of defence and also verified development achievements. The MoD was
active in research groups within the panels for sensors and electronics, technology of
information systems as well as human factors and medicine.

Due to the lack of financial resources, the MoD was not active within the European Defence
Agency.


-----

## IMPLEMENTATION OF RESOURCE PLANS

### 1 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FINANCIAL PLAN 

In 2013, the MoD spent EUR 350.7 million on the accomplishment of its tasks, which makes up
98.5 per cent of the applicable and 98.3 per cent of the adopted financial plan, following the
revised budget (hereinafter referred to as: the adopted financial plan).

_2013 Budgetary Resources (EUR)_


**2013 Revised** **Realisation in**
**Adopted 2013 FP** **Applicable 2013 FP**

**Budget** **2013**

(6 December 2012) (11 July 2013) (31 December 2012)

Financial Plan 378,575,978 356,594,561 355,921,242 350,702,788

Percentage in
Reference to the 106.2 100 99.8 98.3
Revised Budget

Difference in Reference
21,981,417 0 -673,319 -5,891,773
to the Revised Budget

**1.1 MoD’s Financial Plan**

The RS National Assembly issued two rulings on the available resources of the MoD. The first
ruling was made in 2012, whereas the second ruling was made a year later, when the revised
budget was adopted, which resulted in the reduction of the available resources by EUR 22
million – 23 per cent in investments, 14 per cent in current expenditures, and 1,2 per cent in
salaries.

The applicable financial plan of 31 December 2011 amounted to EUR 555,921,242, which is
lower that the adopted plan by EUR 673,319. Integral funds are reduced by EUR 10 million,
while appropriations are increased by EUR 9.3 million. Integral funds were reduced on the basis
of the Rules on the Completion of Implementation of Central and Local Government Budgets for
2014, which limited the acceptance of obligations after 23 October 2013. At the same time, the
acceptance of obligations on integral budget items up to 93 per cent of the adopted revised
budget for 2013 was limited, and due to the redistribution in the current budget reserve at the
Ministry of Finance, namely to cover urgent legal obligations of the state budget following the
Resolution of the Government of the RS, no. 41012-58/2013/3, dated 28 November 2013,
Resolution of the Government of the RS, no. 41012-64//2013/3, dated 10 December 2013, and
Resolution of the Government of the RS, no. 41012-65/2013/3, dated 17 December 2013.

The financial plan realisation in the amount of EUR 350,702,788 represents 3.8 per cent of the
RS national budget, which is the lowest percentage in recent years. In comparison to the
applicable financial plan, the realisation of integral funds was 99.8 per cent. The realisation of
appropriations was 77.6 per cent, chiefly as a result of state property management, for which
the largest amount of unapplied funds will be transferred to the next year. The MoD integral
funds represent 95.5 per cent, and the appropriations 4.5 per cent of the realised financial plan.

_The Portion of the MoD's Financial Plan in the National Budget (in Millions of Euros)_

**2006** **2007** **2008** **2009** **2010** **2011** **2012** **2013**

National Budget 7,628.3 7,762.9 8,740.1 9,259.8 9,280.2 9,362.8 8,993.5 9,314.5

MoD’s Financial Plan 446.6 488.1 546.3 549.8 552.6 448.3 396.0 350.7

Portion (in %) 5.9 6.3 6.4 5.9 6.0 4.8 4.4 3.8


-----

The difference between the applicable financial plan and the realisation is the uncommitted
EUR 5.2 million – EUR 701,960 in integral funds and EUR 4.5 million in appropriations. Of the
uncommitted appropriations, EUR 4.452 million was transferred to the 2014 fiscal year. The
remaining EUR 766,489 million were registered as a surplus in the RS national budget.

In comparison to the adopted financial plan, the realisation dropped by EUR 5.9 million, while
the spending index was at 98.3. The realisation of integral funds indicates a reduction of EUR
10.7 million: EUR 1.4 million for salaries, EUR 5.6 million for current expenditure, and EUR 3.6
for investments. The realisation of appropriations was by EUR 4.8 million higher than planned.

In comparison to the 2012 financial plan realisation, the realised 2013 financial plan was by
EUR 45.3 million lower, while the index was at 88.6. In integral funds, the realization is lower by
46.8 million. In nominal terms, all the categories have a lower percentage, while in in terms of
the structure, the portion of salaries went up by 2.3 per cent, and the remaining categories have
a lower percentage. The realisation of appropriations was by EUR 1.5 million higher.

_Comparison of the realisation in the last two years (in EUR)_


**Realisation in**
**Economic purpose**

**2012**


**Structure**

**(%)**


**Realisation in**

**2013**


**Structure**

**(%)**


Integral Funds 381,870,412 96.4 335,074,727 95.5

Appropriations 14,130,913 3.6 15,628,061 4.5

**Total** **396,001,325** **100** **350,702,788** **100**

The overview of the expenditures by budget users (BU) shows no greater differences in
comparison to the previous year. There was an increase in the share at the ACPDR (BU 1912)
for a 0.5 percentage point and a reduction in the share at the SAF (BU 1914) and MoD (BU
1911) for 0.3 percentage point, while the shares of other users remained the same. Table 4
presents the realization by budget users.

_Realization of the 2013 Financial Plan by Direct Budget Users (in Euros)_


**BU 1911**
**Total**

**MoD**


**BU 1912**

**ACPDR**


**BU 1913**

**IRSPANOD**


**BU 1914**

**SAF**


**BU 1915**

**DIRS**


350,702,788 40,487,850 31,601,365 2,134,618 275,744,808 734,146

100 11.5 9.0 0.6 78.6 0.2

The line chart below depicts the realization by budget users for the period 2006–2013 (base
year 2006). In comparison to 2006, only ACPDR has higher realisation – IRSPANOD has 85
per cent realisation and all other users have lower realisation. Index of the SAF is at 81, of the
DIRS at 70 and of the MoD at 56.


-----

_The Growth Index of Realisation by Budget Users (Base Year 2006)_

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

BU 1911 1912 URSZR BU 1913 BU 1914 1915 IRSO

The pie chart below depicts the breakdown of realisation by economic purposes.

_Breakdown of 2013 Realisation by Economic Purposes_

Research and
development, 0,2

Investment Appropriations, 4,5
expenditures, 5,1

Current
expenditures, 20,6

Salaries, 69,7

Salaries in the amount of EUR 244.3 million represent 69.7 per cent of the total MoD
expenditure. In the recent years, the portion intended for salaries is growing, in particular on
account of lower total nominal scope of the MoD financial plan and less resources for
investments. However, in nominal terms, salaries are strongly decreasing. Since 2009, the MoD
has been reducing labour costs by not replacing departures and by recognising allowances and
reimbursements only on a very rational basis. In comparison with the previous year, the salaries
are lower by a good EUR 22.8 million, while in comparison with 2009, when they were the
highest, the salaries are lower by EUR 47.9 million.


-----

Current expenditures amount to EUR 72.3 million, which represents 20.6 per cent of the total
spending. Due to the ageing of the equipment, the maintenance costs are higher; fixed
operating costs also represent a large part of expenditures.

Investment expenditures stand at EUR 17.8 million, accounting for 5.1 per cent of the total MoD
expenditure. Since 2007, the investments portion has been decreasing; the sole exception was
the year 2010 due to the use of the clearing debt.

As much as EUR 768,000 was used for purposes of research and development, accounting to
0.2 per cent of the total MoD expenditure. In the recent years, the portion of development
resources has substantially decreased.

The dynamics of individual categories of the MoD expenditures in the period between 2006 and
2014 is depicted in the line chart below.

_The Growth Index of Realisation by Economic Purposes (Base Year 2006)_


-----

**1.2 Overview of the Realisation by Programme Structure**

The year 2013 saw the implementation of the financial plan in line with the programme planning.
The financial plan was implemented through two policies, four programmes, 12 subprogrammes and 64 measures or projects. The MoD's fundamental policy is 07 – Defence and
Protection, and three programmes: Defence System and Crisis Management, Military Defence
and Protection against Natural and Other Disasters. Another programme of the policy 05 is also
used – Science and Information Society – Support to technology development projects.

_Realisation of the 2013 Financial Plan by Programme Structure (in Euros)_

**Realisation**
**No.** **Title of the Policy/Programme/Sub-programme** **Structure**

**in 2013**

**07** **Defence and Protection** **349,934,476** **99.78**

**0701** **Defence System and Crisis Management** **40,453,685** **11.54**

070101 Common Defence Functions and Defence Planning 26,142,262 7.45

070102 International Defence Cooperation 6,350,175 1.81

070103 Equipment and Infrastructure 7,227,101 2.06

070104 Inspections in the Area of Defence 734,146 0.21

**0702** **Military Defence** **275,744,808** **78.63**

SAF Human Resources Management, Education
070201 219,921,348 62.71
and Support

070202 Operational Tasks and Readiness of the SAF 44,645,320 12.73

070203 Infrastructure and Equipment of the SAF 6,411,452 1.83

Membership in International Organisations and
070204 4,766,688 1.36
Cooperation with the Local Environment

**0703** **Protection against Natural and Other Disasters** **33,735,983** **9.62**

070301 Functioning of the PRR System 16,814,771 4.79

070302 Preparedness of the PRR System 14,786,594 4.22

070303 Inspection and Law-Enforcement Tasks 2,134,618 0.61

**05** **Science and Information Society** **768,312** **0.22**

**0504** **Support to Technology Development Projects** 768,312 0.22

Development of Technical Capabilities in the
050405 768,312 0.22
Defence Area

**Total** **350,702,788** **100**


-----

**1.3 Defence Expenditure**

The realised 2013 defence expenditure was EUR 381 million, accounting for 1.09 per cent of
the GDP (Autumn Forecast of Economic Trends 2013, IMAD). It was by EUR 9.4 million lower
than that foreseen in the revised budget (index was at 98). The defence system realisation
decreased by EUR 8.7 million, and pensions decreased by EUR 0.7 million.

Defence system resources (budget users 1911, 1914 and 1915) represented 83 per cent of the
defence expenditure. The remaining 17 per cent was represented by military pensions and
resources of the Government Office for the Protection of Classified Information, the latter
amounting to EUR 0.5 million.

_Defence Expenditure between 2012 and 2014 (in EUR)_


**2012**

**Realisation**


**2013**

**Approved**


**2013**

**Revised**

**Budget**


**2013**

**Realisation**


MoD Financial Plan 396,001,325 378,575,978 356,594,561 350,702,788

**% of FP in GDP** **1.12** **1.08** **1.02** **1.00**

Defence Expenditure of the RS 422,969,233 410,727,122 390,733,520 381,280,233

**% of DE in GDP** **1.20** **1.18** **1.12** **1.09**

GDP in EUR million 35,319 34,908 34,908 34,908

_Comparison of the Portion of the Approved and Realised Defence Expenditure in GDP (in %)_

#### 1,80

 1,62 1,62 1,64 1,60
 1,60 1,53 1,53
 1,50 1,50 1,62
 1,56
 1,40 1,52
 1,50
 1,40 1,34 1,46 1,46 1,35
 1,43 1,44 1,41

 1,32 1,32
 1,17
 1,20
 1,12
 1,20

 1,09 1,00
 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

 Approved Realised

The chart shows that realised defence expenditure represented the lowest per cent of GDP in
2013, namely 1.09%. The highest per centage was reached in 2010, when defence expenditure
stood at 1.64% of GDP. The highest per centage of the approved defence expenditure was
recorded in 2006 and 2009, namely 1.62% of GDP. In the period 2001–2013, the average
approved defence expenditure represented 1.44 per cent of GDP, while the average realised
defence expenditure represented 1.42 per cent of GDP.


-----

### 2 PERSONNEL PLAN IMPLEMENTATION

**2.1 Personnel Plan Implementation in the Administrative Part of the MoD**

The Joint Personnel Plan of the RS Government specified that the permitted number of
employees in the administrative part of the MoD as of 31 December 2013 was 1170 public
employees. The administrative part of the MoD includes four budget users: BU 1911 MoD, BU
1912 ACPDR, BU 1913 IRSPANOD and BU 1915 DIRS.

Since the beginning of 2009, the administrative part of the MoD strictly adhered to guidelines of
the RS Government on the reduction of the number of employees. The table below shows that
in the period between 2008 and 2013, the permitted number of employees decreased by 189
public employees, which is 86 per cent of the Personnel Plan (PP) from 2008.

_Personnel Plan Implementation in the Administrative Part of the MoD (BU 1911, 1912, 1913 and_
_1915)_


**Year**


**Allowed**

**Situation**

**Based on the**

**Personnel Plan**


**Personnel**

**Plan**

**Realisation**


**Difference**


2008 1359 1378 19

2009 1328 1328 0

2010 1310 1300 –10

2011 1281 1274 –7

2012 1259 1190 –69

2013 1170 1161 –9

In 2013, the MoD reached the goal again, since the permitted number of employees as of 31
December 2013 did not exceed the permitted number which was specified in the decision of the
RS Government. The actual number was nine employees less than the permitted number. The
reasons for the lower number of employees are mainly some unplanned terminations of
employment, such as a disability retirement, termination of employment contracts and restrictive
employment policies.


-----

_Reduction in the Number of Employees in the Administrative Part of the MoD (BU 1911, 1912,_
_1913 and 1915)_

1400

1350

1300

1250

1200

1150

1100

1050

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Approved 1359 1328 1310 1281 1259 1170

Realised 1378 1328 1300 1274 1190 1161

The table below depicts the portion of the reduction in the number of public employees by
individual budget users from the administrative part of the MoD. The table shows that in 2013,
the administrative part was reduced by two per cent, which is within the agreed social dialogue
between the Government of the RS and the representative public sector trade unions.

_Implementation of the Personnel Plan for the Administrative part of the MoD by Budget Users_


**Realisation of**
**Budget User**

**the PP in 2012**


**Realisation of**

**%**
**the PP in 2013**


1911 MoD 799 768 96

1912 ACPDR 315 321 102

1913 IRSPANOD 59 57 97

1915 DIRS 17 15 88

**Total** **1190** **1161** **98**

**2.2 Implementation of the Personnel Plan in the SAF**

The process of personnel recruitment and provision for the employment in the SAF and for the
performance of military service in the SAF contract reserve includes not only the operational
part but also the activities oriented towards increasing the interest for employment in the SAF,
conclusions of contracts for the performance of military service and voluntary military service.

_Active Component_

The medium-term planning documents provided for 7600 members of the SAF active
component for 2013. With the Joint Personnel Plan of the state administration bodies for 2013,
the permitted number of the SAF active component decreased to 7377 members. On 31
December 2013, the SAF had 7360 employed members, which means that the Personnel Plan
realisation was 99.77 per cent. Of 7360 members employed in the SAF as of 31 December
2013, there were 1136 officers, 2002 NCOs, 3174 soldiers, 246 senior military specialists, 356
junior military specialists and 446 civilians.


-----

In 2013, 292 members left the SAF, of which 214 were soldiers. This is more than in 2012 (265)
and in 2011 (281). Since the permitted number of the SAF employees in the Joint Personnel
Plan was specified late in the year and the available funds for salaries were reduced, the
employment of replacement personnel was limited to the last months of the year. The Personnel
Plan was not fully realised due to limitations in the number of candidates available for
employment.

The quota of the SAF Personnel Plan also includes 47 people employed at workplaces in the
MoD at which military service is performed in accordance with Articles 47 and 48 of the Defence
Act. These members work in the Service for Investigation of Aircraft Accidents and Military
Aircraft Incidents (4), the Protocol Service (4), the Secretariat of the Secretary-General (9), the
Defence Affairs Directorate (24), Defence Policy Directorate (1), Logistics Directorate (4) and
Minister's Office (1).

_Comparison in the Volume of the SAF Active Component in the Years 2012 and 2013_


**Realisation**
**Status**

**31 December 2012**


**Realisation**

**Difference**
**31 December 2013**


Officers 1133 1136 +3

Non-Commissioned Officers 1991 2002 +11

Soldiers 3296 3174 –122

Senior Military Specialists 247 246 –1

Junior Military Specialists 358 356 –2

Civilian Personnel 458 446 –12

**TOTAL** **7483** **7360** **–123**

Owing to the reduction in the permitted number of the SAF employees as well as to the fact that
it is mostly solders who are leaving the armed forces and they cannot be fully replaced, the SAF
cannot achieve the target ratio between officers, non-commissioned officers and soldiers, and
the SAF age structure is deteriorating.

The strategic objective of the SAF is to achieve a structural balance between officers, noncommissioned officers and soldiers equal to the ratio 1 : 2 : 5. The target ratio, within the
framework of 7600 members of the active component, somewhat improved in 2012 in favour of
the number of non-commissioned officers, and in 2013 it became worse at the expense of
soldiers.

_Ratio between Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers and Soldiers_

**Non-Commissioned**
**Year** **Officers** **Soldiers**

**Officers**

2011 1 1.7 2.9

2012 1 1.8 2.9

2013 1 1.8 2.8

From 2005 to 2013, the average age of the SAF members constantly rose and went up from
35.17 in 2005 to 38.23 years in 2013. The biggest rise can be observed between the years
2012 and 2013. This is the direct result of the reduction in the permitted number of the SAF
employees.


-----

_The Average Age of the SAF Members in the Period between 2005 and 2013_

**Category** **2005** **2006** **2007** **2008** **2009** **2010** **2011** **2012** **2013**

Soldiers 27.49 27.92 28.56 29.16 29.19 29.62 30.11 30.78 31.41

Total 35.17 35.53 36.12 36.50 36.27 36.50 36.89 37.46 38.23

**2.3 Employment in the SAF**

A total of 391 candidates applied for employment in the SAF in 2013. Based on the selection
procedures, 171 candidates were employed, 141 of which were soldiers.

The incomplete realisation of the Personnel Plan was the result of the employment dynamics in
2013.

Despite the efforts, and the employment situation in Slovenia, it seems that the requirements
and the complexity of the military profession do not attract potential candidates to work in the
SAF.

_Planned Employments of the SAF Active Component Members and Realisation Overview_


Realisation of personnel plan


-----

**2.4 Military Service in the SAF Contract Reserve**

Personnel Plan 2013–2018 for the implementation of the Medium-Term Defence Programme of
the RS for the Period 2013–2018 stipulated that in this period, the number of members of the
contract reserve keeps within the framework of 1500 members. Due to the reduction in funding,
possibilities for extending the currently valid and for concluding new contracts with members of
the contract reserve were significantly limited in 2013, so that only the contracts for the most
important duties were concluded or extended.

In 2013, two contracts for serving in the SAF contract reserve component were concluded, as
well as 743 annexes. By the end of 2013, the SAF contract reserve included 1377 members, of
whom there were 27 officers, 67 non-commissioned officers, 1242 soldiers, 18 junior military
specialists and 24 senior military specialists.

_Comparison of the Number of the Contract Reserve Component Members in the Years 2012_
_and 2013_


**Realisation**
**Status**

**31 December 2012**


**Realisation**

**Difference**
**31 December 2013**


Officers 30 27 –3

Non-Commissioned
70 67 -3
Officers

Soldiers 1440 1241 –199

Senior Military Specialists 25 24 –1

Junior Military Specialists 18 18 0

**TOTAL** **1583** **1377** **–206**

In 2013, contracts with members of the contract reserve component were extended selectively
and did not include the long-service bonus. Annex on the extension of the contractual
relationship was not concluded with 222 members of the contract reserve component.

In 2013, the Decree amending the Decree on the Contracted Reserve Service in the SAF came
into force. Several times, the revised budget of the RS significantly reduced the financial
resources if the SAF. That amendment, therefore, inter alia, reduced the basis for calculating
the on-call allowance by 20 per cent (from 0.8 to 0.64 per cent of the gross minimum salary per
day). In order to achieve the earliest possible effect on the reduction of funds for the SAF
contract reserve, the Decree directly influenced the right of the contract reserve component
members regarding the amount of the on-call allowance. Legal protection of the members of the
contract reserve component was ensured with the possibility to submit, within 30 days from the
entry into force of the Decree, a written statement on the termination of the contract, without the
financial consequences which apply for the termination on personal grounds. Therefore, in
2013, decisions on the termination of contract were issued to 33 members of the contract
reserve component.

**2.5 Voluntary Military Service**

In 2013, total of 564 candidates applied for voluntary military service. In the end, a total of 198
candidates were employed for voluntary military service, of which 138 soldiers, or 69.69 per
cent, successfully completed the training. 60 soldiers terminated the training, mainly due to
health reasons or because they had not completed the first phase of training.

**2.6 Preparation of Personnel for Departure from Military Service**

For the SAF members who gained the right to retirement in 2013, a pre-retirement seminar was
organised, at which experts on gerontology, healthy diet, addiction etc. presented the perils and
opportunities of the third life period to the participants and gave them advice on how to make a
successful transition to that new life period in the best way possible. In cooperation with the


-----

Pension Fund Management) and “Modra zavarovalnica”, a lecture was held on the possibilities
of disbursement from their pension funds.

Three soldiers lost their employment contracts due to reaching 45 years of age. However, they
were given the right of reassignment to the appropriate posts within the MoD.

**2.7 Scholarships**

In 2013, four contracts for scholarships for the SAF were concluded for the academic year
2012/2013. Call for applications for the award of five scholarships for the academic year
2013/2014 was published in June 2013. On the basis of that call, all five (5) scholarships for
employment in the SAF were awarded.

**2.8 Care of Former SAF Members**

The MoD monitored the needs for direct assistance to its former members who are socially,
medically or otherwise disadvantaged and in need of the appropriate support. Support was
provided in the form of humanitarian and work campaigns, visits and regular contacts,
counselling and organisation of voluntary work.

The Intergenerational Information and Social Centre (MIDS) Ajdovščina organised 46 events
which were attended by 551 participants, whereas the MIDS Slovenska Bistrica organised 18
events which were attended by the total of 230 participants. The events included regular
recreation, lectures, thematic workshops, hikes, excursions and multi-day camps.

The intergenerational groups for quality ageing accepted 70 new members, so that the total
number of their members in now 200.

The voluntary intergenerational association of the MoD for quality ageing has 120 members.
The association conducted an annual meeting and successfully participated in the organisation
of the humanitarian campaign Anina zvezdica.


-----

### 3 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLAN FOR THE ACQUISITION OF THE STATE’S PHYSICAL ASSETS

**3.1 Real Estate**

The MoD realised the plan for the acquisition of real estate of the state as well as regions and
municipalities for 2013 in the following cases:

  - For the restoration of agricultural holdings and the purchase or acquisition of parts of
parcels in the Veliki Podlog Cadastral Community, Cerklje Cadastral Community and
Krška vas Cadastral Community, EUR 764,000 were spent for the project of
enlargement and modernisation of the Cerklje ob Krki Airfield.

  - Within the military area of the 1754 Šentvid nad Ljubljano Cadastral Community, 7/8 of
the necessary land in the value of EUR 613,114 were acquired on the basis of a sales
contract.

  - On the basis of contract no. 478-212/2011-36 dated 4 September 2001, the Municipality
of Novo mesto alienated the parcel no. 1043/1, after land allotment, parcel nos. 1043/3
and 1043/4, all in the Bršljin Cadastral Community, free of charge, to the benefit of the
MoD - (according to the Surveying and Mapping Authority of the RS, the total value was
EUR 5564).

In 2013, the MoD thus spent EUR 1.37 million for the acquisition of real estate.

In the Peter Petrič Military Post in Kranj, a sports facility was built on the basis of funds received
through the sale of the MoD property. In November 2013, the facility was handed over to the
management of the SAF.

The plan for the acquisition of physical assets of the SAF did not provide for the purchase of
real estate.

**3.2 Take-overs**

In 2013, 357 controls of the quality of goods and services were carried out. The total value of
take-overs was EUR 14.4 million. In spite of the reduction of orders, the number of take-overs
exceeded that of the year 2012 by 30 per cent, whereas the financial value of the take-overs
remained at the same level. This data indicates an increased activity in the area of carrying out
quality controls of contract subjects and thus an increased reliability of the supply of quality
goods and services for users.

On the basis of contract from 2012 and the setting up in 2013, a modular armoured tactical
shoot combat house was completed and handed over to operational use within the territory of
the Škrilj firing range and training area.

**3.3 Defence and Confidential Procurement**

In 2013, the MoD conducted 217 public procurement procedures, in accordance with the
provisions of the Public Procurement Act and the Public Procurement for Defence and Security
Act. On the basis of the conducted procedures, 328 contracts were concluded, with the total
value of EUR 82.9 including the VAT.

Most of the value of EUR 62.8 million relates to the conclusion of long-time contracts (usually
two years with a possible extension of up to five years). Such contracts were concluded for
goods and services for ensuring regular operation and permanent readiness of the SAF and the
protection and rescue system in carrying out their statutory tasks, providing maintenance
services and supply of spare parts for SAF aircraft and equipment, and in all other areas where
the MoD needs valid contracts for its activities. On the basis of a Government decision on the
subjects of joint public procurements in 2013 carried out by the Ministry of Finance, the MoD,
with its needs, undertook all current procedures and, on the basis of concluded umbrella


-----

agreements, concluded direct contracts for the purchase of electricity, natural gas, additional
light fuel oil and fuel for passenger vehicles and vessels.

In the field of investments related to the Cerklje ob Krki Airfield, a contract was concluded for
carrying out construction, finishing and installation works on the apron for transport aircraft and
the road connecting the Cerklje ob Krki Airfield, with the value of EUR 8.32 million. Moreover, a
contract was concluded for carrying out construction, finishing and installation works during the
construction of road deviation Drnovo–Črešnjice, with the value of EUR 1.69 million. Both
investments were funded entirely by the NATO Security Investment Programme (NSIP).

In the field of purchasing equipment and goods for the needs of the SAF, major orders were
made for the purchase of combat helmets, ammunition and armaments, combat uniforms items,
and the purchase and installation of equipment for technical security.

In the field of protection and rescue, a major purchase was made of radio stations and pagers,
and the purchase and installation of the SCBA training area in Pekre, thermal video cameras,
radiological detectors and self-contained breathing apparatuses.

**3.4 Plan for the Acquisition of the State’s Physical Assets Belonging to the SAF**

The current plan for the acquisition of the physical assets belonging to the SAF for the year
2013 amounted to EUR 12,817,811 million or 4.6 per cent of the SAF's current financial plan.

Due to the reduction of funds for investment, infrastructure and equipping of the SAF, the
revised budget included the postponement of the purchase of certain equipment to a later
period, whereas the supply was either partially or completely cancelled,

The scope of the acquisition of physical assets did not satisfy the needs of the SAF for the
performance of tasks and maintenance of the level of readiness. In terms of materiel, the SAF is
lagging behind in all areas, assets are getting old, and there is no resupply or replacement of
decrepit equipment. In order to maintain capabilities, stocks have to be reduced and equipment
has to be redistributed between units in the order of priority. In the field of the replenishment of
the SAF unit equipment table, there is a lack of equipment and ammunition corresponding to the
entire annual defence budget. Given that the SAF has not undergone appropriate modernisation
for several years, the level of equipping in comparison to other NATO members is constantly
deteriorating and does not meet the current challenges, which results in increasingly poor
interoperability with the allied and partner armed forces both during trainings and in the IOM as
well as in the implementation of collective defence.

The soldier's combat uniform equipment is very poor and does not meet the minimum criteria for
belonging to the SAF. Annually, soldier's protective clothing meets only 20 per cent of the
statutory requirements. Vehicles are old and worn out, there is a lack of combat vehicles with
the appropriate armaments. On average, the car park is 17.6 years old. An increasing number
of vehicles and other equipment must be withdrawn from use for not meeting the minimum
technical and security conditions of use.

Important purchases in 2013 by individual projects:

  - EUR 3.32 million were spent for the purchase of SAF uniforms. Within this project, the
MoD provided funds for the purchase of sports equipment and military uniforms, and a
small part for the purchase of inventory of items belonging to the official uniforms. In the
context of the reduction of funds, the purchase of uniforms provided very limited
conditions necessary for the construction, training and achieving of operational
capacities of key SAF units. The available resources cannot ensure the purchase of all
types of uniforms prescribed by the criteria for the equipping of SAF members.

  - EUR 2.82 million were used for the project of equipping with the main equipment. The
available resources ensured the purchase of a limited scope of goods:
‒ Machine guns for combat vehicles.


-----

‒ Engineering equipment (mining, and demining set, demolition set and
engineering machines.
‒ Equipment for the maintenance of infrastructure (logistics supply).
‒ Tactical means for electronic warfare.
‒ Means for the modernization of IT projects which cover the most urgent
replacement or upgrade of information terminal equipment (computers,
monitors, printers), the most urgent replacement of the equipment related to
server infrastructure (servers, software for producing backup copies and disk
arrays), upgrade of the information system for the management of MoD
documents, and purchase of information system to support the operation of the
medical unit.
‒ Telecommunications equipment, which includes the equipment for the upgrade
of communications and information backbone of the MoD/SAF and the
appropriate equipment for crypto protection. Ensuring the replacement of the
most worn-out terminal communications equipment (telephones, fax machines,
multifunction terminals and Inmarsat handheld terminals) and devices for
uninterruptible power supply.
‒ Warrior equipment (combat helmet and patrol rucksack).
‒ Payment of charges for the importation of equipment on the basis of the
Warsaw Initiative.

- EUR 287,399 was allocated for the purchase of ammunition. Within this project, funds
were provided for ensuring the minimum resupply of ammunition and meeting the
urgent training needs.

- EUR 1.33 million were used for the equipping for the performance of operational tasks.
The available resources ensured the purchase of a limited scope of goods:
‒ Equipment for the operation of the SAF in IOM.
‒ Equipment for regular activities (furniture, pyrotechnic material, tools, and
equipment for the maintenance of surfaces, environmental protection
equipment).
‒ Equipment for fire protection and protection at work.
‒ Quartermaster resources and equipment (camp and kitchen equipment).
‒ Military Police equipment.
‒ Air force and air defence equipment (video scope). In relation to the basic value
of the project, realisation in the middle of the period is only 38.1 per cent.
‒ Naval equipment.
‒ CBRN equipment.
‒ Sports and mountaineering equipment.

- EUR 585,706 was allocated to the project of investment maintenance of material
resources.

- EUR 795,598 was allocated to the project of investment maintenance of military
infrastructure.

- In recent years, there was no funding for tactical communications and information
resources. All the funds received were dedicated to the maintenance of business
communications and information systems. Workshops for the maintenance of the SAF
communications and information systems are not able to ensure the appropriate level of
maintenance of military communications and information resources.

- EUR 1.57 million was allocated to the project of the upgrade of helicopters. In 2013, two
helicopters were thus fully upgraded.

- EUR 65,933 million was allocated to the project called light wheeled armoured vehicle
4x4. The funds were used for the payment of charges (VAT and customs duty)
according to the Foreign Military Sales contract from 2010.

- EUR 520,316 million was allocated to the project of the Cerklje Airfield. Funds were
provided for the payment of further construction of electronic and visual navigation.

- EUR 721,295 million was allocated for adaptation of infrastructure. Funds were
provided for:
‒ Completion of works on the facility of the Main Electronic Warfare Centre;
‒ SAF wiring and optical networks.
‒ Acquisition of project documentation, permits and spatial plans.

- EUR 709,852 was allocated to the project of establishing technical security of the SAF
facilities.


-----

  - EUR 75,000 was allocated to the project of co-financing of the local infrastructure.
Funds were provided for the co-financing of the Municipality of Postojna.

_Overview of Investment Purchases and Maintenance of the SAF Equipment in the Period_
_between 2009 and 2013 (in EUR million)_

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

_In 2010, spending was higher due to a one-off purchase of a patrol boat Triglav (approximately_
_EUR 37 million) arising from the clearing debt._

**3.5 Plan for the Acquisition of the State’s Physical Protection and Rescue Assets**

In 2013, resources were planned for national protection and rescue units for the upgrade and
development of applications to support the planning of the system of protection against natural
and other disasters, the functioning of the system of notification and public warning, and the
functioning of communications during natural and other disasters.

The resources were used for the purchase of special protection and rescue equipment for
national protection, rescue and relief units, replenishment of state reserves of material
resources for protection, rescue and relief, and for testing and development of equipment. Major
investments included the purchase of tents, lighting kits for tents, movable stretch film wrapping
machine and boat trailers. Due to the revised budget, the ACPDR had to cancel the planned
purchase of a special working vehicle and five 4 x 4 vehicles for the transport of persons for civil
protection. Moreover, due to the rules pertaining to the conclusion of the budget, rescue boats
could not be paid once the contract had been concluded. Due to budget cuts after the revised
budget, the purchase of the following equipment was cancelled: field shower kit, remote control
water cutter for a more secure destruction of unexploded ordnance and large mobile hydraulic
pumps to mitigate the consequences of major floods.

In order to ensure the functioning of the system for notification and public warning and the
functioning of communications during natural and other disasters, the following investments
were carried out in 2013: the operation of the service SMS 112 was established; 33 public
warning sirens, recording devices for regional notification centres, equipment for the upgrade of
the protection and rescue network were purchased; the telephone exchange Aastra was
upgraded, and operator's working desks for establishing the operation of the regional
notification centre in Celje at the new location were purchased and installed. A small amount of
computer and server equipment was purchased, replacing the already worn-out and useless old
equipment. Upgrades of applications important for the efficient functioning of the notification and
warning system were carried out (further development of the e-Call application). Furthermore,
the 3D geographic information system (GIS) application, the NevSnov database of hazardous
material, the application for the display of a person's location (PLK), and the sound recording
system were upgraded, and the web application for the monitoring of water was further


-----

developed. Among the major purchases which could not be carried out due to revised budget
was also the purchase of the telephone exchange for Slovenj Gradec.

In the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief with the three training units in
Sežana, Logatec and Pekre, funds were spent for the purchase of chairs and tables for
classrooms, laser printer, LCD screen, computer equipment (computers, monitors), projector,
electric projection screen, POS computer, camera and microphones, and for the replacement of
the workstation in the studio and the establishment of a wireless Internet connection. Equipment
and means for conducting education and training courses, particularly fire-fighting equipment
(for rope technique, dangerous substances, and rescue from rubble and fire rescue equipment)
were purchased. Portable intervention suitcases were purchased for the UXO unit or for
education in the field of unexploded ordnance.

EUR 258,363 were spent for investment maintenance, renovations and adaptations as well as
the reconstructions of facilities and logistics centres of the ACPDR, Training Centre for Civil
Protection and Disaster Relief with three units and ACPDR branch offices. Of that amount, EUR
27,730 was spent for the establishment of technical security in the Logatec unit, and EUR
35,007 were spent for investment maintenance works on the facility of the Regional Notification
Centre Celje. Maintenance works were carried out in the boiler room of the Celje branch office,
whereas in a warehouse in Postojna, electrical installation works were carried out. Furthermore,
the warehouse in Tolmin was reconstructed.

EUR 150,000 was allocated for the reimbursement of investments into the Training Centre for
Civil Protection and Disaster Relief (the Logatec Training Unit), for the Union of Veterans of the
War of Slovenia, and for the development and operation of the Centre of War Veterans of
Slovenia in Logatec.

Funds from own activities were spent for the purchase of a gas stove, potato peeler machine
and steam convection oven for the kitchen at the Training Centre for Civil Protection and
Disaster Relief in Ig.

Funds of the fire-fighting fund were used for the purchase of fire-fighting equipment and the
equipment required for fire-fighting training activities: helicopter water tanks, NBC
decontamination stations, decontamination kit, radiological detectors, dosimeters, bag filling
machines, simulation burglar-proof doors, battery powered winch, compressor with a filling ramp
and control panel, oil skimmer, water barriers, thermal cameras, communications - radio
stations, pagers, programmers for pagers, and a trailer for warning and guidance on the road.

Funds were also used for the recovery of a shipping container (Hot Fire), purchase and setting
up of the SCBA training area in Pekre, completion of the roof at the fire house and the transfer
of the fire house on a platform, upgrade of the application for Fire-Fighting Units of General
Importance, preparation of project documentation and completion of a polygon with associated
infrastructure in Ig, and preparation of project documentation for setting up the changing rooms
in Sežana.


-----

### 4 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE PLAN FOR THE SALE OF STATE PROPERTY 

**4.1 Real Estate**

In 2013, ten public auctions were conducted for the sale of real estate not required by the MoD
for the performance of its activities. Eight public auctions were successful, selling real estate in
the value of EUR 779 415: 16 residential units, nine garages, seven sets of construction and
other land and two guardhouses. Four flats and five sets of construction land with the total value
of EUR 102,410 million were sold through direct sale. The total value of all sold real estates was
EUR 881,825 million.

**4.2 Movable Property**

Ordinance on the State-Owned Tangible Assets Management Plan Intended for State Bodies,
Judicial Bodies, Public Institutes, Public Agencies and Public Funds for 2013, of which the plan
for the disposal of the state’s movable property for 2013 is a constituent part, included two radar
stations of the type AN/TPS-70, infantry ammunition, ammunition of various calibres and
explosive ordnance. Radar stations were not sold. An annex to the contract on coordination,
organization and counselling at the sale of both radar stations with associated equipment,
documentation and spare parts was concluded with the company Avtotehna. The MoD sold
explosive ordnance in the value of EUR 2796, as well as 378 pieces of 30 x 173 TPFDS-T
ammunition in the value of EUR 24,570.

In addition, the MoD also sold some movable property which was not in the disposal plan: 222
pieces of permanently deactivated weapons with certificates on the deactivated weapons in the
amount of EUR 12,364, 874,000 pieces of protective masks of the GP-5 type in the amount of
EUR 15,050, and 11,314 meters of light camouflage fabric in the value of EUR 1697. The total
value of all sold movable property was EUR 56,477 million.

In 2013, in managing the compensation funds on the basis of insurance of movable property
channelling compensations from insurance companies related to loss events in the event of
traffic accidents involving MoD vehicles, 83 proceedings for damages were completed, for
which the MoD received compensations in the total of EUR 94,974. In the same period, the
MoD determined the occurrence of 94 traffic accidents. The funds obtained in this way are used
specifically for the repair of vehicles damaged in accidents, with the purpose of continued use of
these vehicles, whereas part of the funds is allocated for the purchase of new vehicles.

In 2013, the purchase of new vehicles was not performed, since the amount of the available
funds was not sufficient to buy a more powerful car that could mostly meet the needs of the
MoD vehicle fleet.

**4.3 Donations**

Movable property (non-formation quartermaster battle uniform items, such as mess-tins, shirts,
pullovers, tent canvases, sleeping bags, tetrahedron, unimportant books, electrical stove and
kettle, deactivated infantry weapons) was transferred free-of-charge to the following
organisations:

  - Reinforced concrete tetrahedron to the Kamnik Komenda District Association of the
Veterans of the War for Slovenia.

  - Electrical kettle and electrical stove to the Slovenska Bistrica District Association of the
Veterans of the War for Slovenia.

  - 10 pieces of deactivated weapons to the Mežiška dolina District Association of the
Veterans of the War for Slovenia.

  - 47 blankets and 30 pairs of boots to the Velike Lašče District Association of the
Veterans of the War for Slovenia.

  - Two pieces of military medical equipment (ophthalmic diagnostics device and ECG
apparatus) to the University Medical Centre Ljubljana.


-----

  - 10 pieces of military wardrobes and 10 pieces of military beds to the Carinthian
Regional Museum.

  - Unimportant books to public museums and collectors.

Five applications of organisations which are of special importance for the defence (public
museum and public protection, rescue and relief services) are still in the procedure of free
transfer. Applications of other societies, a self-governing local community, public institutes and
individuals were resolved negatively, as they did not fulfil the necessary legal requirements.

Based on the agreement between the old and the new managers, the MoD defined the new
manager of movable property:

  - Transport, Energy and Spatial Planning Inspectorate of the RS – three passenger cars
were transferred.

  - Ministry of Justice – a passenger car was transferred

  - Secretariat-General of the Government of the RS –information equipment was
transferred.

  - Ministry of the Interior – explosive ordnance.

  - Ministry of Defence – hydraulic generator.


-----

### 5 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EDUCATION, TRAINING AND ADVANCED TRAINING  PLAN

**5.1 Education, Training and Advanced Training in the Administrative Part of the MoD,**
**DIRS, ACPDR and IRSPANOD**

_Overview of Training Courses per Categories_


**Functional**

**External**
**Training**


**Administrative part of the**
**MoD**


**Functional**

**Internal**

**Training**


**Language**

**Training**


**Training**

**Abroad**


Panned Number of
1197 354 136 40
Participants

Number of Participants 1108 253 26 33

**Realisation (in %)** **93** **72** **19** **82**

In internal organizational units and constituent bodies (apart from the SAF), participation in
functional internal training courses was 93 per cent.

In addition to the planned training courses, the employees attended training courses organized
by the IT and Communications Service of the Training Centre Ig, and by the Doctrine,
Development, Education and Training Command (DDETC) - these unplanned training courses
were attended by 372 employees.

In internal organizational units and constituent bodies (apart from the SAF), participation in
functional training courses was 72 per cent.

According to the plan, 136 public employees from in internal organizational units and constituent
bodies (except the SAF) should attend various language training courses. However, the
realisation was only 19 per cent, which is mostly due to the capacities of the School of Foreign
Languages.

Some language courses were not organised, and some participants were unable to attend the
planned courses due to their work duties.

The ACPDR planned the organisation of an English Language Refresher Course for 90
employees (RS Notification Centre, Regional Notification Centres). However, the course was
not carried out.

Realisation of training courses abroad was 82 per cent – the highest in the NATO School in
Oberammergau, where the attendance was 90 per cent, and the lowest in the Marshall Centre,
where the realisation was 66 per cent - mainly due to the cancellation of training courses and
non-compliance with the conditions for training.

**5.2 Education, Training and Advanced Training in the SAF**

Members of the SAF improved their capacity to perform tasks with their participation in various
forms of military education and training within the Military Schools Centre or in comparable
military education and training courses abroad, and with participation in various forms of
education and training courses outside the MoD.

In 2013, the only ones who continued the part-time education were the SAF members –
participants of the module studies which are a combination of military and undergraduate
studies for non-commissioned officers at the Vocational College of Traffic and Transport.
Currently, there are also 18 valid education contracts for the acquisition of a higher level
education. In 2013, 79 SAF members successfully completed the training courses for the


-----

acquisition of general higher education, out of which 12 members had education contracts
concluded with the MoD, while 67 did self-studies.

In the period between January and December 2013, language courses for the acquisition of
STANAG 3332 and 2221 were successfully completed by 8 SAF members. A total of 55
members attended the English Language False Beginner Refresher Course. 37 members
attended the English Language High Elementary Refresher Course. In 2013, 730 candidates
underwent the ALCPT placement tests.

As many as 2194 members of the SAF, the MoD, the Police and of foreign armed forces
participated in different forms of military education and training in the organizational units of the
Military Schools Centre (with training courses for military occupational specialties and without elearning). The planned military education and training courses were completed by 2171
candidates, which represent a total success of 98.6 per cent of all the forms of training carried
out for the participants who attended military education and training programmes.

In 2013, various functional and career education and training courses abroad were attended by
306 SAF members, out of which 169 were officers, 93 non-commissioned officers, 26 soldiers,
14 military specialists and four civilians. The realization of all executed deployments to
education, training and advanced training abroad was 72.5 per cent when compared to the
planned deployments.

There are various reasons for non-realisation of planned deployments. Some are due to the
organisers, while others were cancelled due to reduced funds.

_Available Funds for Education and Training of Individuals in the SAF in the Period between_
_2009 and 2013_

**YEAR** **2009** **2010** **2011** **2012** **2013**

**EUR** 5,583,587 4,107,087 4,716,459 2,927,536 2,605,606

The table shows the trend of reductions of the available funds in the last five years. In 2013, 53
per cent less financial resources were allocated for education and training of individuals in the
SAF as in 2009.

In view of that, the MoD substantially reduced the number of deployments to career military
education and training courses abroad, while many deployments to expensive courses were
cancelled altogether. Given the reduction of the allocated available funds, the MoD will no
longer be able to continue the initiated development of knowledge, but will maintain the already
acquired knowledge in Slovenia and abroad to ensure that the system continues to function.
Functional education and training courses are carried out mainly to grant licenses that are
essential so that members can perform their professional duties. In the long term, the above
mentioned policy of reducing funds implies a gradual disappearance of individual military skills
and certainly does not signify the development of the military profession and the transfer of
knowledge through national vocational qualifications to the civil area.

What is alarming is that the downward trend of the available financial resources allocated to the
education and training of individuals in the SAF continues in 2014.


-----

### 6 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION PLAN

In 2013, international activities in the MoD were carried out within the programmes of bilateral
and multilateral cooperation, the EU, NATO, sport – CISM (French: Conseil International du
Sport Militaire) and military and technical cooperation. Activities were carried out in accordance
with priorities, programme and objective set out in the 2013 MoD Business Plan.

The objectives in the field of international cooperation supported the achievement of key
conceptual objectives and priorities of the MoD.

Based on the Annual Plan of International Cooperation for 2013, the MoD planned 1117 events.
844 events, or 75.5 per cent, were realized, and 305 planned events were not realized. 256
unplanned events were realized. The MoD spent EUR 894,320 to implement the plan of
international cooperation.

The discrepancy between the planned activities and the actual realization is still large. At the
same time, the number of new unplanned events that could not be foreseen increased.

The number of realized unplanned events reminds us that the planning should take into account
new obligations and foresee subsequent execution. In the assessment of the realisation of
planned events, it is also necessary to take into account cancellations of the opposite side, as
well as the fact that some of the proposals are written only as a form of possible cooperation
and that certain objectives aimed at with certain activity have changed and that there are some
organizational and personnel changes.

All these facts point out that in the next round of planning international activities in the MoD, the
strategic, planning and development documents and guidelines as well as objectives to be
achieved through international cooperation should be followed in an even more detailed,
transparent and accountable way.

_The Summary of Realisation in the Field of Implementing the MoD's International Cooperation_
_Plan for 2013_


**Number**

**of**

**Additionally**

**Realised**

**Unplanned**

**Events**


**Total**

**Funds**

**Spent in**

**EUR**


**Number of**

**Realised**

**Planned**

**Events**


**Organisational**

**Unit**


**Number of**

**Planned**

**Events**


**Realisation**


**Number**

**of Unrealised**

**Planned**

**Events**


Minister's
32 20 62.5% 12 25 96,739
Office

Defence Policy
61 44 72% 17 32 123,462
Directorate

Defence
Diplomacy 287 184 64% 82 83 62,237
Representatives

Secretariat of
the Secretary 33 23 70% 10 6 24,070
General

Logistics
62 47 75% 15 8 40,005
Directorate

Defence Affairs
28 17 61% 11 16 31,622
Directorate

Service for
Investigation of 2 2 100% 0 0 2621
Aircraft


-----

Accidents and
Military Aircraft
Incidents
Total MoD
Organisational
Units


505 337 67% 147 170 380,755


DIRS 4 4 100% 0 0 3554

ACPDR and
237 147 62% 90 33 127,945
IRSPANOD

SAF General
371 356 95% 68 53 382,066
Staff

**MoD TOTAL** **1117** **844** **75.5%** **305** **256** **894,320**


-----

## IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RISK REGISTER

The risk register is a set of anticipated risks that could be a negative influence on the
economical use of the fiscal resources and the attainment of the MoD's set goals and the set of
all measures that are prepared in advance and applied for timely prevention of the occurrence
of risks or for the reduction of their negative influences.

Based on the MoD’s risk register, 158 risks were anticipated for 2013. The level of risk is
determined based on the level of the risk probability estimate and the consequences influence
estimate, which are marked with numbers from 1 to 3, the higher value meaning greater
probability of the occurrence or a greater influence of consequences of the realized risk. The
product of both assessments signifies the level of risk. Taking into account the value of the
product, four levels of risk have been determined:

  - 9 – a very high probability for the occurrence of the risk and the influence of the
consequences (red colour).

  - 6 – a high probability for the occurrence of the risk and the influence of the
consequences (orange colour).

  - 3, 4 – a medium level probability for the occurrence of the risk and the influence of the
consequences (yellow colour).

  - 1, 2 – a low probability for the occurrence of the risk and the influence of the
consequences (green colour).

10 risks or 6 per cent out of all risks have been assessed with the highest level of risk, 50 or 32
per cent were attributed a high level of risk, 69 or 44 per cent with a medium level of risk, and
29 or 18 per cent with a low level of risk, as depicted in the chart below.

_Structure of Risks in Reference to the Level of Risk_

50%

44%

45%

40%

35% 32%

30%

25%

20% 16%

15%

10%

6%

5% 2%

0%

9 6 3-4 2 1

In 2013, 84 risks or 53 per cent of anticipated risks were realized, and appropriate measures
were applied for the majority of them. The measures were not applied for 15 of the realized risks
or for 18 per cent.

The chart below depicts the realisation of risks in reference to individual levels of risk. Surprising
is the high degree of realized 2-level risks, namely 62 per cent, which probably means that in
the future, it makes sense to increase the level of probability of the occurrence of these risks. In
the event of very high and high probabilities for the occurrence of risks, that is levels 9 and 6,
the occurrence of risks was at the level of 60 per cent, which means that in the future, it is
necessary to devote even more attention to the preparedness of measures for preventing the
occurrence of risks or for mitigating their consequences.


-----

In comparison with the previous year, the number of realized risks reduced, which is also the
result of timely action. However, there are still too many risks which we have no influence on,
because they dependent from the financial resources that are provided under the RS national
budget. In such cases, it is necessary to achieve the least possible impact of such risks on the
achievement of key MoD objectives.

_Realisation of Risks in Reference to Individual Levels of Risk_

100%

90%

80% 38% 38%

44%
50%

70%

67% 67%

60%

50%

40%

30% 62% 62%

56%
50%

20%

33% 33%

10%

0%

9 6 4 3 2 1

YES NO

The structure of risks in reference to their type (personnel, project, procedural, normative,
financial or security) shows that the majority of risks are of procedural nature. Together with
project risks, these two types of risks represent two-thirds of all the risks. Thus, the risks with a
very high probability of occurrence are predominantly of project nature, as they are four out of
ten. Among the risks with a high probability of occurrence, nine are of procedural type, eight are
of project type and five are financial.

_Structure of Risks in Reference to their type_

50%

44%

45%
40%
35%
30%
25% 22%
20% 17%
15%

10%

10%

4%

5% 3%
0%

In reference to the type of risk, we distinguish: (1) procedural risks, which can occur as the
consequence of inadequacy, slowness, fragmentation and un-connectedness of business
processes in the MoD and of cooperation between the constituent bodies and internal
organisational units, etc.; (2) project risks, which can occur as the consequence of the
(non)activity of contractors performing tasks for the MoD, etc.; (3) personnel risks, which can
occur as the consequence of unfavourable internal structure of personnel, lack of specific
personnel, inadequate training level of personnel, dissatisfaction of employees, etc.; (4)


-----

financial risks, which can occur as the result of the reduced scope of funds, unfavourable
internal structure of the financial plan, ineligible or illegal use of public funds, etc.; (5) normative
risks, which can occur as the consequence of non-compliance with normative acts or with the
needs to amend the applicable and prepare new normative acts, etc.; and (6) security risks,
which can occur as the consequence of unauthorised access to classified information.

The predominance of procedural or project-related risks is a warning that processes and project
management should be given more attention in the future, as they directly influence the
effectiveness and efficiency of operation. This means that our priority in the short term period
must be to further endeavour for an effective use of the mentioned financial, personnel and
material resources and systematically direct them in the implementation of the key long- and
medium-term objectives.

Effective implementation of measures for the management of risks and the prevention and
mitigation of their consequences greatly contributes to the further development of the defence
system, which is highly important in the increasingly unpredictable environment.


-----

