**MINISTRY OF DEFENCE**

Vojkova cesta 55, 1000 Ljubljana

# ANNUAL REPORT OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR 2012

Number: 0100-44/2013-28
Date: 31 May 2013


-----

### CONTENTS

##### MINISTER’S ADDRESS .......................................................................................................... 4

 MILITARY DEFENCE .............................................................................................................. 6

 1 SCOPE AND STRUCTURE OF THE SAF ............................................................................... 6

 2 SAF MILITARY TRAINING AND EXERCISES......................................................................... 7

 3 SAF DEVELOPMENT AND CAPABILITY BUILDING ............................................................ 10

 4 MAINTAINING THE LEVEL OF READINESS ....................................................................... 11

 5 KEY PROJECTS OF SAF MODERNISATION........................................................................ 11

 6 SAF OPERATION IN SUPPORT OF THE SYSTEM OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS ..................................................................................................... 12

 7 SAF CONTRIBUTION TO INTERNATIONAL PEACE, SECURITY AND STABILITY ................. 13

 PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS ................................................... 15

 1 PREVENTIVE ACTIVITIES ................................................................................................. 15

 2 PREPAREDNESS OF THE SYSTEM OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS AND PROTECTION, RESCUE AND RELIEF FORCES ............................................ 17

 4 EDUCATION AND TRAINING ........................................................................................... 26

 5 INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION .................................................................................... 30

 6 INSPECTIONS IN THE AREA OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS ......................................................................................................................... 33

 DEFENCE SYSTEM AND CRISIS MANAGEMENT .................................................................... 34

 1 DEFENCE POLICY ............................................................................................................. 34

 2 SLOVENIA’S CRISIS PREPARATIONS AND RESPONSE MEASURES ................................... 41

 3 DEVELOPMENT OF CIVILIAN CAPABILITIES..................................................................... 43

 4 INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY OPERATIONS .................................................................. 45

 5 EQUIPPING, REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT, STANDARDIZTION AND CODIFICATION ..... 46

 6 COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SYSTEM (CIS) .................................................. 49

 7 INSPECTION AND INTERNAL AUDIT ACTIVITIES IN THE FIELD OF DEFENCE ................... 50

 8 INVESTIGATIONS OF AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS AND MILITARY AIRCRAFTS INCIDENTS ...... 50


-----

##### 9 STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION ....................................................................................... 51

 10 NORMATIVE ACTS ........................................................................................................ 52

 11 RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGICAL PROJECTS ............................................................... 54

 IMPLEMENTATION OF RESOURCE PLANS ............................................................................ 55

 1 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FINANCIAL PLAN ................................................................. 55

 2 PERSONNEL PLAN IMPLEMENTATION............................................................................ 60

 3 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLAN FOR THE ACQUISITION OF THE STATE’S PHYSICAL ASSETS ............................................................................................................................... 64

 4 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE PLAN FOR THE SALE OF STATE PROPERTY ............................................................................................................... 67

 5 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EDUCATION, TRAINING AND ADVANCED TRAINING PLAN 69

 6 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION PLAN ............................... 71

 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RISK REGISTER .......................................................................... 74


-----

### MINISTER’S ADDRESS

In 2012, as in the previous year, the operation and development of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) took
place in the situation of very limited financial resources which is the result of broader negative impacts
of the economic and financial crisis. As compared to the previous years, the volume of financial
resources of the Ministry reduced in 2013 both in terms of their nominal value and also as a share of
GDP, amounting to only 1.19 percent, which is the lowest since 2001.

It is very important to point out that in the recent years, the scope of the MoD financial plan in the
framework of the national budget of the Republic of Slovenia has also been reduced, accounting for
4.4 percent as compared to 2008, when the share was 6.4 percent.

Due to the above-mentioned constraints, the MoD efforts were focused on the increase in productivity
and the search for solutions for austerity in all the MoD areas of activity, in accordance with various
economy measures taken at the national level. Therefore, labour costs were reduced by 6 percent in
2012 as compared to 2011, whereas the current expenditure was reduced by 11.4 percent.

It is important to emphasize that in comparison to 2011, the volume of financial resources intended for
investments has declined by 40 percent, which, on the one hand, has positive effects in terms of
austerity at the national level. On the other hand, however, it has a very negative impact on the
development of new capabilities and services of the defence system and the system of protection
against natural disasters.

Visible success has also been achieved in terms of reducing the number of the employed, as with the
restrictive personnel policy, the number of the employed in MoD's internal organizational units
decreased by 6.4 percent, in the Slovenian Armed Forces (SAF) by 1.5 percent, in the Administration
for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief (ACPDR) by 7.3 percent, and in the Inspectorate of the
Republic Slovenia for Protection Against Natural and Other Disasters (IRSPANOD) by 6.3 percent.

In the area of investment, due to drastically reduced volume of the available financial resources, a
large number of investment projects have not been carried out. Among the key investment projects in
the area of defence, I may stress the purchase of navigational aids for the modernization of the Cerklje
ob Krki airfield, which is partly financed from NATO funds, the continued modernization of mediumsized Cougar helicopters, and the purchase of ammunition and combat and service uniforms for the
SAF. In the area of protection against natural and other disasters major investments include the
continued repair and upgrade of public warning sirens, and the purchase of the necessary electronic
equipment and of a small amount of material resources for national reserves.

The financial resources available in 2012 did not allow for the development and building of the SAF
capabilities, provided for in the medium-and long-term planning documents. Nevertheless, progress
was made in the development of new SAF capabilities. Among the most important is the introduction
of the multi-purpose military boat Triglav 11 into operational use, the introduction of the long-range
radar system, which has improved the air surveillance capabilities in Slovenia, as well as various
communication and information system (CIS) capabilities, such as the system of command and control
in medium wheeled armoured 8x8 vehicles, the military messaging system, and the maritime
command information system.

Despite limited financial resources, the SAF was a credible participant in international operations and
missions (IOM) led by NATO, EU and UN, within the approved scope of participation. The widest
scope of SAF participation was that in NATO KFOR operations in Kosovo and ISAF operations in
Afghanistan.

In 2012, the SAF actively supported the operation of the system for protection against natural and
other disasters and participated in that system with its capabilities, with the focus on helicopter rescue,
emergency medical aid, response in the event of natural disasters and fire-fighting.

The financial crisis and the subsequent reduction of the available financial resources have had a
severe impact on the area of protection against natural and other disasters. With investments and
regular operation, resources were reduced to the greatest extent in the area of national reserves, and
the resources for the equipment of units for protection and rescue and for operations. Negative


-----

impacts are merely due to economy measures, but also due to the cancellation of projects. Only those
projects were carried out which were necessary to ensure the functioning of the system of protection
against natural and other disasters.

In the area of protection against natural and other disasters, members of the protection, rescue and
relief forces carried out almost 17,000 interventions, of which the majority was performed by firefighting societies and units and the mountain rescue service. The most demanding test for protection,
rescue and relief forces was the response to the strong bora wind in February and floods in November
2012. Timely and effective response and help to those affected have undoubtedly contributed to the
reduction of the huge damage caused by those disasters.

One of the fundamental approaches of the system of protection against natural and other disasters is
the performance of preventive activities carried out through various projects, research papers,
amendments to regulations, consultations, presentations and other activities among different age
groups to ensure greater awareness of natural and other disasters.

Roman Jakič
Minister


-----

## MILITARY DEFENCE

### 1 SCOPE AND STRUCTURE OF THE SAF

Realised number of members of the SAF ensured a satisfactory level of manning of SAF commands
and units to enable the performance of its tasks. According to the needs of commands and units,
education and training was focused on reaching the appropriate number of members with the military
and specialized qualifications, with the aim of attaining the appropriate level of readiness and
capabilities.

In 2013, the scope and structure of the SAF have not changed substantially in comparison with the
previous year. By reaching a stable number of the SAF members, an improved level of functional
professionalization of the SAF was ensured and approved in accordance with the SAF Personnel Plan
for 2012. Small discrepancies from the Personnel Plan are the result of partially performed personnel
consolidation, and above all of the reduction in financial resources.

In 2012, the number of the SAF active component members was reduced to 117 members. The
Personnel Plan for 2013 provided for 7,600 members of the active component. The scope of the active
component was reduced due to the termination of employment for 265 members due to various
reasons in 2012.

Departures were mainly due to the termination of employment (104), retirement (79), expiration of
temporary employment (37), unjustified absence from work (19) and other reasons. Due to the
reduction of financial resources and the scope of the SAF active component provided for in the
Personnel Plan of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia for 2013 (7,109 members),
supplementary employments were not fully carried out.

The basic objective is to preserve the scope of the SAF in the framework of 7,600 active component
members and 1,500 volunteer contact reserve members, in accordance with the Resolution on
General Long-Term Development and Equipping Programme of the Slovenian Armed Forces up to
2025 from 2010 and the Mid-Term Defence Programme 2013–2018.

In the second half of 2012, preparations took place for the SAF transformation, as well as the actual
transformation, which encompassed the merging of the operational and strategic level processes, and
the abolition of the Force Command. For 2013, the plan provides for the transformation at all levels of
command and control.


-----

### 2 SAF MILITARY TRAINING AND EXERCISES

In 2012, over 2,000 SAF members participated in 31 international exercises and training courses
abroad (Italy, Germany, Austria, France, Bosnia and Herzegovina, United Kingdom, Poland, Hungary,
Slovakia, USA, Romania, Macedonia, Montenegro, Ukraine and Albania).

In Slovenia, 23 exercises and training courses aimed at maintaining the level of readiness and the
increase of capabilities with the participation of over 1,900 SAF members and over 100 members of
other NATO Allied forces.

Training of individuals focused primarily on military occupational speciality (MOS) training, which
enabled unit members to acquire the knowledge and skills necessary for the performance of their
formation duties. In addition, the SAF members trained on a regular basis and verified their knowledge
of the prescribed general individual military topics and skills.

Training was mainly carried out in Slovenia, in SAF firing ranges and training areas. For reasons of
limitations in the SAF firing ranges and training areas, the use of air defence weapons, large-unit
exercises to test full operational capabilities, and final preparations of units for deployment to IOM
were conducted abroad.

#### 2.1 Overview of important training courses for SAF members and units

The most important military exercise in 2012 was the tactical exercise Pomlad (Spring) 2012, which
was organised in three phases. The first was testing of the SAF forces in the implementation of
manning of individual SAF units, and the second was the assessment of readiness of the SAF
Response Force, and in the third phase of the exercise the operation of the SAF Light Battalion Battle
Group was examined.

For the EU, the SAF provided, together with the Italian and Hungarian armed forces, a series of
training courses for the readiness of the EU Battle Group, taking place from July to December 2012.

The Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear Defence Unit Cooperated with the organization of
the International Corpus MNC NE with various activities. Among these activities, the most important
was the CRISTAL EAGLE 12 exercise in Denmark.

With over 200 members, the SAF also participated in the international military exercise SABER
JUNCTION 2012, which was organized and led by the US armed forces. The exercise took place in
the Joint Multinational Readiness Centre in Hohenfels in the Federal Republic of Germany, in the area
of more than 3,400 square kilometres. Armed forces of 19 countries participated in the exercise, which
was the largest exercise of the US armed forces in Europe. The focus of the training was on the
coordinated operation of units from various branches in a complex environment of the contemporary
battle space.

Before their deployment to KFOR and ISAF missions, members of Slovenian contingents attended
international military exercises at the Joint Multinational Readiness Centre which lasted three weeks
and trained them for their operation in IOM. On these exercises, members were trained in staff and
tactical procedures for the achievement of full operational capability in order to operate in IOM as part
of the Allied forces. Before their departure to IOM, members of Slovenian contingents intended for
operation in IOM also received intense training in with the use of a modern system for simulation of
tactical operation in Slovenia, primarily in the Central SAF Training Area Poček near Postojna.

Under the auspices of NATO, in the Slovenian and Hungarian airspace, the biggest exercise in
electronic warfare in the region took place; the IRON GUARD 3, intended for units and commands
involved in the NATO Integrated Air Defence System which could at any time be exposed to electronic
jamming. Activities taking place in the airspace of both countries were focused on the proper action
and fight against electronic jamming in a real situation with electronic warfighting. The focus of the
exercise was the training of units for command support, and the training of air defence units and air
forces in the operation in situations with electronic jamming of radars, communication equipment and
command and control system.


-----

The SAF also participated in the EU crisis management exercise CRISIS MANAGEMENT EXERCISE
MULTI LAYER 2012, which is the continuation of the former crisis management exercises MILEX and
CME. The exercise scenario assumed the deepening of crisis situation in Central and Eastern Africa,
which required the response of the international community. Upon the call of the UNO, the EU is also
included in solving the crisis situation, with the possibility of military and civilian response.

The subject of the FALCO II exercise was biological terrorism. The exercise was organized and
conducted in cooperation with the Veterinary Faculty in Ljubljana, and included the removal of
improvised explosive improvised explosive devices (IED), sampling, transport and analysis of
biologically contaminated water. The Veterinary Faculty participated in the exercise as the reference
laboratory for the SAF.

A fire rescue exercise LETALO 2012 was executed in Gazice in the vicinity of the Cerklje ob Krki
airfield. Exercise participants included SAF members working in the Fire Rescue Service of the Cerklje
ob Krki airfield and civilian voluntary fire-fighting societies. According to the exercise scenario, the
aircraft touched tree tops and crashed in the area south from the village Gazice. The Fire Rescue
Service of the Cerklje ob Krki airfield was warned and hurried to the place of the crash and started to
extinguish the burning aircraft and rescuing the crew. Due to the large-scale extensiveness of the
accident, the rescue operation also included local voluntary fire-fighting societies.

The SAF also participated in two protection and rescue exercises in the civil protection organizations,
ZiR DOMŽALE 2012 and PODPORA – POTRES 2012 exercises, the purpose of which was to test the
competence of the entities responsible for protection, rescue and relief in the Domžale municipality.
The first exercise included approximately 400 and the second 250 members of various SAF units and
branches.

#### 2.2 Training of aviation units

Training of members of aviation units focused on the training of helicopter crews and airworthiness
units. The Air Defence Brigade members trained for high-intensity operations and the provision of air
support.

Regular training was provided to ensure a high level of readiness and responsiveness of units
involved in the NATO Integrated Air Defence System. The SAF participated with Pilatus PC-9M
aircrafts, Italian Air Forces with two hunter Eurofighter EFA-2000 aircrafts, and Hungarian Air Forces
with the JAS 39 Gripen fighter aircrafts.

The SAF was also involved in the above-mentioned exercise SABER JUNCTION with PC-9M aircrafts.
In this exercise, the SAF played an important role in the training of JTACs.

Aviation units participated in the international exercise ADRIATIC STRIKE 2012 which was conducted
in Slovenia and will become a regular regional annual event. The exercise included members of
Slovenian as well as Croatian, Italian, Hungarian and American armed forces, the JTACs of which
were trained in the procedures of air support.

SAF helicopters participated in the international exercise LORD MOUNTAIN, organized in Slovenia,
where the SAF and Hungarian members trained in the flying in demanding operating conditions in the
mountain terrain.

#### 2.3 Important training of the naval unit

The Montenegro territorial waters held the international naval exercise ADRION 2011, hosted by the
Montenegrin Navy. The exercise included the navies of Slovenia, Albania, Montenegro, Greece,
Croatia, Italy and Slovenia. The purpose of this exercise was to enhance regional maritime
cooperation which is the basis for better understanding and implementation of the naval doctrine and
procedures among the participating navies. The participants trained in the planning and conduct of
international naval operations. Moreover, the exercise helped improve interoperability between the


-----

participating navies through learning about the equipment and the possibility of use of different types
of vessels.

The multi-purpose patrol boat Triglav-11 (VNL-11) was involved in the international environmental
protection exercise ADRIATIC 2012 in the Albanian territorial waters. The exercise also included the
navies or coastal guards from Albania, Croatia, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Greece, Italy,
as well representatives from Norway and international organizations MIC (Monitoring and Information
Centre), EMSA (European Maritime Security Agency) and REMPEC (Regional Marine Pollution
Emergency Response Centre for the Mediterranean Sea). The exercise scenario included response in
the event of environmental disasters and resulted in successful and synchronised operation of the
Slovenian Maritime Administration (URSP), Administration of the Republic of Slovenia for Civil
Protection and Disaster Relief (ACPDR) and the Slovenian Environment Agency (ARSO).

#### 2.4 Training of the voluntary contract reserve

The planning and organisation of training were based on the training of units additionally manned with
volunteer contract reserve members, which, in the future, should constitute modules of the Battalion
Battle Group (BBG) for manning the Slovenian contingent in IOM.

The most extensive exercise of the voluntary contract reserve was the exercise GORSKI UDAR 12
which was conducted in the framework of the exercise POMLAD 2012. Members of the voluntary
contract reserve were also trained for combat in mountainous terrain. The SAF aircrafts Pilatus PC-9M
were also involved, providing fire support and helicopters which were used for conducting airborne
assault.

#### 2.5 Student's camp

This year's military camp was attended by 63 university and secondary school students from 11
different faculties and 7 different secondary schools.

Together with the International Award for Young People’s Association (MEPI), the SAF participated in
the preparation and implementation of MEPI expeditions which were attended by 69 young people.


-----

### 3 SAF DEVELOPMENT AND CAPABILITY BUILDING

The available financial resources for 2012 have not provided for the development and the
establishment of SAF capabilities planned in long-term and medium-term planning documents. As a
result of the introduced austerity measures the financial resources in the area of modernization, the
maintenance of infrastructure and vehicle fleet have diminished. So did the resources for providing
conditions for work, accommodation of members and the provision of personal equipment for SAF
members.

However, the following material resources and capabilities were introduced into operational use:

  - Maritime command and information system;

  - Multi-purpose boat Triglav (VNL-11);

  - Ground Master long-range radar system 40;

  - Command and control system in Middle Wheeled Armoured Vehicles 8x8 (MWAV) 8x8
SVARUN (C4I MOTB 8x8);

  - Military message systems;

  - Special explosive devices;

  - Tactical cargo vehicles (TTV) 6x6;

  - Equipment of the unexploded ordnance (UXO) removal platoon;

  - Force protection devices;

  - Thermal sighting device for heavy support weapons;

  - Capabilities at the Škrilj firing range and training area;

  - Portable video surveillance system;

  - Semi-automated pistol;

  - Information system for monitoring the stock of medicines in outpatient clinics (IS MEDIC);

  - Double-lock multi-digit hyperbaric chamber.

The SAF continued with the introduction of short-range radar systems, air defence missile system SA24, ammunition destruction workshop and training range for the training of instructor skills.

In 2012, the SAF continued with the development and maintenance of units and key capabilities:

  - Motorised Battalion on light 6x6 wheeled armoured vehicles (MOTB LKOV) Valuk;

  - Transport company;

  - Two military police companies;

  - Two movement control groups;

  - Two special forces battle groups.

  - Light Battalion Battle Group;

  - CBRN Defence Battalion;

  - First Light Manoeuvre Medical Unit ROLE-2 LM;

  - Civil Military Cooperation Group;

  - Mobile part of the Epidemiological Laboratory (EPILAB) in the Epidemiological Centre (EPIC);

  - Unexploded ordnance removal platoon (UXO);

  - Water Purification Unit;

  - Infantry module for active protection of airfields;

  - Two tactical groups for aircraft direction;

  - Engineer capabilities (combat engineering platoon and bridge capability);

  - Helicopter capabilities (BELL 412 crew, Cougar AS 532 crew and equipment for aeromedical
evacuation (MEDEVAC);

  - Special Operation Forces Tactical Unit (SOF TU);

  - Multi-purpose boat Triglav-11 (VNL-11);

  - Fast patrol boat HPL-21 Ankaran;

  - Airspace Surveillance and Control Centre.

The Joint Operations Centre (JOC), whose essential missions and tasks include monitoring of
situation on land, at sea and in the air in Slovenia and in the SAF areas of operation, and the


-----

command of prepared forces and forces operating in Slovenia and abroad, achieved its full operational
capability.

### 4 MAINTAINING THE LEVEL OF READINESS

Due to the reduction in financial resources, the SAF forces did not reach the planned level of
readiness in 2012.

Nevertheless, with the austerity, reduced expenses and the selection of activities, the attained level of
readiness still ensured the implementation of tasks in IOM and the fulfilment of obligations to the
Alliance. With its forces in IOM, it made an important contribution to international peace, security and
stability.

Wit its current capabilities, the SAF successfully supported the system of protection against natural
and other disasters.

### 5 KEY PROJECTS OF SAF MODERNISATION

The following key projects were realised as part of the SAF modernisation (equipping):

  - In the framework of the transport vehicles project, three 6x6 terrain cargo vehicles for the
transport of containers were acquired and introduced into use.

  - Within the project of upgrading Cougar transport helicopters, upgrading of the first helicopter
with the systems for communication, navigation and protection, and systems for minimization
of thermal images was completed.

  - In the framework of the Cerklje ob Krki airfield modernisation project, navigation equipment
was provided.

  - In the context of the electronic equipment project, the upgrade of key information system was
carried out and the most essential telecommunication equipment for operational use in the
SAF was acquired.

As part of the American military assistance project, spare parts for ASOC were supplied, as well as
light 4x4 wheeled armoured vehicles (LKOV) HMMWV and medical equipment.


-----

### 6 SAF OPERATION IN SUPPORT OF THE SYSTEM OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS

In 2012, the SAF actively supported the operation of the system of protection against natural and other
disasters and participated with its capabilities, with the focus on helicopter rescue, emergency medical
assistance, response in the event of natural disasters and fire-fighting. Intervention forces, which are
properly trained and in constant readiness for operation in Slovenia were available for immediate
assistance.

#### 6.1 Helicopter rescue and assistance

In 2012, the duty crew of the 15[th] SAF Helicopter Battalion carried out 202 rescue operations, which is
20 percent more compared to the previous year. The table below shows detailed information on
helicopter rescue and assistance.


**Forms and the number of rescue**

**operations, flying hours and injured**

**persons**


**2011** **2012** **Index**


Mountain rescue 125 97 78

Helicopter emergency medical assistance 36 85 236

Wildfires 7 19 271

Total number of rescue operations 168 202 120

Total number of helicopter flying hours 211 339 161

Total number of injured persons 170 180 106

#### 6.2 Forms of assistance and operation of the SAF in the system of protection against natural and other disasters

The SAF participated in protection, rescue and relief operations in the event of floods, fires and search
for missing persons, as shown in the table below:

**Event** **Forms of SAF’s assistance and operation**

                - Fire fighting from the air in the areas of Sveta Gora near
Wildfires
Nova Gorica, Kočevska Reka and Osilnica.


Search for missing
persons

Floods in Slovenia



- Search for four missing persons in water (Drava, Lake
Bohinj, Rudniško jezero lake near Kočevje and Gradiško
jezero lake near Lukovica).

- Participation in the prevention of floods – construction of
flood embankments.

- Participation in the rescue of property, including evacuation.

- Transport in flooded areas, cleaning works and the
elimination of consequences.

- Erection of the by-pass bridge C 200.

- Participation in the restoration of destroyed roads and river
beds.

- Performance of simple physical work together with the
population.

- Filming of the consequences of floods from a helicopter.


-----

                - Filming of the flooded area with an unmanned aerial vehicle.

                - Disinfection of common areas.

                - Collection and participation in the distribution of
humanitarian aid.

### 7 SAF CONTRIBUTION TO INTERNATIONAL PEACE, SECURITY AND STABILITY

The SAF activities in IOM were carried out in accordance with Government Decisions, the Minister of
Defence’s guidance and plans for the operation of the SAF forces abroad. The SAF's participation in
IOM and individual operations was conducted in a coordinated manner, with no major discrepancies.
The table below shows deployments of SAF members to IOM.


**International**
**Operation**

**forces**


**Area of**

**operations**


**Conduct of**

**the**

**operation**


**Number of**
**Rotation**

**members**


UNTSO Middle East UN 12 months 3

UNIFIL Lebanon UN 6 months 14

UNSMIS Syria UN 3 months 1

KFOR Kosovo NATO 6 months 304

Joint

NATO HQ, Sarajevo, 6 months 3

Enterprise

MLO Skopje, NATO 12 months 1
MLO Belgrade 12 months 2

ISAF ISAF Afghanistan NATO 6 months 80

ATALANTA EU NAVFOR Northwood EU 6 months 1

Bosnia and
ALTHEA EUFOR EU 6 months 15
Herzegovina

**TOTAL** **424**

#### 7.1 NATO operations

_KFOR_

Security, stability and development in the Balkans were Slovenia's national priority. Consequently,
participation of the SAF in the NATO-led KFOR operation in Kosovo was its most important task, in
which the SAF participated with 304 members. Basic tasks of the Slovenian contingent were
protecting enclaves and special importance facilities, readiness for rapid response, helicopter
transport, operation of liaison groups and performance of a variety of duties in the KFOR HQs.

_ISAF_

The number of SAF members in Afghanistan was reduced from 90 deployed in the beginning of the
year to 80 at the end of the year, mainly due to rationalization of the revised concept of training and
redeployment of the main body of the contingent. In April, the training in the Special Police Training
Centre (SPTC) in Wardak began, and in the summer, the participation in the Regional Military Training
Centre in Herat (RMTC) and in the 207[th] Corps of the Afghan National Army came to an end, whereas
activities began for the redeployment of the main body of the SAF contingent.


-----

_NRF – operational readiness_

The SAF participated in the Immediate Response Force with its transport platoon and in the lowreadiness Response Force with the motorized company of the 74[th] Motorised Battalion (MOTB).

In addition to participating in KFOR and ISAF operations, the SAF was also present in the NATO HQ
in Sarajevo and in NATO military offices in Belgrade and Skopje.

#### 7.2 UN operations

_UNIFIL_

The SAF was involved In the UNIFIL operation in Lebanon with 14 members who performed
reconnaissance tasks and accompanied convoys and important persons, established checkpoints and
controlled communications. Three members were working in the Multinational Brigade HQ. In the
UNTSO operation, the SAF participated with three military observers, of which there were in
Damascus in Syria and one in Tiberias in Israel. In the UNSMIS operation in Syria, the SAF was
involved with one member.

#### 7.3 EU Operations

_EUFOR, Althea_

15 SAF members were involved in the EUFOR Althea operation. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, shortterm deployments of the mobile group responsible for the training of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
armed forces in the area of engineering were carried out between 12 March 2012 and 10 April 2012
and between 23 October 2012 and 20 November 2012. From September 2012, the SAF provides a
company which constitutes a part of the regional reserve forces. In November 2012, the squad carried
out the required training in the area of operations. In the EU NAVFOR operation Atalanta, the SAF
participated with an officer in the British base Northwood.


-----

## PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS

### 1 PREVENTIVE ACTIVITIES

One of the fundamental approaches of preventive action is to provide protection against natural and
other disasters, including fire protection and protection against drowning at the system level.
Regulatory documents govern the performance of various activities for the broadest spectrum of
professional and lay public.

In the area of fire protection, some solutions related to the regulatory framework were in line with the
development of the entire system of protection against natural and other disasters, and adapted to the
developments in the expert field, particularly in the areas of planning activities which affect the
physical environment, training residents in fire protection, and emergency and evacuation routes. Fire
watch service was regulated more in detail in some parts or for facilities which are more at risk of fire.
Data collection and processing in the area of fire protection were simplified, and requirements were set
out for the preparation of expert reports on project documents providing for fire protection measures.
Special consents for building permits were also abolished.

At the end of the year, the research project The Development of Methodology for the Assessment of
Fire Risk in Buildings was completed. The research project will be the scientific basis for the
preparation of methodology for the assessment of fire risk in buildings.

In the area of protection against drowning, periodic aptitude test for water rescue personnel were
conducted, as well as activities pertaining to regulatory changes related to the reduction of the number
of water rescuers present in swimming pools in the event of proper equipment of those swimming
pools.

With regard to the public interest of fire protection and protection against natural and other disasters,
346 authorisations were issued for fire protection training, and one authorisation for training in the
protection against drowning. A total of 196 guidelines and 231 opinions on spatial planning documents
were issued in the areas of protection against natural and other disasters and fire protection.
Moreover, 153 approvals of Fire Safety Studies were issued for those facilities for which, in
accordance with the regulations, such studies must be made.

Particular emphasis was placed on continuous training of the expert public and on raising awareness
of the population in the areas of fire protection and protection against drowning. For that purpose,
several activities have been carried out for different target groups.

In the area of fire protection, the ACPDR conducted two consultations whose purpose was to present
novelties in the normative field of fire protection to those responsible for the implementation of fire
protection measures. Special emphasis was on photovoltaics. For the expert public, two consultations
were organised on fire safety and earthquake, with the focus on planning and the implementation of
measures of protection against fires when they break out as a result of an earthquake. Materials of
consultations have been published on the website of the ACPDR.

"Are you prepared for an earthquake?" was the slogan of the project October - Fire Safety Month
2012. The purpose of the project was to warn people that an earthquake cannot be prevented,
however, we can prepare for it. Preventive measures against earthquakes were presented, which can
reduce the effects of the earthquake. The measures were presented separately for households and
for children. Three publications were prepared - two television spots and a theme poster for children.
All materials are available at http://www.sos112.si.


-----

ACPDR has also conducted the following preventive awareness activities for the public:

  - The _Zmajček_ magazine for children presented activities in the area of fire protection and
protection against natural and other disasters on the topic of earthquakes.

  - Activities were carried out for children and youth on the topic of natural and other disasters in
the puppet show and at the Children's Fair.

  - The publications "periodic table" presented the topics related to fire protection and protection
against drowning and earthquake to sixth-year elementary school students.

  - These themes were also presented to fourth-year secondary school students in a supplement
to the publication FAX Vpisnik.

  - On the first day of school, the entire population of first-year university students received the
publication _Priročnik za bruce_ (A Guide for Freshers), containing topics related to university
students and fire safety. For the widest group of population activities regarding chimney fires
and carbon monoxide were organized in January, November and December, while activities
related to the Veseli december festival and fire protection were organized in December.

  - In different media and on the national radio, preventive measures were presented, pertaining
to risks of improper combustion, the possibility of damage to the combustion and smokechannelling devices and the risks due to candle burning, the use of pyrotechnics and the like.

  - Throughout the year, activities were carried out for the population, especially youth and
children, on the topic of protection against drowning, measures before, during and after an
earthquake, and preparedness for hailstorms.


-----

### 2 PREPAREDNESS OF THE SYSTEM OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS AND PROTECTION, RESCUE AND RELIEF FORCES

#### 2.1 Operational planning and preparedness

In 2012, scientific bases were prepared for reporting to the EU on the topic of risk assessments, as
well as bases for participation in the preparation of the Proposal for a Decision on a Union Civil
Protection Mechanism.

The Regulation on the Subject Matter and Preparation of Emergency Response Plans was issued,
determining the planning bodies, the subject matter, the criteria and methods for the preparation of
emergency response plans for people, animals, property, cultural heritage and the environment in the
event of natural and other disasters, and reducing the obligations of planning bodies with essentially
simplified procedures of disaster response planning for natural and other disasters.

A new risk assessment for massive outbreaks of contagious animal diseases was made, and the
National Emergency Response Plan for Massive Outbreaks of Contagious Animal Diseases was
adopted.

General annexes to emergency response plans were fully updated.

The National Emergency Response Plan for Nuclear and Radiological Accidents was supplemented;
activities were also carried out within the Interministerial Group for Monitoring the Implementation of
the Plan. Activities related to the distribution of potassium iodide in the diameter of ten kilometres
around the Krško Nuclear Power Plant are still under way.

The risk assessment and the National Emergency Response Plan for Earthquakes and HighlyDangerous Diseases were updated, as well as the Plan for the Operation of the Republic of Slovenia
Civil Protection Staffs.

#### 2.2 Monitoring, notification and warning

Operational and communications tasks related to monitoring, notification and warning are carried out
24 hours a day and 365 days a year by the National Notification Centre (CORS) and 13 regional
notification centres (ReCOs), responding to the emergency call number 112.

In ReCO Murska Sobota, Ptuj, Trbovlje, Novo mesto, Postojna and Slovenj Gradec, night duties were
abolished on 1 July 2012, and their night tasks were taken over by the neighbouring ReCOs. The
ReCOs provide access to emergency medical services, rapid activation of emergency responders,
especially fire-fighters, and the corresponding response of various rescue services in the event of
natural and other disasters to all citizens. In 2012, the responsiveness for all calls to operators in
ReCOs was, in 90 percent, less than nine seconds on average.

There are 121 operators employed in the ReCOs. Due to the employment limitations, 22 positions are
still not filled. The majority of calls, on average 446 per day, were received in the ReCO Ljubljana. This
was followed by the ReCO in Maribor with 233 calls per day, the ReCO in Celje with 184 calls per day
and the ReCO in Kranj with 143 calls per day. In total, all Slovenian notification centres received more
than 640,000 calls. Together with outgoing calls made by operators, over 900,000 calls were made.

In 2012, the total number of events was 13,955, which is 788 more than in 2011. Most of the events
were fires and explosions (5,562), technical and other assistance (3,303 events) and traffic accidents
(2,074 events). There were a total of 22,150 interventions. Most of them were conducted by voluntary
territorial fire-fighting societies (13,567), while professional fire brigades conducted 7,873
interventions. In the field of mountain rescue, the Mountain Rescue Service carried out 526
interventions. In 32 interventions, the Underwater Rescue Service was also activated, and 89 cases
involved rescue units with rescue dogs.


-----

#### 2.3 Communications and Information Systems (CIS) in the protection against natural and other disasters

In 2011, the MoD planned to purchase three emergency response management systems for the
decision-making support system SiPod in notification centres. The purpose of these systems is to
shorten the response times and enable automatic exchange of information gained from the call
between all rescue services. The systems, however, could not be bought for financial reasons. Thus,
the MoD is currently only using the first three systems purchased in 2009.

Two new emergency call services were introduced into use, namely the SMS112 application for
receiving text emergency calls and the Video112 application for receiving video emergency calls. The
SMS112 application strengthened the existing, Europe's award-winning, WAP112 text emergency call
application which was primarily intended for the deaf and hard-of-hearing. Public telephone operators
must now do what is necessary for these services to start working. In the Telekom Slovenije network,
the SMS112 application became operational in February 2012.

The 3D geographic information system (GIS) started to replace the existing scalar layers with
geographically positioned vector layers.

The update of the paging system was completed, and the remote pager triggering server was set up.
The worn switchboard in ReCO Ljubljana was replaced.

The StatKlic system ensured local recording of all received calls to the 112 emergency call service in
ReCOs. In this way, recording of calls is centralised, enabling continuous monitoring of the quality of
the emergency call service.

The ACPDR participated in two interministerial working groups:

  - The first group dealt with the Construction of a Unified Digital Radio Network of Public
Authorities project – TETRA – Implementation Project which was continued from 2011. The
project was completed in 2012, with the exception of the review of project documentation.

  - The second group was intended for the completion of a unified digital radio network of public
authorities. The decision was adopted that further development of this network will be towards
the combination of two standardised digital technologies TETRA and DTM.

The ACPDR also actively participated in European projects (MONET and AlpSAR). The former studies
the possibilities of use and introduction of mesh networks in the work of rescue services, while the
latter deals with the development of communications and information support to mountain rescue.

#### 2.4 Protection, rescue and relief forces

Protection, rescue and relief forces were put to the test mainly in the response to strong bora wind in
February and to floods in November 2012. With timely and effective response and help to those
affected, the forces contributed to the mitigation of huge damage caused by the disaster.

In accordance with the regulatory framework and the organisation of Civil Protection (CP) units,
services and bodies, the manning of units was continued, especially through the conclusion of new
contracts for service in CP, with 21 contracts concluded in 2012.

In accordance with the Decree on Service in Civil Protection (Official Gazette of the RS, Nos. 1/08 and
99/08), the ACPDR concluded additional contracts with CP contractors for the performance of
specialised protection, rescue and relief tasks in the event of natural and other disasters throughout
the country.


-----

The performance of these tasks requires special expertise and qualifications and is also intended for
assistance to other countries. Due to budgetary constraints and the reduction of resources for the area
of protection against natural and other disasters, 92 contracts were concluded for CP service for the
most critical duties, which, however, does not cover all the needs. The table below shows the overview
of CP contract members.

**Unit** **Number**

National Rapid Response Unit – Technical Diving Unit 10

National Rapid Response Unit – IT Support Team 4

National Rapid Response Unit – Transport Unit 4

National Rapid Response Unit – Command 3

National Rapid Response Unit – NBC decontamination 1

Support Service – Psychological Support Team 2

Mobile medical unit 4

Notification Centre – Notification Centre Manning Team 28

Technical Rescue Team with Special Working Machines and Devices 10

Support and Implementation Service for Special PRR Tasks in the Event of
14
Environmental and Other Disasters at Sea

Logistics Centre 12

**TOTAL** **92**

The ACPDR adopted a decision on the designation of national and regional CP units, services and
bodies which are primarily manned by CP contract members. In addition, it adopted the CP contract
members’ annual training plan.

With regard to the manner of inclusion and participation of citizens (over 70,000 citizens), protection,
rescue and relief forces are divided into voluntary, professional and duty forces. Individual units and
services can be organized as a combination of professional and voluntary members.

  - Professional units and services (5%) are organised independently based on the principle of
professional performance of tasks as public institutes or public utility units and based on a
contract concluded with the corresponding companies, societies and other organisations.

  - Duty units and services (25%) are organised based on civic obligation as CP units and
services.

  - Voluntary units and rescue services (70%) are organised based on a voluntary basis as nongovernmental organisations (NGOs), especially humanitarian organisations. Their operation is
connected to, as well as supplemented by, professional rescue services.

All protection, rescue and relief forces are connected into a unified system, enabling a unified
management and command and the use of common telecommunication, information and other
infrastructure.

#### 2.5 Protection from Unexploded Ordnance (UXO)

Protection from UXO is organised as a single measure throughout Slovenia and is divided into
training, operational activities related to the National Unit for Protection from UXO, and temporary
storage and destruction of UXO. The destruction of UXO is centralised and carried out at the Polygon
208 protection and rescue training range. With regard to training, a new introductory and basic training


-----

programme was prepared for members of the National Unit for Protection from UXO. The measure for
protection from UXO has been carried out by 37 contract members.

In 2012, National Unit for Protection from UXO carried out 399 interventions, two regular UXO
destructions and six emergency destructions. A total of 5,119 pieces of UXO were destroyed in 2012,
amounting to 5,747 kg of total weight, whereby 540 kg of TNT, 75 kg of plastic explosives and 122 kg
of commercial explosive were used. For each destruction, an expert report and a summary report were
produced.

#### 2.6 Provision of conditions for the operation of Protection, Rescue and Relief Forces

The operational part of the system of protection against natural and other disasters is primarily based
on voluntary rescue services and other structures organised by associations and NGOs. With the
supplementary budget, the subsidy provided by the ACPDR was reduced by 13.5 percent, which
represents over 75 percent of the total funds required for the operation of units. Such operation
includes continuous training of unit members, members’ medical examinations and insurance policies,
payment of salaries and reimbursements for loss of income to employers, purchase and maintenance
of collective and personal protection and rescue equipment, and material costs of interventions.

_Co-funding of rescue services, associations and other organisations_

On the basis of the established criteria, provided funds, reports for 2011 and work programmes for
2012, subsidy programmes were implemented for rescue services, associations and other
organisations through annexes to the current multi-annual contracts or through new contracts.

Annexes to contracts in the amount EUR 1.578 million of were concluded with:

  - Mountain Rescue Association of Slovenia

  - Cave Rescue Service of the Speleological Association of Slovenia

  - Slovenian Kennel Club, Slovenian Diving Federation

  - Slovenian Red Cross

  - Slovenian Catholic Girl Guides and Boy Scouts Association

  - Scout Association of Slovenia

  - National Institute of Biology

  - Institute of Occupational Safety

  - Faculty of Medicine – the Institute of Microbiology and Immunology

  - Faculty of Medicine – the Forensic Identification Unit

  - Veterinary Faculty – the Institute of Microbiology and Parasitology

  - Jozef Stefan Institute

  - Velenje Coal Mine

  - TKI Hrastnik (chemical products factory)

  - Institute of Public Health Maribor

  - Slovenian Professional Fire-Fighter Association

  - Association of Societies and Clubs of Rescue Dog Handlers of Slovenia

  - Association of Radio Amateurs of Slovenia, and the following flying clubs: Josip Križaj
Ajdovščina, Postojna, Tolmin, Zagorje ob Savi

  - Coastal Flying Centre Portorož

  - Slovenj Gradec Airport

  - Kras Flying Centre Divača

_Co-funding of the Fire-Fighting Association of Slovenia_

Based on the annual programme of activities and tasks of the Fire-Fighting Association of Slovenia,
such as organisational activities, prevention activities, fire-fighter training, and publication of
professional literature in accordance with the Fire Service Act and the Fire Protection Act, an annex
was concluded with the Fire-Fighting Association of Slovenia in the amount of EUR 0.492 million.


-----

In addition, the ACPDR allocated EUR 110,000 for anniversaries of voluntary fire-fighting societies,
and EUR 93,500 to assist fire-fighting units in the purchase of protection and rescue equipment.

_Programme for co-funding fire-fighting units of general importance_

The programme for co-funding of fire-fighting units of general importance was fully implemented in the
following areas:

  - Completion of authorisations for tunnels (PGD Gornja Radgona, PGD Murska Sobota, the Fire
and Rescue Centre Novo mesto.

  - Updating and completion of data on influence factors in operational areas (new roads, tunnels
etc.).

  - Modernisation and completion of fire-fighting units of general importance dual activation areas,
taking into account double-overlap areas.

  - Procedure for the evaluation of plans for 2012 and reports on the utilisation of funds for 2011,
and the preparation of annexes to current contracts.

The fire-fighting units of general importance were co-funded in the amount of EUR 2.744 million. Of
this amount, EUR 134,000 was intended for the amortisation of seven special fire engines for tunnel
rescue. The rest of the funds were divided among units, in line with the criteria for the allocation of
funds.

_Emergency rescue in long road and motorway tunnels_

On the basis of contracts for the performance of operational tasks in the event of road tunnel
accidents, concluded between the Motorway Company of the Republic of Slovenia, the MoD and
individual fire-fighting units (the Jesenice Fire and Rescue Service, the Domžale Fire Safety Centre
and the Celje Professional Fire Brigade), a total of EUR 81,000 was paid to co-finance the
maintenance and restoration of personal protective equipment, insurances and transport costs of
tunnel fire-fighters.

_Co-funding of fire-fighting protection and rescue equipment_

The modernisation of protection and rescue equipment of fire-fighting units in voluntary fire-fighting
societies, and thus the provision of harmonious development of these units, continued in 2012. A total
of 458 applicants responded to the tender notice for co-funding of fire-fighting protection and rescue
equipment. A total of 391 co-funding contracts in the amount of EUR 0.930 million were concluded.

_Protection and rescue operations at sea_

A co-funding procedure was carried out with the company Adria Tow, storitve, vleke in asistiranja ladij
in plovil, d. o. o. (towing services and assistance to ships and vessels). A contract was concluded for
carrying out protection and rescue operations at sea in the amount of EUR 30,200.

#### 2.7 National reserves for the event of natural and other disasters

National material reserves were complemented in accordance with the Medium-Term Plan for the
National Material Reserves 2009–2015 and within the budget options. The primary focus was on the
rescue equipment in the event of floods and on fire-fighting equipment.

#### 2.8 Commodity reserves

In cooperation with the Agency of the Republic of Slovenia for Commodity Reserves, the annual
programme for the purchasing of protection and rescue equipment in the context of commodity
reserves was prepared pursuant to the Decree on Minimum Personal and Collective Protection
Resources and Equipment in the Event of Natural and Other Disasters and War and in accordance
with the plans for the protection and rescue of people in the event of hazmat accidents and terrorist
operations.


-----

For 2012, the Agency's board of directors adopted a work programme and a financial plan for the
purchase of personal and collective protection equipment in the amount of EUR 0.925 million (excl.
VAT). A total of EUR 0.795 million was spent for the purchase of gas masks for children and youth, for
protective gowns, dosimeters with readers, decontamination assets, devices and tools, radiological
detectors, protective boots, gloves and overalls and other means of protection.

#### 2.9 Delivery of fire fund assets and vehicles to voluntary fire-fighting societies

With regard to the public interest of protection against natural and other disasters and fire protection,
866 pieces of various fire-fighting equipment and communication resources were transferred to the
Fire-Fighting Association of Slovenia, in accordance with the contract.

#### 2.10 Fire tax

The use of funds for wider social significance (30 percent of all funds) is in the hands of the Committee
for the Management of the Fire Funds Assets, in accordance with the annual plan for the use of the
fire tax inflow which amounted to EUR 7.613 million in 2012. Of this amount, municipalities received
EUR 5.551 million.

In 2012, high-value and several low-value public procurement procedures were carried out for:

  - Purchase of transport nets for helicopters – EUR 90,000.

  - Purchase of self-contained breathing apparatuses – EUR 83,000.

  - Purchase of barrier reels for the prevention of marine pollution – EUR 108,000.

  - Purchase of equipment for the Kras Centre – EUR 7,500.

  - Purchase of CBRN equipment for the elimination of consequences of major floods – EUR
23,500.

  - Purchase of NBC equipment – EUR 13,600.

  - Implementation of research and development projects – EUR 10,400.

In addition, the following projects were also carried out in 2012:

  - Public call for the co-funding of fire engines in the Kras was made in the amount of EUR
191,000. Based on this call, five contracts were signed with the selected municipalities in that
area.

  - Co-funding of the purchase of fire-fighting equipment for tunnel rescue fire engine (Gornja
Radgona) in the amount of EUR 50,000.

  - Co-funding of the purchase of communications vehicle for the Soča Radio Club from Nova
Gorica in the amount of EUR 10,000.

Co-funding procedures were carried out for:

  - Training of operational voluntary fire-fighters in the amount of EUR 492,600.

  - Maintaining and updating of the Vulkan (Volcano) information system in the amount of EUR
14,000.

  - Medical examinations of fire-fighters before the training with self-contained breathing
apparatuses in the amount of EUR 180,000.

The Fire Fund assets in the amount of EUR 204,000 were used to prepare project documentation for
the training range and regularly maintain equipment at the Training Centre for Civil Protection and
Disaster Relief in Ig and at the Sežana and Pekre training units.


-----

#### 2.11 Research and development in the area of protection against natural and other disasters

In 2012, seven research and development projects (RDP) in the area of protection against natural and
other disasters were carried out. They were aimed at assessing the vulnerability of buildings after
earthquakes, at setting up an early warning system for the risk of landslides, at the efficient use of
protective water barriers in support of emergency response in the event of disasters, at an overview of
earth and concrete water barriers, at assessing fire risk in buildings, video surveillance of the sea, and
training of fire-fighters in a firehouse.

Contracts were signed with the selected contractors for the following RDPs:

  - Tyre fires (emergency response instructions).

  - Preparation, implementation and analysis of evacuation from the school premises (an
interactive guide).

  - Development of technological equipment for an operational fire engine for the time monitoring
of procedures and the use of equipment.

  - Necessary conditions for the development of internal fires and practical demonstrations in a
real situation: the impact of a water source on the parameters in an internal fire.

  - Fire construction products and materials after a real fire.

The expert public was called to submit proposals for RDPs financed through the Fire Fund. Seven
RDPs were selected. However, in spite of requests for additional explanation and assessment of the
submitted proposals, the RDPs have still not been published. The titles of the selected proposals are
the following:

  - Fire escape and operational plan in electronic form.

  - Possibility of setting preventive fires in Slovenia.

  - Fire safety in residential houses.

  - Fire protection of cultural heritage.

  - Evacuation of people with movement impairment.

  - Ejection of concrete in various fire conditions due to explosions.

  - The spread of fire over the façade.

International projects in 2012:

  - In the framework of the South East Europe programme within the MONITOR II project, the
ACPDR played a role of the observer. In addition, in cooperation with the neighbouring
countries, it prepared project proposals for tenders financed from the European funds.

  - The ACPDR participated in the counselling board of external experts within the projects
SAFER, LINKER and MONET coordinated by the European Union Civil Protection Unit within
the EU 7[th] Framework Programme for Research, Technological Development and
Demonstration Activities.

  - The ACPDR was also an observer in the SAFELAND project which is also financed from the
7[th] Framework Programme.

  - In the Climate Change Adaptation by Spatial Planning in the Alpine Space (CLISP) project
which was approved after the call for proposals for the Alpine Space Programme in the
framework of the Objective no. 3 – Territorial Cooperation, the ACPDR cooperated with a
number of other ministries.


-----

### 3 DISASTER RESPONSE AND DAMAGE ASSESSMENT

#### 3.1 Disaster response

In 2012, members of protection, rescue and relief forces carried out 16,919 interventions. The
overview is shown in the table below:


**Number of activated**
**Type of unit**

**units**


**Number of**

**participating units**


Rescue Dog Units 89 584

Mountain Rescue Service 526 3,636

Cave Rescue Service 23 94

Voluntary Territorial Fire-Fighting Societies 13,567 107,972

Professional Fire Brigades 7,873 33,300

Voluntary Industrial Fire-Fighting Societies 40 184

Underwater Rescue Service 32 145

**TOTAL** **22,150** **145,915**

#### 3.2 Damage assessment

In 2012, municipalities were issued decisions for damage assessment and given instructions for
damage assessment in the event of strong wind, drought and floods. Records of the parties suffering
damage were entered into the AJDA application, and damage assessment materials were sent to the
National Damage Assessment Commission and then sent for consideration to the Government.

_Strong wind (bora)_

From 29 January to 12 February, strong wind or bora affected municipalities in the Notranjska, Littoral
and the Southern Primorska Regions and caused damage. The municipalities of Nova Gorica,
Ajdovščina, Vipava, Ilirska Bistrica, Koper, Izola and Piran were called to perform damage
assessment, which ended on 9 March 2012. The municipalities of Nova Gorica, Ajdovščina, Vipava,
Koper, Izola and Piran informed the ACPDR that they will not assess property damage, since
according to their estimate the damage should not exceed the 0.3 per mil of the planned national
budget revenue.

The damage assessment was based on 98 forms and amounted to EUR 138,500. The assessed
direct damage caused by the bora wind did not surpass 0.3 per mils of the planned incomes of the
state budget. Consequently the limit for assistance provided in accordance with the Removal of
Consequences of Natural Disasters Act has not been reached.

_Drought_

The assessment of imminent damage to the current agricultural production includes damage in the
Littoral, Prekmurje, Podravje, Dolenjska, Notranjska, Northern Primorska, Posavska, Eastern
Štajerska, Western Štajerska and Zasavska Regions. The drought affected 122 municipalities or
17,245 parties suffering damage on 106,257 hectares. 85 different crops were affected.

Imminent damage exceeded 0.3 per mil of the planned national budget revenue for 2012. In this way,
the threshold for the allocation of aid was exceeded in accordance with the Removal of Consequences
of Natural Disasters Act.


-----

_Floods_

Between 4 and 5 November 2012, floods affected eleven regions, namely Gorenjska, Koroška,
Notranjska, Ljubljanska, Podravska, Pomurska, Posavska, Northern Primorska, Eastern Štajerska,
Western Štajerska and Zasavska, and caused property damage. The decision on the assessment of
damage was issued to 103 municipalities, a supplementary decision on the assessment of damage
was issued to 6 municipalities, while 11 municipalities received a supplementary decision on the
assessment of damage to watercourses.

The damage assessment ended on 10 December 2012. The municipalities of Radlje ob Dravi, Dol pri
Ljubljani, Komenda, Dornava, Kostanjevica na Krki, Cerkno, Kungota in Tabor informed that they will
not assess property damage. The total damage amounted to a total of EUR 310.9 million (excl. VAT).
Damage to property amounted to EUR 55 million, to economy EUR 45 million, to national roads EUR
15 million, to railway EUR 0.710 million and to watercourses EUR 194.526 million. The damage was
assessed on the basis of 7982 records on damage to agricultural areas, forests, national roads,
railway, watercourses, economy, buildings, civil engineering buildings, animals and partial damage to
buildings.

The assessed imminent damage to property, civil engineering buildings and watercourses from the
previous paragraph exceeded 0.3 per mil of the planned national budget revenue for 2012. Thus, the
threshold for the use of resources from the national budget was reached, in accordance with the
Removal of Consequences of Natural Disasters Act.


-----

### 4 EDUCATION AND TRAINING

In line with the annual education and training plan, education and training took place at the Training
Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief in Ig and at the Centre's training units in Pekre, Sežana
and Logatec. Training was provided to members of various protection, rescue and relief forces and to
government officials in the field of protection and rescue. In addition, training organised by NGOs for
rescue services and other operational structures was also conducted.

A total of 32,906 participants attended various forms of education and training, of which 19,792
persons at the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief in Ig, 7,744 persons at the
Centre’s training unit in Pekre, 4,475 at the Logatec training unit and 895 at the Sežana training unit).

In 2012, six training programmes were updated:

  - Introductory and basic training programme for members of CP and SAF units for protection
from UXO.

  - Basic training programme for lecturers in the area of protection against natural and other
disasters.

  - Training programme for mountain rescuers (approved by the Management Board of the
Mountain Rescue Association of Slovenia).

  - Supplementary training programme for lecturers and mentors in the area of protection against
natural and other disasters.

  - Basic training programme for the use of aircraft in carrying out protection, rescue and relief
tasks.

  - Training programme for access to the occupation of a fire-fighter.

Four new programmes were approved:

  - Supplementary training programme – leadership and group dynamics.

  - Basic training programme for the preparation and use of fire-fighing command vehicle PV2.

  - Introductory and basic training programme for rescue dog handlers, training programme for
providers of the elective course on protection against natural and other disasters in
elementary schools.

Six programmes are still in preparation:

  - Supplementary training for aerial ladder operators.

  - Introductory and basic training programme for members of rescue units in the structure of
technical rescue CP units.

  - Introductory and basic training programme for members of the contract reserve.

  - Basic training programmes for instructors in the area of protection against natural and other
disasters.

  - Supplementary training programmes for instructors in the area of protection against natural
and other disasters.

  - Supplementary training programme on defusing.

In the framework of trainings for the protection from UXO for the needs of trainings and operational
work in the field, a French database EOD TURPIN was acquired. The database contains 5,887
processed UXO. The necessary materials were prepared (instructions, records) as well as guidelines
for help in the work of members in interventions and periodic destruction of stored UXO at the Poligon
208 training range.

Several trainings in the area of psychological help were carried out for professional fire-fighters and
workers in notification centres. Guidelines were prepared for psychological help to rescuers in the
system of protection against natural and other disasters. In cooperation with psychologists of the SAF
and Police, the selection of candidates for confidants was made, and psychological testing of those
confidants was also carried out. Confidant candidates also underwent training, which was successfully


-----

completed by 46 candidates. The procedure for the activation of a psychologist from the Psychological
Assistance Service was prepared.

For elementary school teachers who wish to teach the elective course on protection against natural
and other disaster, the e-classroom conducted distance training, which was successfully completed by
22 teachers.

On the basis of demonstrated needs or provided suggestions of the employees in the notification
centres, for all civil servants and contract members in the notification centres, supplementary training
was organised – communication and language training. The emphasis was placed on grammatical
rules, work with language manuals, newsletter writing and radio reporting.

In the first half of the year, the training of the 19[th] generation for the access to the profession of a
fireman was carried out. The program included 48 candidates who successfully completed the training.

The employees of the Fire-Fighting College also conducted training for professional fire-fighters in
extinguishing internal fires (module A and B), the use of self-contained breathing apparatuses, the use
of aircraft for the purpose of protection and rescue, the use of hydraulic tools and rescue in single-tube
and twin-tube tunnels.

Two new virtual classrooms were established to conduct training in dealing with stress and for learning
about the system of protection against natural and other disasters. In preparation is the virtual
classroom for training of protection from UXO.

Three consultations were carried out at the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief in
Ig:

  - The management of a major intervention.

  - Presentation of staff work in Austria and the preparation of exercises in the EU.

  - Presentation of the research Psychological impacts of disasters on workers in notification
centres and their preparedness for facing the disasters in the work process for the
management of the notification centres.

The system of protection against natural and other disasters and the organisation of psychosocial
support for rescuers and population were also presented to the members of the Slovenian
Psychological Association and to the students of the Faculty of Social Work.

#### 4.1 Assessment of training level and exercises

Testing the competence of CP and Red Cross (RC) first aid teams at the regional and national levels
is aimed at restoring practical knowledge, maintaining skills and competence, operating in different
situations, and introducing and presenting activities to the widest range of people. The main topics of
the testing in 2012 were rescue and provision of help in the event of an earthquake.

The regional testing of the competence of CP and RC first aid teams took place on Saturdays from 19
May to 22 September in Konstanjevica na Krki, Zreče, Koper, Jesenice, Mengeš, Makole, Ljutomer,
Metlika, Pivka, Cirkulane, Vuzenica and Hrastnik. A total of 137 first aid teams attended the testing,
which is 8.36 percent of all the first aid teams in Slovenia. The winners of the regional testing and the
second-placed team according to the overall result qualified for the 18[th] national testing of first aid
teams.

The national testing of the competence of CP and RC first aid teams took place on 6 October 2012 in
Ljubljana. A total of 134 first aid teams participated in the trial (seven RC teams, 5 CP teams and a
team from a voluntary fire-fighting society). The winner was the CO first aid team from the Nova
Gorica municipality.

Approximately 3,800 members of units, services and organisations included in the system of
protection, rescue and relief participated in the preparation and implementation of the 12 regional trials
for the CP and RK first aid teams. The broader purpose of the trials is to bring the activities closer to


-----

the people, to involve the youth (active participation of the pupils and students), the demonstration of
protection, rescue and relief forces and the raising of awareness of the population (the importance of
first aid skills, willingness to help members of the ones and promotional material).

In the area of protection against natural and other disasters, activities took place in the framework of
exercises organised at the regional, national and international levels.

_Exercise IPA CRO-FLOODS 2012_

Together with Croatia, Germany and Sweden, Slovenia conducts a two-year EU Programme on Civil
Protection Cooperation for the Candidate Countries and Potential Candidates (countries of the
Western Balkans and Turkey) – sub-programme of exercises.

A multi-day international exercise was based on the assumption of disastrous floods in the northern
part of Croatia and the request of the Government of the Republic of Croatia for international
assistance in the implementation of emergency measures for the search and rescue of the victims of
floods. Preparations for the exercise were carried out by an international group of experts, which was
composed mostly of Slovenians, with the participation of the European Commission. The exercise was
entirely financed by the EU funds.

_Exercise HNS 2012_

The exercise HNS 2012 (Host Nation Support) took place within 14[th] international exercise of rescue
dog handlers, organized by the Municipality of Ljubljana from 18 to 20 May 2012. The main objectives
of the exercise were to check the applicability of solutions specified in the manual Preparation of the
Host Country to Receive International Assistance, prepared by the ACPDR, and to test the
management structures in the use of international assistance units and the search for people in the
rubble.

The exercise was based on the assumption that the surroundings of Ljubljana were struck by a
powerful earthquake. Many people were dead or wounded and the material damage was enormous.
Slovenia was not able to handle the situation with its forces and therefore asked for international
assistance in the form of forces and resources. Upon the request for help, three European countries
responded with their search and rescue (SAR) units: Germany (three units), Croatia (three units) and
Italy (two units).

In accordance with the manual Preparation of the Host Country to Receive International Assistance,
the ACPDR formed a HNS cell at the CP Headquarters with the task of organising the reception and
support of international units which arrived in Slovenia to provide assistance.

_Exercise Potres 2012_

The purpose of the theoretical part of the exercise Potres 2012 was testing of the appropriateness of
solutions in the disaster response plans for earthquakes preparedness, and of the preparedness for
response to earthquakes at the municipal, regional and national levels. The objective of the exercise
was to verify the effectiveness and coherence of solutions in disaster response plans, testing of
competence and preparedness of those responsible for carrying out asks, verifying the implementation
of procedures and the harmonization and coordination of operation of the management bodies, and
identification of deficiencies and possible inconsistencies in planning responses to earthquakes.

The exercise was based on the assumption of an earthquake with the intensity at VIII EMS with severe
consequences in central Slovenia, affecting the municipalities of Cerklje na Gorenjskem, Dobrova Polhov Gradec, Dol pri Ljubljani, Domžale, Grosuplje, Hrastnik, Ig, Kranj, Litija, Ljubljana, Log Dragomer, Mengeš, Moravče, Radovljica, Škofja Loka, Šmartno pri Litiji, Trbovlje, Vodice, Vrhnika and
Zagorje ob Savi.

The exercise took place from 25 to 26 September between 8 am and 4 pm at participant locations.
The exercise involved active participation of CP commanders and deputy commanders CP staffs at
the local, regional and national levels in the operational structure, and ministries and government


-----

services that are responsible for carrying out protection and rescue tasks according to the National
Disaster Response Plan for Earthquakes, Version 2.0 (April 2005). The exercise was accompanied by
representatives of municipalities which are partially or entirely situated within the area of intensity at
VIII EMS and with the possibility of a strong earthquake.

During the exercise, which took place exclusively through e-mail, the participants were solving
scheduled tasks related to the assumption of the exercise, in accordance with the matrix of activities.
The participants made assessments of their own vulnerability and the vulnerability of key buildings,
made damage assessments, analysed their own forces, assessed the necessary forces, prepared
messages, releases, notices and requests for assistance, and prepared situation reports.


-----

### 5 INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

International activities in the area of protection against natural and other disasters in 2012 were
primarily focused on the strengthening of bilateral and regional cooperation, on the support to the
development of systems for disaster management in the region of Southeast Europe, on joint efforts
for strengthening the EU CP mechanism and on the provision of an active role of Slovenia in
international organisations. During major natural disasters in Albania and Montenegro, Slovenia
contributed its own share of international assistance to the affected countries. A part of activities was
carried out as a form of development aid to the countries of the Western Balkans, while the ACPDR
also successfully participated in several European projects (co)financed by the European Union.

#### 5.1 Bilateral cooperation

In 2012, Slovenia continued its strengthened cooperation with the neighbouring countries, particularly
in the border area and in the framework of European projects:

  - In cooperation with Austria, in the framework of the three-year European GOAL project, the
purpose of which is the strengthening of operational cross-border cooperation in the area of
protection and rescue, a major cross-border exercise Forest Fire Soboth 2012 was conducted.

  - In cooperation with Croatia planned activities within the Permanent Joint Commission for
protection against disasters were implemented, as well as activities of the Subcommissions.

  - In confirmation of good cooperation with Italy, the Slovenian Minister of Defence visited the
Italian Office for CP within the Council of Ministers in September 2012, which gave an impetus
to the process of concluding a bilateral agreement in the area of protection against disasters
between the two countries. The Slovenian delegation visited the area in central Italy struck by
a massive earthquake and gained a wealth of experience in response and post-earthquake
reconstruction. The cooperation with the Italian region of Friuli-Venezia Giulia continued in the
framework of the project AlpSAR, the purpose of which is the development of communication
and information support to mountain rescue.

  - With Hungary, a meeting was conducted by the Permanent Joint Commission. The majority of
activities took place within the Subcommission for Cross-Border Cooperation which provided
support to the cross-border European project of Slovenia and Hungary in the area of firefighting.

Special attention was devoted to the transfer of knowledge and experience to the Western Balkan
countries in the form of development aid, which complements regional activities and EU projects.
Bilateral visits were carried out with lectures in Montenegro and Macedonia, as a form of support to the
process of integration of the countries in the region into Euro-Atlantic structures. Two bilateral
agreements on cooperation in the area of protection against natural and other disasters with Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Macedonia were ratified.

The project-oriented bilateral cooperation in the area of education and training successfully continued
with France. Slovenia also cooperated with Germany and Sweden. Good cooperation with China was
continued.

#### 5.2 Regional cooperation

In 2012, the ACPDR was involved in several forms of regional cooperation:

  - Cooperation in the regional Disaster Preparedness and Prevention Initiative for South Eastern
Europe (DPPI SEE). In addition to technical support in the development of systems for
disaster management to the members of the initiative and the yearly financial contribution for
its functioning, two trainings were organised in Slovenia: basic hot fire training and cave
rescue training. The ACPDR actively participated in the revision of the Memorandum of
Understanding – the key document for the functioning of the initiative.

  - In June, Slovenia took over from Serbia a one-year presidency of the Adriatic-Ionian Initiative,
in the framework of which the ACPDR participated in the working table on fire protection.


-----

  - In the context of the Alpine Convention, the ACPDR professionally contributed to disaster
protection activities.

  - Slovenia implemented the annual programme of the regional initiative Euroregio West Nyugat
Pannonia for the area of protection against disasters.

#### 5.3 European Union

The ACPDR represented the views of the Republic of Slovenia in the Civil Protection Working Group
of the Council (PROCIV) on the Proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council
on a Union Civil Protection Mechanism. The ACPDR also represented the views on the related areas
(establishment of a European humanitarian aid units, the implementation of the solidarity clause, major
hazmat accidents, deliberate marine pollution, the single European emergency call number, and the
like). Attention was paid to the improvement of civil protection through learning from experience and
the consideration of the new CBRN agenda.

In the strengthening of the Civil Protection Mechanism, the ACPDR:

  - Ensured continued involvement in the CECIS communication and information system.

  - Participated in expert groups (for transport, risk assessments, training, civil protection
modules, etc.).

  - Increased the pool of experts and protection, rescue and relief units for participation in
international rescue operations.

  - Ensured the participation of Slovenian experts in trainings within the EU Civil Protection
Mechanism; with courses conducted by the ACPDR.

  - Actively worked on the integration of the Western Balkan countries and Turkey into the EU
Civil Protection Mechanism, both at the legislative and the operational levels.

  - Gave support to the EUROMED countries in the framework of the PPRD South programme
(prevention, preparedness and response to natural and other disasters).

#### 5.4 European projects 

In 2012, the ACPDR participated in the following EU projects:

  - The EU Programme on Civil Protection Cooperation for the Candidate Countries and Potential
Candidates (countries of the Western Balkans and Turkey) – sub-programme of exercises in
the framework of the instrument for pre-accession assistance, which was successfully
completed in November 2012 with a conference in Brdo pri Kranju. The programme
contributed to the development of CP capabilities in the Western Balkans and Turkey, and
bringing these countries closer to the EU Civil Protection Mechanism. The multilateral project
of external aid, which was fully funded by the European Union was led by Slovenia; Croatia,
Germany and Sweden participated as partners.

  - Conduct of trainings (courses for modules and technical experts) within the EU Civil Protection
Mechanism, together with partners from Sweden, and United Kingdom.

  - Participation in the HeERO project which was designed to support to the EU countries in the
mandatory introduction of the eCall service by 2015.

  - Technical assistance in EU projects PROTEUS – Raising of awareness and improving
effectiveness of cave rescuing and PfE project – Preparedness for evacuation in case of a
nuclear accident.

  - Successful application for the two-year project of conducting staff exercises for modules and
for the QUESTCity project which is designed to train young people in protection against
accidents.

#### 5.5 UN

The ACPDR participated in UN activities for the implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action
2005-2015 and fulfilled its obligations in the framework of the Hague and Barcelona Conventions, the
Mediterranean Action Plan under the auspices of the United Nations Environment Programme and the


-----

United Nations Advisory Group on the use of forces and resources of the armed forces and civil
defence and CP in the event of natural and other disasters.

#### 5.6 NATO

Within NATO the ACPDR participated in the Working Groups dealing with civil protection and crisis
management issues in which the activities were implemented in accordance with the working plan for
2013. An ACPDR representative attended the exercise of the Euro-Atlantic Disaster Response
Coordination Centre (EADRCC) Georgia 2012 in Georgia.

#### 5.7 Assistance in the event of disasters abroad 

In 2012, Slovenia responded to two requests for assistance after natural disasters abroad. The
ACPDR was involved in and also coordinated the assistance provided to Montenegro and Albania.

On the basis of a request for international assistance via EU Civil Protection Mechanism, NATO
EADRCC and bilateral agreement between Montenegro and Slovenia on cooperation in protection
against natural and other disasters, assistance was provided to Montenegro in the event of heavy
snowfall in February 2012 in the form of a SAF helicopter with two crews and three members of the
mountain rescue service. In four days, the SAF made 17 flying hours.

On 27 August 2012, Albania requested international assistance in fighting forest fires through the EU
Civil Protection Mechanism. Slovenia responded to the request with the SAF Cougar helicopter with
two crews and equipment for fighting forest fires, as well as an expert from the ACPDR for the
coordination of international assistance. In three days, the Slovenian helicopter made 146 fire-fighting
cycles (about 25 flying hours) and dropped more than 280 tons of water in the area around Tirana and
Lake Skadar.


-----

### 6 INSPECTIONS IN THE AREA OF PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS

In 2012, inspectors in the area of protection against natural and other disasters carried out 5,190
inspections. Fire protection inspections were carried out in buildings with a large number of people and
in facilities in which activities that may endanger workers and nearby residents take place. Inspectors
supervised the construction of buildings and exercised control on the basis of reports, an enhanced
control during increased fire risk to the natural environment. Fire-fighting units were supervised with
regard to meeting the prescribed medical fitness standards for operational fire-fighters.

In the area of protection against drowning, inspections of swimming pools, equipment lenders and
water activity organisers were carried out.

In the field of protection and rescue, inspections in companies representing a major source of
environmental risk were carried out as well as inspections of ski areas and UXO storage facilities and
inspections in municipalities. Inspections were also conducted in some protection and rescue units
and services organised by the state.

On the basis of inspections, a total of 868 regulatory decisions were issued. In addition to issuing
regulatory decisions, inspectors often used the report on the implemented inspection control as a legal
possibility of assigning corrective actions.

Based on the Minor Offences Act, the Inspectorate of the Republic of Slovenia for Protection against
Natural and Other Disasters (IRSPANOD) carried out 1,269 inspections and issued 46 payment
orders. Moreover, it introduced 297 procedures for the issuing of offence decisions, and issued four
accusatory instruments and 1,176 offence warnings.

Due to the lack of inspectors in individual areas of Slovenia (four inspectors retired and were not
replaced) and in order to ensure a uniform scope of inspections in Slovenia which, within the
competence of the IRSPANOD, provides a uniform standard of safety for the citizens of Slovenia in
the area of protection against natural and other disasters, the year 2012 also saw the continued
implementation of uniform criteria for the performance of inspections in Slovenia.

In 2012, the IRSPANOD carried out the task of monitoring and evaluating exercises of national
importance in the field of protection and rescue. Inspectors from the management of the IRSPANOD
and its branch offices participated in various exercises: POTRES 2012, JAMA 2012, POMURKA 2012,
GOLTE 2012.


-----

## DEFENCE SYSTEM AND CRISIS MANAGEMENT

### 1 DEFENCE POLICY

#### 1.1. NATO

In February 2012, defence ministers held an informal meeting in Brussels, and in April, they held an
informal joint meeting, also in Brussels. At the February meeting, they coordinated the report on the
Allied deterrence and defence posture, and reviewed the implementation of the reforms adopted at the
NATO summit in Lisbon, particularly the reforms of the NATO command structure. At the April
meeting, the defence ministers held a discussion on the provision of the Alliance capabilities by 2020
and beyond.

Priority joint capabilities, which will be developed by NATO primarily in the context of initiatives on
smart defence and related forces, are included in the "defence package". NATO aims at modern,
closely connected, equipped and trained forces, led in such a way that they can work together and
with partners in any environment and in crisis situations. They also discussed the conditions for the
declaration of interim capability of NATO's missile defence and listened to reports on defence
transformation and progress made in carrying out reforms. The foreign ministers coordinated the
report on the deterrence and defence posture of the Alliance, which identified the forces that NATO
needs for adequate deterrence and defence against the security challenges in the next decade.

In May 2012, the heads of states and governments at the NATO summit in Chicago talked about the
changed security situation in the 21[st] century, taking into consideration the fact that during the
economic crisis, balance must be found between balancing, national budgets and the fulfilment of
commitments within the Alliance. They confirmed the defence package of the most important
capabilities and declared an interim capability of NATO's ballistic missile defence, which is designed to
protect the Allies which, according to NATO's assessment, are under threat. The review of deterrence
and defence posture has shown that the current pool of capabilities and plans for their development
are appropriate, while providing for greater role of NATO in the area of weapons proliferation control,
disarmament and non-proliferation. It introduces missile defence as a new capability in the NATO's
pool of forces that can only be complement rather than substitute for other allied capabilities.

Formal meeting of defence ministers in October 2012 in Brussels was aimed at implementing the
conclusions in Chicago. The ministers reviewed the progress made in development of capabilities, and
discussed the strengthening of NATO's defence planning process, the provision of safety during the
economic and financial crisis, and the future of NATO's common funding. Within the framework of the
Nuclear Planning Group, the ministers adopted amended policy guidelines for nuclear planning and
consultation.

Within the partnership and enlargement policy of the Alliance, the Ministry of Defence strongly
supported the Western Balkan countries in 2012 in their efforts for their eventual NATO membership,
mainly through their defence reforms in the context of bilateral or multilateral projects.

The Ministry of Defence also actively participated in major NATO crisis management (CMX in
December 2012) and nuclear consultation (Able Staff in December 2012) exercises.

#### 1.2 Common Security and Defence Policy of the EU (CSDP)

In March 2012, the Minister of Defence participated, together with in the EU defence ministers, at the
meeting of the Foreign Affairs Council, where special attention was paid to the future development of
military capabilities in the situation of economic and financial crisis and reduction of defence budgets.

They called for a new impetus to the development of European military capabilities, including through
the introduction of innovative collaborative methods of pooling and sharing of capabilities, filling the
current capability gaps and ensuring adequate capabilities for the planning and execution of
operations within the framework of the CSDP.


-----

Later on, the ministers focused on the discussion on crisis management operations in the EU. Within
the Steering Board of the European Defence Agency (EDA), the ministers discussed about concrete
projects in the area of pooling and sharing of the EU military capabilities. Slovenia signed the
Declaration of Intent for the Establishment of Multinational Modular Medical Units.

In September 2012, an informal meeting of EU defence ministers took place in Nicosia, Cyprus.
Ministers discussed the security situation in the EU's southern neighbourhood, focusing on the current
situation in Libya and Mali (Sahel), the current EU operations in the Horn of Africa and the Balkans
(EU NAVFOR Atalanta, EUTM Somalia, EUCAP Nestor and EUFOR Althea), and the development of
capabilities with the emphasis on their pooling and sharing, and a more flexible use of the EU battle
groups.

At the autumn session of the Foreign Affairs Council in November 2012, EU defence ministers focused
on the re-launch of the EU defence capabilities. They adopted the EU Council conclusions in which
they agreed on the agenda of the European Council for 2013 on defence. Slovenia, in cooperation
with Italy and Hungary in the framework of the Multinational Land Force (MLF), formed a trilateral
battle group (EUBG), which was in the state of readiness in the second half of 2012. The first half of
the year saw the preparation of partners and the training of units at the national level.

The Ministry continued its cooperation with EDA through its involvement in the work of the steering
committees at the level of national capability directors, armaments directors, and research and
technology directors. The Ministry participated in two joint investment programmes (force protection)
and became involved in the creation of multinational modular medical units, a multinational initiative
led by Italy.

For the second year, the MoD participated in the Central European Initiative and the second half of
2012 took over the presidency of the Initiative. The initiative is aimed at the integration and
development of capabilities at the regional level. In addition to Slovenia, Austria, Czech Republic,
Croatia, Hungary and Slovakia are also involved, whereas Poland participates as an observer.
Operational work takes place at the level of Defence Policy Directors, and a meeting was also
organised at the ministerial level. Slovenia organised two meetings of Defence Policy Directors of the
Central European Initiative, one in June in Maribor, Slovenia, and one in October in Brussels. The
meetings were devoted to the discussion on current issues related to the progress and development of
projects in the field of pooling and sharing of capabilities, and the presentation of situation and new
initiatives within the Central European Initiative. Slovenia presented opportunities and initiatives of
multinational cooperation in the Western Balkans.

#### 1.3 International Operations and Missions (IOM)

_KFOR_

In accordance with strategic interests of the Republic of Slovenia, the majority of SAF members
participating in IOM performed their duties in the Western Balkans, where the emphasis was laid on
the operations of the KFOR Allied Forces in Kosovo in which over 300 SAF members and one civilian
functional expert took part. Under the KFOR mandate, Slovenian members' main activities were aimed
at maintaining a secure and stable environment, providing the freedom of movement, creating
conditions for the transfer of responsibilities to the Kosovo civilian authorities, and, in the framework of
their tasks, providing assistance and support to the establishment of the Kosovo Security Force and its
civilian supervising institutions. In the beginning of September 2012, when a SAF Brigadier General
assumed the position of KFOR Deputy Commander, Slovenia's representation and role in the
command structure of the NATO–led Kosovo Force gained further importance. The assumption of this
duty is a recognition of endeavours Slovenia has made and the activities it has performed in support of
peace and stability in Kosovo and the wider Western Balkans region. It was due to the very fragility
and volatility of the security situation in Kosovo, especially in the northern part of the state, that the
MoD advocated a prudent and gradual reduction of the KFOR forces manpower, taking into account
the security situation in the filed.


-----

_EUFOR, Althea_

Slovenia also participated in the operation EUFOR Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thus
continued to contribute to the strengthening of peace and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to
the joint effort to establish suitably qualified, professional and efficient armed forces of this country. At
the political level, the MoD advocated continuing the operation EUFOR Althea’s executive mandate.
On this basis, it was also decided on the contribution of SAF’s motorized troops in the regional reserve
forces operations, from September 2012 until the end of February 2013.

The presence of SAF members was maintained in NATO command in Sarajevo and in NATO military
liaison offices in Belgrade and Skopje. The integration of Slovenian members in the Allied structures in
the Western Balkans continues to provide an active support to host nations in the realization of their
defence and security reforms and partner programmes, and consequently, to their process of joining
the Euro-Atlantic Integrations. At the same time, this enhances possibilities for greater promotion of
Slovenia’s national interests, its recognition and reputation in the region.

_ISAF_

Another priority task was the SAF’s participation in the ISAF operation in which the SAF, in line with
the commitments of the international community and the principle of Allied solidarity, continued to
contribute to the stabilisation and reconstruction of Afghanistan with military and civilian capabilities.
Moreover, it assisted in the preparation of key Allied documents, adopted at the Chicago NATO
Summit in May 2012, which define the role of NATO in Afghanistan by the year 2014 and beyond. Due
to the complexity of the ISAF's operation and its dynamic development the need arose for a wider
political and a more profound reflection about the Republic of Slovenia's future participation in the
operation concerned. To this end, in March 2012, the MoD in cooperation with the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, prepared an analysis of Slovenia's operation in Afghanistan based on which the Government
made a decision on the scope and type of Slovenia's participation in the ISAF's operation until its
completion by the end of 2014. Consequently, the SAF continued to train the Afghanistan National
Army (ANA). Throughout most of the year, Slovenia independently led the Operational Mentor and
Liaison Team (OMLT) through which it offered training to an ANA infantry battalion in Bala Boluk. In
October the same year, following the restructuring of the contingent, Slovenia took over the
management of two Military Advisory Teams (MATs) with a view of providing training for the ANA
infantry and combat support battalions in Farah. During this time, the number of SAF members in ISAF
reduced from 90 to 80; some of these members also participated in the activities of the ISAF
command structure, the ANA Military Police School in Kabul and in the Special Police Training Centre
in Wardak. The execution of civilian development projects continued; however, due to financial
limitations, the number of civilian functional experts was reduced from four to two during the year. The
civilian functional experts carried out their tasks under the aegis of the Provincial Reconstruction Team
(PRT) in Herat and Farah, especially in the field of higher education development, empowering of
women, rule of law and the establishment of the customs service.

Both the civilian and the military part are essential for a successful completion of the transfer of
responsibility for security to the Afghan Security Forces by 2014.

In the light of maintaining the attained level of the Republic of Slovenia's credibility in the international
community in ensuring global peace and security, the SAF's presence in the Middle East crisis area is
of special importance. From May to August, a SAF officer carried out duties of the head of the
international group of military observers in the area of Damask and in the Rif Damascus region in the
UNSMIS mission in Syria, while other SAF members participated in the UNFIL operation in Southern
Lebanon (staff personnel and reconnaissance squad) and in the UNTSO mission in the Middle East
(Syria, Israel, Lebanon) together with military observers.

The participation of the Republic of Slovenia in EU-led IOM in Africa was very limited the previous
year. The MoD, with one SAF officer, participated only in one maritime EU NAVFOR operation called
Atlanta in the international fight against piracy. At the end of the year, the Ministry closely monitored
the deterioration of the security situation in Mali, at which the emphasis was laid on the international
community’s endeavours for the stabilization of the situation and for the prevention of possible wider
consequences of the conflict. At the same time, different aspects of possible cooperation in the
planned training mission for the Mali Forces (EUTM Mali) were examined.


-----

The SAF was ensuring a 12-month readiness of the 670[th] Logistic Battalion and the Infantry Company
to the NATO Response Forces (NRF).

In the second half of 2012, the SAF contributed forces in the extent of one motorized company,
including an HQ Logistics element and a certain quota of the EUBG command structure to the
European Union Battle Group (EUBG), in which it is participating together with Italy and Hungary
under the regional MLF initiative in the framework of a six-month readiness.

The MoD took into account the principles of the Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia's participation in
IOM and through its implementation endeavoured for enhanced interministerial cooperation, a more
intensive public diplomacy and a more appropriate adjustment of the management and work
processes. Further on, the Ministry strengthened the integrated approach in the IOM segment through
the IOM-related periodic consultations, decision-making at the strategic level and in close cooperation
with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

_Middle East_

The Middle East is one of the priority areas of the Republic of Slovenia's strategic external policy.
Hence the MoD strived to maintain the SAF's participation in the UNIFIL peace keeping mission, which
contributes to peacekeeping in southern Lebanon, and in the UNTSO observer mission, which
contributes to peacekeeping in the wider Middle East. Due to the deterioration of the security situation
in Syria, the MoD supported the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ vigorous efforts by sending a military
observer to the UNSMIS mission, where he carried out duties of the head of the observation team in
Damascus; however, the mission was cancelled after three months.

#### 1.4 Bilateral cooperation

Bilateral defence and military cooperation carried out within the framework of annual programmes,
especially in the form of project-oriented activities, was most intense with the neighbouring countries,
strategic partners within NATO, IOM and with the countries in the Western Balkans. The agreement of
defence cooperation with Poland was signed and renewed. At the same time, the procedures for the
negotiation of the agreement on cooperation between the MoD and the Ministry for the Kosovo
Security Force and the umbrella agreements on defence cooperation with Brazil and Argentina
continued.

In the framework of official bilateral ministerial meetings the views on and aspects regarding the
current defence and security challenges were exchanged, the emphasis being on the development of
bilateral cooperation, cooperation in international operations and missions, defence reforms and the
security situation in the wider region. Minister Hojs separately hosted the Minister of Defence of the
Republic of Macedonia and the Minister of Defence of the Republic of Croatia at their official visits in
the Republic of Slovenia, and also carried out official visits of Italy, Turkey and Poland. In the context
of the visits abroad, special emphasis was given to the promotion of the Slovenian defence industry,
as the minister was accompanied by the delegations of individual companies. Moreover, on the
sidelines of the visit in Rome, an agreement on cooperation between the Slovenian Defence Industry
Cluster (GOIS) and the Italian partnership association was signed. Bilateral working discussions at the
ministerial level have taken place also on the sidelines of multilateral ministerial meetings and
international security conferences. The minister also visited the American Federal State of Colorado,
as ever since 1993, the Slovenian Armed Forces and the Colorado National Guard have established
intensive cooperation under the so-called partnership programme.

In the form of introductory, parting and courtesy visits minister Hojs met with over thirty ambassadors
and defence attachés, accredited in the Republic of Slovenia. In addition, he addressed the entire
military and diplomatic corps, accredited in the Republic of Slovenia, as part of a regular annual
meeting.


-----

#### 1.5 Multilateral cooperation

The Republic of Slovenia was included in different forms of global and regional defence and military
cooperation with the emphasis on the initiatives directed towards South-Eastern Europe or more
precisely, the Western Balkans.

In the framework of the South-Eastern Europe Defence Ministerial (SEDM), the Adriatic Charter (A5),
South-East European Cooperation Process (SEECP) and Forum for Western Balkans Defence
Cooperation (SEEC), the highest MoD and SAF representatives attended ministerial meetings,
meetings of chiefs and meetings of individual working bodies and committees. With a view of
rationalizing defence and military initiatives in the region, the MoD started intensive preparations,
coordination and the promotion of the comprehensive ministerial meeting, which is expected to take
place in October 2013 in Brdo pri Kranju.

As an associate member, the Republic of Slovenia actively participated in the bodies of the Centre for
Security Cooperation (RACVIAC) based in Rakit near Zagreb. In 2012, the MoD continued to second
the civilian employee in charge of the security sector reform, while at the same time the MoD coorganized and hosted two seminars with important international participants.

In the context of MLF, the members enhanced their efforts for the signing of the renovated umbrella
agreement on the MLF as well as their efforts for the audit and renovation of other legal documents. In
the same context, the Republic of Slovenia also actively contributed to the ISAF forces in Afghanistan
and in the process of integrating MLF in NATO’s Rapid Deployable Corps – Italy (NRDC – ITA). In the
second half of the year, the MLF participated in EU battle groups.

The MoD provided financial support for the participation of a representative of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Ministry of Defence at one of the courses organized by the Geneva Centre for Security
Policy, where an MoD representative is still active at the Founding Council.

#### 1.6 Defence diplomacy

Based on the results of an in-depth analysis of the further development and transformation of
Slovenian defence and diplomatic network and the requirements for financial and personnel
rationalization, a decision regarding the reduction of the number of representatives abroad was
adopted. After the mandates expired, no new defence attachés were deployed to France or
Montenegro. In Montenegro, a defence advisor was replaced who offers assistance and support to the
country in the area of defence reforms, especially in the context of Montenegro's efforts to become a
NATO and EU member. A visiting defence attaché in Great Britain and Norway was accredited once
again.

#### 1.7 Strategic planning

In strategic planning, the work was oriented towards the preparation of developmental strategic and
planning documents.

_Defence Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia_

The adoption of the Defence Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia by the Government in December
2012 concluded the trilogy of the preparation of the renewed defence strategic documents from the
field of defence or national security. The new Defence Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia, as a basic
developmental and guiding defence document, serves as a foundation for the preparation and
supplementation of other operational and doctrinal documents in the defence field, and for a
normative, organizational and substantial management of questions related to defence of the Republic
of Slovenia.


-----

_Medium-Term Defence Programme 2013-2018_

In February 2013, the government adopted a new Medium-Term Defence Programme 2013-2018
(SOPR 2013-2018), preparation of which started in 2012. The Programme was prepared on the basis
of the Resolution on the Strategy of National Security of the Republic of Slovenia (ReSNV) and the
Resolution on General Long-Term Development and Equipping Programme of the Slovenian Armed
Forces (ReSDPRO 2025) adopted in 2010, NATO Political Guidelines of March 2011, the Defence
Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia and the Doctrine of the Military Strategic Reserve of the Republic
of Slovenia adopted in 2012, and the proposal of the goal of NATO capabilities in 2013 for the
Republic of Slovenia. The SOPR 2013-2018 is a planning and guiding document setting goals and
guidelines for the operation and development of the defence system of the Republic of Slovenia for
the next medium-term planning period.

The adoption of SOPR provides a programme and planning basis for future operation of the defence
system of the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovenian Armed Forces as its largest and most important
part. The SOPR 2013-2018 serves as a basis for reorganization and transformation of the Slovenian
Armed Forces and the MoD. It also presents a link between the national defence planning and the
planning in NATO and the EU (target NATO capabilities, response to NATO’s Capability Survey
(DPCS), main EU objectives etc.).

_Participation in NATO’s Defence Planning Process_

In October 2012, joint consultation with NATO took place in Ljubljana at which the proposal of target
NATO 2013 capabilities for the Republic of Slovenia was reviewed. The Republic of Slovenia’s
objective within this process is to ensure the country’s credibility by contributing a proportionate share
to the joint capabilities of the Alliance and, at the same time, to make sure, through active participation
in and guidance of the process, that capabilities allocated to the Republic of Slovenia comply to the
largest extent possible with the current SAF capabilities and the national development of defence
capabilities.

_Rules on Defence Planning in the MoD_

The new Regulation on planning in the MoD of September 2012 will provide effective and targetoriented defence planning based on the planning of capabilities and in coordination with the defence
planning in NATO and the EU, effective and goal-oriented business planning of the ministry as well as
transparent reporting based on the measuring of effectiveness and efficiency. The planning process
has thus been supplemented as it will connect individual planning areas and provide a more clear
demarcation of responsibilities and determine responsibilities between individual bodies affiliated to
the MoD and internal organizational units of the MoD essential for the planning process.

#### 1.8 Provision and implementation of the unified operation of the NATO registry system in the Republic of Slovenia

Last year, the NATO Central Register/EU Sub-Register (CRNE) was responsible for a unified
operation of the NATO register system in the Republic of Slovenia. It provided conditions in a timely
and comprehensive manner and performed all tasks for the reception and distribution of classified and
other NATO information, and also provided conditions for their traceability and destruction. With the
help of a military courier service, the CRNE organized and coordinated the transportation and transfer
of NATO classified documents, classified EU data and the crypto material abroad and across the
Republic of Slovenia.

In the context of bilateral cooperation, the CRNE organised a number of bilateral meetings in the
Republic of Slovenia at which lessons learned during the establishment and operation of the NATO
register system and the protection of classified information were presented to the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro. Following official requests of the Ministry of
Defence of the Republic of Croatia and the Ministry of Security of Bosnia and Herzegovina, assistance
for the transportation or transfer of NATO classified information was organized and provided for both
countries.


-----

Later, reaccreditation of the CRNE for the information of the highest level of classification was carried
out. An information system through which the Republic of Slovenia and the MoD are integrated in
NATO’s consultation and decision-making process on nuclear issues is also operational within the
CRNE.

#### 1.9 International development cooperation

In 2012, the MoD allocated a total of almost EUR 3.02 million for Official Development Assistance
(ODA), also taking into account the data on the cooperation of military capabilities in international
peacekeeping operations and missions based on UN resolutions which can count as the ODA.

Development cooperation was carried out in four different areas; cooperation of military capabilities in
IOM on the basis of UN resolutions; protection and rescue (civil protection); participation of civilian
capabilities in international operations and missions; and defence policy.


-----

### 2 SLOVENIA’S CRISIS PREPARATIONS AND RESPONSE MEASURES

In 2012, the Government of the Republic of Slovenia adopted the Doctrine of the Military Strategic
Reserve of the Republic of Slovenia, which is an operational and a guiding or doctrinal document in
the defence field. The military strategic reserve directly provides for the maintenance of SAF’s
sustainability in military defence and for the implementation of international commitments on the basis
of Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty. The military strategic reserve does not have a peacetime
organizational structure, but encompasses merely conceptual solutions that define procedures, tasks
and activities of individual bodies with which such organization and equipment of the SAF is attained
that the SAF would, in the event of extreme deterioration of the security situation in the Republic of
Slovenia, be able to provide adequate response through personnel and material capabilities supported
by civilian capabilities. Within the framework of defence planning, adequate database and material
means of the strategic reserve will be provided. For purposes of its activation, elements of military duty
can be reintroduced in accordance with the law.

Authorities responsible for the formation of defence planning at the state level were given directions for
individual planning areas on the adjustment of the defence plans preparation with emphasis on the
Republic of Slovenia's crisis response measures in international integrations. The annually planned
coordination and amendments of documents related to the defence plan were also carried out within
the context of providing expert assistance. The ministries and other authorities responsible for defence
planning were acquainted with novelties in planning also through discussions which serve as a good
basis for the exchange of experience and good practices. In cooperation with the ministries and
certain government offices, proposals of new acts were developed relating to defence planning or
amendments and supplements of regulations developed at the MoD and approved through interministerial coordination, e.g. from the field of a country's crisis response measures, mobilization, threat
assessment, economic performance, host country support etc.

In addition, the management of critical infrastructure protection continued. The interministerial
coordination group for coordinating preparations for critical infrastructure protection submitted basic
sectoral criteria for the determination of critical infrastructure of national importance to the Government
for adoption. On this basis, competent ministries can prepare proposals of possible critical
infrastructure of national importance from their individual sphere of activities. The basic criteria
adopted by the Government outline the border for determining critical infrastructure in reference to the
inhabitants' quality of life, health influences, areas of national security and defence, and protection
against natural and other disasters, economic activities, drinking water and food supplies, electrical
energy, natural gas, oil products and influences on the inland or aqueous habitat, to communication
and information systems and possible transboundary consequences. In the framework of sectoral
criteria, the following sectors have been determined: energy industry, traffic, food and drinking water
supply, medical care, finances, environment protection, and communication and information support.

The MoD was in charge of the preparations for and the organization of two crisis management
exercises for the area of the Republic of Slovenia, namely the NATO CMX 2012 exercise (Crisis
Management Exercise) and the EU’s Crisis Management Exercise Multi Layer 2012. All ministries, a
couple of government offices and the SAF participated in the exercises. The lessons learned during
the exercises are used to form certain crisis management solutions in the Republic of Slovenia in
connection to the two international integrations and the appropriate response of the state to different
types of threats and hazards.

In respect to the adjustment of the construction to the requirements of the defence, regular processing
and coordination of the applications received were provided in the context of the work area of internal
organizational MoD units, such as real estate management, informatics, communications and the SAF.
The Ministry regularly responded to documents on geospatial planning in the RS received from the
state authorities into consideration by preparing viewpoints, proposals and opinions.

On the basis of the Decree on administrative communications regulating the organization and
functioning of administrative communications organized by the MoD for the purposes of the state’s
defence management, a new Plan of administrative communications was prepared which was adopted
by the defence minister decision. The Plan serves as a basis for planning of the organization,


-----

preparations and operation of the administrative communications in peacetime and in all security
circumstances.

The national Crisis Management Centre (NCMC) as one of the key crisis management mechanisms
provided spatial, organizational, technical and other conditions for rapid and effective work of the
Government of the Republic of Slovenia and the interministerial analytical group. A couple of years
ago already an independent communication and information network was established within the
NCMC for the purposes of implementation of all required communication and information links. The
network connects all important state authorities, government offices and companies of special
importance for defence as well as defence administrations. One of the applications operating within
the CIS NCMC is the Information System for Decision Support (ISDS NCMC) intended for a rapid,
secure and effective communication and coordination of activities in taking decisions by key crisis
management entities in the country in times of crisis. A national, NATO and EU permission was
acquired – an accreditation for the operation of the CIS NCMC up to the level of classified information
RESTRICTED.


-----

### 3 DEVELOPMENT OF CIVILIAN CAPABILITIES 

Civil-military cooperation is one of the three most important areas of the new NATO strategic plan and
is an important tool in a comprehensive, integrated and synchronized response to modern crises and
conflicts.

#### 3.1 Civilian functional experts

Civilian functional experts are an important support element of each IOM; their integration into the
military environment increases capabilities of the military component and decreases possibilities for
conflicts with civilian participants involved in a crisis or a conflict. For smaller NATO and EU members,
this is an area that should be further developed in the future. Unlike the larger countries which allocate
greater financial resources to this end, the Republic of Slovenia does not develop independent work
forms that could unify and support a larger group of civilian functional experts.

In 2012, seven Slovenian civilian functional experts participated in IOM; six in Afghanistan and one in
Kosovo. Prior to their deployment to IOM, the chosen civilian functional experts underwent special
deployment training with the emphasis on particularities of the IOM environment.

On the basis of preparations for participation and on the basis of all previous participations of
functional experts in IOM, new guidelines for the future development and operation of civilian
functional experts were formed. In addition, amendments and supplementations of regulations from
the field in force also started to be introduced. Moreover, the training course Cooperation of civilian
functional experts for civil-military cooperation in international operations and missions and in missions
in the defence field was also carried out which was successfully completed by 14 new civilian
functional experts.

_Afghanistan_

Out of six Slovenian civilian functional experts in Afghanistan, three participated in the Provincial
Reconstruction Team (PRT) Herat lead by the Italians, while the other three experts participated in
PRT Farah, led by the USA. The work of functional experts was deliberately oriented towards the
establishment of capabilities of the national and regional administration, which is one of the main tasks
of the PRTs. For the most part, the efforts of civilian functional experts in the PRT Farah – a highly
rural area with a small number of educated or schooled inhabitants and an even lesser percentage of
schooled or educated women – were oriented towards the counselling and the provision of expert
assistance for the establishment of the regional administration’s capabilities in the field of finance,
customs duty and the legal system.

In the PRT Herat, the most developed part of Afghanistan, efforts were oriented towards the support
and development of education institutions and the training of public employees in the use of modern
communication tools. The major part of projects carried out in Herat pertains to education. Therefore,
cooperation with the University of Herat, which started already during the first deployment,
strengthened.

Civilian functional experts in Herat offered development assistance in the form of projects:

  - the project of awarding scholarships to Afghan students for their studies in the Republic of
Slovenia;

  - the project of providing training for an Afghan doctor from the Centre for Burns in Herat at the
Ljubljana University Medical Centre in the field of plastic, reconstruction and aesthetic surgery
of burns;

  - the project of the educative and working visit of the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and
Livestock representative at the Agricultural Institute of the Republic of Slovenia and the
Slovenian National Building and Civil Engineering Institute.


-----

In addition, a number of other projects of civil-military cooperation were carried out:

  - donation of equipment to a primary school in the vicinity of Herat;

  - establishment of cooperation between the Faculty of Architecture in Ljubljana and the
University of Herat with a view of exchanging knowledge and building foundations for longterm cooperation between the institutions;

  - initial cooperation of the Škofja Loka municipality with the city of Herat leading to a formal
establishment of contacts between two historical cities in the areas such as culture, sports and
museum activity, including the introduction of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan to the world;

  - presentation of the work with children within the Women and Children Welfare organization.
The project was presented on the Bayan Radio which operates in the Arena Base. The
presentation, which aimed at informing the public of the children’s rights in the society, was
accepted in a very positive way;

  - installation of solar cells on top of the Karokh medical centre.

_Kosovo_

In Kosovo, civilian functional experts offered expert counselling in the field of defence policy and
defence planning within the NATO Advisory Group that plays a key role in the establishment and
provision of an effective operation of the security forces within the Ministry for the Kosovo Security
Force.

#### 3.2 Cartographic and geospatial support to the defence system

Within the context of civilian capabilities, the development and maintenance of the cartographic
system for defence needs continued in coordination with the Slovenian military and NATO standards
and the NATO geospatial politics. In cooperation with the Geodetic Institute of Slovenia a Visual Flight
Rules (VFR) Military Aircraft Navigation Map of the Republic of Slovenia with a scale of 1 : 250,000
was published in hard copy and in a digital form. The new edition of the map contains numerous
changes in aviation that have been introduced in the past five years. In addition, a scientific
monograph Geostrategic Support to the Defence System of the Republic of Slovenia was published in
cooperation with the Institute of Anthropological and Spatial Sciences of the Research Centre of the
Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts and the Geodetic Institute of Slovenia. The monograph was
also used as a training tool at a training that held the same title. For the purposes of preparing the SAF
members for international operations and missions in Afghanistan and Kosovo, the prescribed
cartographic material was acquired free of charge based on concluded bilateral agreements in the
geospatial area and on the basis of participation in the working group for NATO geospatial
requirements and needs.


-----

### 4 INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY OPERATIONS

The MoD intelligence and security operations were carried out in line with the Defence Act, the
adopted annual work programme, objectives and tasks. The key tasks and objectives were linked to
the provision of intelligence and security support to the SAF forces in IOM as well as to other bodies of
the national security system.

The priority task in the intelligence and security area in the period concerned was to assess military as
well as political and security conditions in the Western Balkans, especially in Kosovo, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Afghanistan. The activities in the intelligence and security area were directed also
to other crisis areas in Africa and in the Middle East, where the SAF members have been participating
in IOM. The MoD principally monitored the indicators that might threaten the Slovenian defence
interests or increase the degree of a military threat to the RS.

One of the key priorities of the MoD intelligence and security operations was to provide efficient
intelligence and security support to the SAF members participating in IOM. In this context, the MoD
cooperated with all competent entities in the RS, NATO and the EU.


-----

### 5 EQUIPPING, REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT, STANDARDIZTION AND CODIFICATION

#### 5.1 Equipping

In 2012, financial resources dedicated to the equipping of the SAF were scarce.

The current situation of the implemented equipping projects demonstrates that the Act on the
Implementation of Basic Development Programmes of the Slovenian Armed Forces in the period
between 2008–2015 will be implemented to only approximately 30% or in other words, only two
projects that relate to the mentioned Act will be fully implemented.

The MoD has successfully terminated the contract for the purchase of Middle Wheeled Armoured
Vehicles (SKOV 8x8) by common agreement.

In 2012, through the inclusion of the Public Procurement for Defence and Security Act into the
Slovenian legal system, the Directive 2009/81/EC was fully implemented. The Directive refers to public
procurement procedures in the defence and security area and to the procedures for the provision of
legal protection in the procedures for public procurement from the area in question.
In the area of public and defence procurement, the greatest focus in 2012 was on:

  - the equipping of the Cerklje ob Krki Military Airport with the equipment for electronic and visual
navigation, meteorological equipment, signals and communication equipment and hardware
and software equipment;

  - maintenance and supply of spare parts for the maintenance of SAF aircraft, maintenance and
supply of spare parts for the maintenance of SAF military cargo vehicles and MoD passenger
vehicles;

  - insurance arrangements for the MoD means of transport (passenger and multi-purpose
vehicles, cargo vehicles, other land means of transport, aircraft and watercraft) and accident
insurances for the MoD employees;

  - information and communication equipment at which the computer and software equipment
was supplied, the cryptographic equipment was delivered and the contract for the updating
and maintenance of Microsoft software was concluded for the period of three years.

All companies with which the MoD has concluded contracts with were asked to consider the contract
price reduction for 15 percents. Response of the business partners addressed was immense; through
the annexes on the reduction of prices or additional discounts, the MoD saved approximately EUR 2.3
million.

Currently, two larger projects are underway, namely the introduction of a new battle dress uniform and
the upgrading of two transport helicopters.

#### 5.2 Real estate management

Within the context of public resources, saving the operation in the field of infrastructure was directed
towards the completion of projects and the implementation of the most important projects the timely
realization of which would ensure uninterrupted operation and development of the defence system.

In 2012:

  - a proposal was prepared for the National spatial plan for the SAF central firing range and
training area Poček near Postojna; currently, opinions of national stakeholders for spatial
management are being acquired;

  - a joint municipal detailed spatial plan for the spatial arrangement of the Berek Military Post
near Murska Sobota was adopted and published;

  - a concept in different versions and an identification document of the investment project for the
arrangement of temporary mooring for military vehicles at Pier III in the Port of Koper were
prepared;

  - the mistakes found during the use of the Škrilj firing range and training area were eliminated;


-----

  - the construction or upgrading of the wiring in the SAF facilities was executed;

  - the construction of the computer centre and the construction of the MoD/SAF technical
facilities at the seat of the ministry were completed;

  - activities for the equipping of SAF facilities with technical security systems were carried out;

  - project documentation for the business premises at Dimičeva 15 in Ljubljana and for the
reconstruction of the facility 4 in the Baron Andrej Čehovin Military Post in Postojna was
prepared on time; due to the lack of financial resources, the investment in the project
concerning the business premises on the Dimičeva street was withdrawn;

  - project documentation for a partial removal and a partial reconstruction of the facility on
Maistrova 5 in Celje was prepared; a tender offer for the renovation of storeys was repeated
as no tendered with appropriate references applied to the first one; the construction takes
place as planned in the timetable and is expected to be finished within the periods set under
the contract; a systematic solution for the installation of solar power stations on facilities under
the MoD management was beginning to be formed.

Due to the economic situation of construction companies certain projects came to a standstill, which
resulted in a failure to meet the deadlines. The construction of a sports facility in the Peter Petrič
Military Post in Kranj is delayed due to the contractor’s considerable financial problems. However, all
construction works and the majority of installation works have been carried out.

In 2012, EUR 10.31 million were invested in the construction of the Cerklje ob Krki Airport, of which
EUR 4.78 million were provided by the MoD and EUR 5.53 million by the NATO. All construction works
inside the airport were finished:

  - construction and modernization of the runway;

  - construction of the heliport;

  - construction of the airport lighting installation;

  - installation of navigation and meteorological devices.

For purposes of the modernization of the airport, contracts have been concluded for the construction
of aprons for fighter aircraft, aprons for sensitive cargo and warehouses for MEO, and an agreement
has been reached for the performance of the tender for the construction of the apron for transport
aircraft and the fuel farm. The procedures for the selection of a contractor for the construction of the
fire-fighting and rescue service and for the purchase of fire-fighting vehicles were cancelled as no
financial means were allocated to that end in the financial plan. The mentioned provision is essential
for the operation of the airport, therefore an alternative solution was being sought for in the form of a
donation and installation of multipurpose tents.

In the context of maintenance of the SAF's and the administrative part of the ministry’s facilities and
infrastructure, procurement and installation of individual air-conditioning appliances for the MoD’s
information and telecommunication system were performed.

The money acquired from the rents was used for the renovation of 32 MoD apartments.

In accordance with the decision of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia, 165 of 237 apartments
that shall be transferred to the Housing Fund of the Republic of Slovenia, and 39 of 60 apartments that
shall be transferred to the municipalities were registered in the land register. In 2012, 164 apartments
and one garage, all managed by the MoD, were registered in the land register. Speedy
implementation of procedures for the registration of real estates within military barracks in the land
register is underway.

In addition, the number of rented business premises and rental costs reduced.

Based on the demonstrated public interest, outstanding transfers of real estates no longer required
were carried out and the real estates were transferred to seven local communities.

The local public infrastructure was co-financed on the basis of the programme of the Government of
the Republic of Slovenia on co-financing of the public infrastructure in the Brežice, Postojna and Pivka
municipalities.


-----

#### 5.3 Standardisation and codification

The adoption and implementation of Slovenian military standards in support of the construction and
maintenance of SAF capabilities is one of the cornerstones of achieving interoperability of the
Slovenian defence system with NATO member states, NATO partner countries and the EU member
states. Codification contributes to the transparency and the reduction of costs for equipping and
maintenance of armament and military equipment. Each year, the codification of supply resources is
increasingly involved in the equipping processes, from investment programmes to delivery orders and
the introduction of equipment into operational use.

The Ministry’s standardization plan which encompasses the adoption and implementation of Slovenian
military standards was partially carried out. In 2012, 46 standards were adopted, which represents a
75% realization of the plan. For purposes of their implementation, 31 decisions and orders were
issued. In the process of national certification of NATO standards, only 44 national responses were
signed, representing a third of the required Slovenia’s obligations to NATO. In 2012, a Slovenian
translation of Slovenian Military Standards AAP-3(J) was published, which also serves as a NATO
directive for the management of standardization, preparation of NATO standards and their
implementation in NATO Forces and NATO member states. Under national jurisdiction, the National
Codification Bureau of Slovenia in 2012 assigned 113 new NATO codification numbers (NSN) to
Slovenian products and registered seven Slovenian companies, which makes 188 altogether. On the
basis of the acquisition of new supply resources, Slovenia was registered as the user of 3,397 NSNs.
The preparation of registration data on all material assets used by the defence and the protection and
rescue systems was successfully completed. Equally successful was the transfer of code numbers for
89,797 material resources to the new logistics information system in the SAP environment. As far as
national provision of quality is concerned, all claims by the NATO members (Turkey, Germany, Spain)
which purchased the products from Slovenian producers (AREX, PRIMAT) were carried out. The
implemented procedures encompassed risk analyses in production and analyses of the final product
inspection.


-----

### 6 COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SYSTEM (CIS) 

#### 6.1 Information security

In 2012, most financial resources were dedicated to the modernization of the NATO network in the
Republic of Slovenia with a view of enhancing interoperability and security. The MoD communication
infrastructure has been upgraded, the transfer to the IP-network has been carried out and the
rationalization of expenses of communication connections between individual remote locations has
been supported through the introduced technological solution.

#### 6.2 Information infrastructure

Investment resources were used for the critical infrastructure equipment of the NATO network in the
Republic of Slovenia.

The renovation of the computer centre for the requirements of the MoD communication and
information system (CIS) has been completed and the conditions to ensure the availability of the MoD
CIS and to establish national CIS for the processing of classified information up to the SECRET level
have been established. The renovated computer centre will provide adequate level of protection
against electromagnetic radiation (TEMPEST).

#### 6.3 Communication and information backbone

Leased CIS lines continued to be replaced with more modern and significantly less costly VPN
connections (IP VPN technology). The MoD CIS as a global MoD network continued to grow, enabling
the operation of the Ministry and rendering the services available to the users, SAF members in the
international environment, permanent presentation of the Republic of Slovenia to NATO and to military
diplomatic representations across the world.

#### 6.4 IT Solutions

In the area of information solutions the operation and availability of applicable solutions (information
system for defence and protection duties (ISOZD), Unified Accounting System of the Ministry for
Finance (MFUAS), the public procurement information system (ISOJAN), the keeping of records
(SKEV), information system for paperless operation (IRDG) etc.) has been provided for.


-----

### 7 INSPECTION AND INTERNAL AUDIT ACTIVITIES IN THE FIELD OF DEFENCE 

In 2012, the Inspectorate of the Republic of Slovenia for Defence (IRSD) conducted 53 inspections.
The Military Defence Inspection Division carried out 24 inspections, while the Division for Inspection of
Civil Defence, Administrative and Professional Defence-Related Matters carried out 29 inspections.
The ratio between the number of inspections in an individual division does not represent the value of
work of an individual division, as 29 out of total 53 inspections were so-called joint inspections made
by inspectors of all divisions.

47 out of 53 inspections in total were regular scheduled inspections, 3 were exceptional announced,
and 3 were repeated. Inspections were conducted over a period of 572 inspection days. Based on the
findings of the inspections, the inspectors issued a total of 366 measures.

Out of all imposed measures, the deadline for the introduction of such measures in 2012 expired for
256 measures. Nine out of the latter (3.5%) were not implemented, while the deadline for 110
measures will be due in 2013. The inspected entities filed a complaint against three of the imposed
measures. The majority of delays in the resolution of complaints at the second instance filed in 2010
and 2011 were eliminated.

In 2012, the internal audit service attained a 100% realisation of the annual audit and counselling plan.
It carried out six audits encompassing the survey of the operation of internal controls and the
correctness or the purpose of operation in areas subject to audit. The internal audit service issued 25
recommendations for the improvement of operation in the audited areas. Higher level of successful
control over the MoD development and operation resulted in the improved management of risks and in
the functioning of internal control systems, greater accuracy and clearer purpose of the MoD
operation.

### 8 INVESTIGATIONS OF AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS AND MILITARY AIRCRAFTS INCIDENTS

In 2012, a total of 21 incidents were recorded by the aircraft accidents and incidents reporting system.
A total of 12 security recommendations were issued on the basis of finished investigations for 2012,
which contributed to greater flight safety. At the request of the Ministry of Infrastructure and Spatial
Planning, the Service for Investigation of Aircraft Accidents and Military Aircraft Incidents (SPLNI) at
the MoD participated in the investigation of the hot-air balloon accident which resulted in deaths.

Four serious incident investigations were launched, while other incidents were merely recorded. A
tendency in the increase of incidents due to malfunctions or inadequate operation of the aviation
technical systems has been detected, which is proportional with the ageing of the SAF fleet. Out of
four introduced investigations, three were completed. In one of the examples of a serious incident
(metal object in the main reduction gear in the Cougar helicopter in KFOR) great risk existed that
similar could happen to other SAF helicopters of the same type. The main investigator, therefore,
issued a decision to ground the aircrafts for a month until the reason for the malfunction was
discovered.

In addition, certain irregularities were uncovered during medical inspections of the military aviation
personnel as part of preventive actions. Also, a new type of flight safety hazard appeared at which the
aircrafts are being illuminated with strong green lasers.

The findings of investigations and the issued security recommendations were introduced to the IRSD
and the Military aviation body at the General Staff of the Slovenian Armed Forces responsible for flight
safety.


-----

### 9 STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION 

The transparency of the MoD was ensured through communication of real, timely and complete
information. As much as 635 press releases were communicated to the public and on the average
slightly less than two pieces of news per day were published at the official websites www.mo.gov.si
and www.slovenskavojska.si. In addition to the news, 1941 photographs and 167 sound recordings
were published. On YouTube and on the MoD webpage, a total of 109 video clips and short films were
published, such as recordings of the areas affected by the November floods, recordings of the
delegation of the MoD leadership at the SAF members in Afghanistan and a video recording of the
flight with the Pilatus PC-9M aircraft. By the end of the year, the published materials had 432,236
viewers and 409 people subscribed to the published video materials.

In 2012, social networks gained importance in terms of communication. The introduction of such
networks enabled direct communication with the outside public, which increased the transparency of
operation. The MoD activated four official websites on Facebook and opened a profile on Twitter. On
Facebook, the MoD published 346 news, the SAF published 126 news, the Revija SV (SAF Magazine)
published 58 news, the ACPDR published 49 news and the MoD Twitter account had 412
publications. All Facebook pages received a total of 2,310 likes, and the Twitter account had a total of
477 followers.

The predominant communication topics on the websites were the use of financial resources,
transformation and reorganization, the adopted planning and other documents, the Falcon EX
airplane, the consensual termination of the contract on the purchase of wheeled medium combat
vehicles (SKOV) 8x8, the management of the MoD housing fond and the adoption of the National
spatial plan for the SAF central firing range and training area Poček near Postojna. More than 200
answers to journalists’ questions were prepared. On the other hand, the right of correction or response
due to inaccuracies or ambiguities in the published articles was applied in accordance with the Media
Act in 15 cases.

Altogether six press conferences were organized with the intent to present the key tasks and the
guidelines for the development of the defence line ministry and to present the activities in the
international area. Also in 2012, the intensive communication support was intended for international
activities of the ministry and for the events in NATO and the EU attended by the MoD leadership. The
minister held speeches at over 60 ceremonies and other events in the Republic of Slovenia, held nine
extensive interviews for the print and the internet media, participated at 55 media events altogether,
such as studio conversations and short statements.

In reference to internet communication the Predlagam (“I suggest”) application was introduced on the
intranet pages. This application allows all employees to submit their proposals for the improvement of
work process, allowing them to participate in the organization of work. Since its introduction in April
2012, 249 suggestions concerning different areas of work were submitted.

The planned publication of military and other literature was realized to 27 percent, out of which only 12
percent of publications were published and 15 percent were issued in the electronic form on CDs. The
low level of realization was mostly due to the limited financial and personnel resources. However,
despite the low level of plan realization, 12 additional publications were issued in the electronic form.
All 10 planned numbers of the Revija SV (SAF Magazine) with attachments were published. The
magazine was completely renewed in terms of design and content. The graphic design for all
publications issued in the electronic form was made with the help of internal resources; in the same
way, all published materials were proofread (approximately 400 units written by authors (16
typewritten double-spaced pages) were proofread and edited). The film production plan for 2012 was
realized to 60 percent. The filming of two promotional movies _Sile SV_ _(SAF Forces) and the_
_Predstavitev enot PDRIU (Presentation of the DDETC Units) was completed. Another project to be_
highlighted are the two promotional films _Vaja Adrion 2012 (Adrion Exercise 2012) and_ _Bojiščni_
_reševalec (Battlefield rescuer), a short promotional film 15 let mednarodnih operacij in misij (15 Years_
_of International Operations and Missions), a documentary on the exercise_ _Podpora Potres_
_(Earthquake Support) and the video of the concert by the Band of the Slovenian Armed Forces._


-----

### 10 NORMATIVE ACTS

In 2012, the MoD published twenty regulations in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia; one
statutory provision and 19 implementing regulations, 10 out of which were decrees and decisions and
nine were regulations. Most regulations were prepared outside the Normative Programme of Work of
the Government of the Republic of Slovenia for the year 2012, as the need for their adoption appeared
only later during the year. Based on the stated programme, five regulations were not realized.
However, this did not influence the implementation of tasks in the field they regulate.

A larger part of normative activities was oriented towards further coordination of implementing
regulations with prior statutory changes, especially in the ministry’s field of work. However, these
activities were also partially linked to measures for public finance balancing and, to a lesser extent, to
the implementation of the European legal order in the Slovenian legal order.

One of the key normative projects in 2012 was the supplementation in the fire safety field. Thus the
Act Amending the Fire Protection Act provided the adjustment of normative solutions to the attained
situation in individual areas of fire protection, expert findings, which especially contributed to the
simplification of individual solutions and procedures related to the area. Therefore, the provisions on
the programming, planning and implementation of fire protection measures and the information system
fire protection were modified or supplemented. Taking into account the action programme for the
abolishment of administrative obstacles, the fire safety approvals to the projects for the attainment of
building permits were abolished, and the bases of the preparation of the concepts or fire safety studies
were also changed. With a view of improving fire safety, solutions regarding evacuation routes,
intervention platforms and fire protection plans and the implementation of fire watch were better
determined.

The following regulations were adopted at the level of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia:

  - Through the implementation of the Decree on the use of additional postal stamp during the
Fire Safety Month, the resources gained with the sale of the additional postal stamp became
dependant on the scope of the postal traffic and did not decrease on account of replaceable
postal services.

  - The Decree on the contents and drawing up of protection and rescue plans simplified
especially the solutions and minimized the scope and the content of the protection and rescue
plans, the emphasis being on the formation of protection and rescue concepts. In addition, the
procedures for notification, the exchange of data and the planning and coordination of
solutions were improved. Due to the problems with the implementation of the Decree
amending the Decree on the fire tax in practice, certain deadlines for payment and the ways of
billing of fire protection tax were more clearly determined. Due to harmonization with the
solutions of the Fiscal Balance Act new bases for the salaries and other revenues of SAF
members during the performance of their duties in international operations and missions were
determined on the basis of the Decree amending the Decree on salaries and other
remunerations of service members of the Slovenian Armed Forces when fulfilling obligations
assumed in international organizations and through international agreements.

  - With two Decrees on the modification and amendment of the Decree on the appointment of
the RS civil protection commander, his deputy and the members of the RS civil protection
staff, their deputies and members of the regional civil protection staffs, some commanders or
members of civil protection staffs were excused from their duties, while other commanders or
staff members were assigned to that same duties.

  - With the Decree amending the Regulation on production consents and trade permits for
military weapons and equipment, and on preliminary permits for import, export, transit and
transfer of defence products, a supplemented list of defence products was introduced to the
legal order of the Republic of Slovenia due to the alignment with the European legal order. In
addition, due to minor problems with the implementation of the regulation in practice, certain
provisions related especially to conditions for the performance of the activity of the production
of and traffic with military weapons and equipment and the transfer of defence products within
the EU, were partially supplemented.


-----

  - Based on the Decree amending the Decree on the defence real estate management, the
family members of persons who died in the War of Slovenia in 1991 as members of the
Territorial Defence are also entitled to the military housing fund.

  - Due to the coordination with the Fiscal Balance Act, the Decree on the military service in the
reserve units of the Slovenian Army by contract was adopted. In accordance with the decree
the basis for the settlement of payment received for readiness has been decreased. At the
same time, some other forms of acquiring military knowledge and the performance of military
service in peacetime became widespread.

  - On the basis of equally sensible reasons, a Decree amending the Decree on military service
was adopted reducing certain revenues of volunteer soldiers and setting additional conditions
that have to be met by the candidates for the voluntary military service (security clearance
process). The reasons for the interruption or cancellation of the voluntary military service were
extended accordingly.

The following regulations were adopted within the limits of the MoD’s powers:

  - Two latest amendments to the Rules on Informing and Reporting in the System of Protection
Against Natural and Other Disasters partially modified the list of voluntary fire-fighting
associations that can also be activated with the public warning sirens.

  - The Rules on Employment of Top-Notch Athletes and Coaches in the Slovenian Armed
Forces were supplemented or amended on two occasions. The two amendments expanded
the set of formation duties in the military a top-notch athlete or a coach could be assigned to,
including the formation duties of military specialists in uniforms. In addition, the option of
regular employment in the military was also given to coaches, in accordance with the
conditions for such employment.

  - In comparison to the formerly applicable regulation, the new Regulation on the uniforms in the
SAF specifies certain elements of individual types of military uniforms, and coordinates the
rules on the wearing of uniforms with the Act on the Service in the SAF and the Rules of
Service in the SAF.

  - With the introduction of the Rules on education and training in the area of protection against
natural and other disasters, the centre in Logatec was also included in the education centres
in the field of protection against natural and other disasters. Furthermore, programmes for
education or training in this field were partially extended.

  - With the Rules amending the Rules on military personnel evaluation, the conditions for the
evaluation of SAF contract reserve members and military personnel who were deployed to
work posts or assigned duties within the ministry or in other state bodies were also partially
modified. However, top-notch athletes and coaches were exempt from military personnel
evaluation.

  - An important novelty of the Rules on activities that ought not to be performed by employees
working in the field of defence was a time limit for consents determined by these rules, and a
detailed definition of works that ought not to be performed by an employee working in the
defence field or works that can only be performed on the basis of the minister's prior consent.

  - In accordance with the starting points of the Societies Act, the Rules governing the criteria
specifications for associations in demonstrating major achievements in order to be granted the
status of an association operating in the public interest in the field of defence, the criteria in
the defence field were determined on the basis of which an individual association can be
granted the status of an association operating in the public interest.


-----

### 11 RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGICAL PROJECTS

A drastic reduction of financial resources allocated for the implementation of research and
development activities called for a redeployment of funds from other budget headings.

#### 11.1 Basic research

The resources were allocated for the implementation of the basic research of the lower level of
technological development for the attainment of priority capabilities of defence and protection. The
implementation of seven projects continued; five were completed and two will continue also in 2013.

#### 11.2 Technological development

The projects and activities in this area were intended for the attainment of priority capabilities of
defence and protection at higher levels of technological development. All activities were oriented
towards research and development, industrial research and the study of technical feasibility. The
resources were used for the financing of five out of the planned six projects that were part of the
Orders for the increase of technical capabilities.

Based on the capability analysis, the main purpose of the investment was to support the development
of innovative technologies consistent with the priorities identified in the framework of the EU and
NATO. Due to financial limitations and austerity measures, four already launched projects of key
technologies out of five were cancelled. Consequently, the realization in 2012 was lower than planned.

Despite unfavourable financial conditions and a consequent reduction in the scope of investment and
development, the results contributed to a better equipment of the SAF or the PRR forces.

The MoD continued to carry on its development and research activities in the framework of NATO. The
cooperation was most intensive in the field of NATO's Science and Technology Organization (STO). In
the context of the HFM panel (human factor and medicine), a panel session was organized in
Ljubljana in October with an adjacent symposium on Biological effects of exposure to ionizing
radiation. The MoD representatives participated in the NATO organization STO within nine technical
groups, they joined two new technical groups and left one group due to financial limitations.

On the basis of the obtained results, particularly in the development of key technologies, contractors
started to more actively participate also in international groups, such as the STO SET-1 THz Wave
Technology for Stand-Off Detection of Explosives and Other Military and Security Applications, and
the STO SET-173 Fuel Cells and Other Emerging Manportable Power Technologies for the NATO
Warfighter. The Republic of Slovenia terminated its participation in the STO SET-161 Leading body for
the attainment of a long-term plan for the capabilities of the fight against improvised explosive devices.
In the international area, such procedures are used to verify developmental achievements and to set
the basics for participation in the international environment, which is the essence of participation of the
Slovenian scientific activity through the NATO STO organization. In the future, the continuation of such
cooperation can bring new business opportunities to the Slovenian contractors.

In the context of international cooperation coordinated by the EDA Research and Technology (R&T)
Directorate, Slovenian development and research entities continued their participation in the
international environment, in the Joint Investment Programme on Force Protection (JIP-FP) and the
Joint Investment Programme on Innovative Concepts and Emerging Technologies (JIP-ICET). Most
projects in both programmes have finished. The transfer of results is already underway.


-----

## IMPLEMENTATION OF RESOURCE PLANS

### 1 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FINANCIAL PLAN 

For the purposes of the implementation of tasks and the mission of the MoD, EUR 396 million were
realized, which represents 4.4 percent of the Republic of Slovenia's national budget (the lowest
percentage in the recent years) and is EUR 52.3 million lower as in 2011. The realized financial plan
(FP) signifies 97.8 percent of the applicable or 104 percent of the adopted financial plan based on the
supplementary budget, which can be seen in the table below:


**Supplementary**


**Adopted FP**


**FP** **Realized FP**


FP in EUR 486,048,454 380,852,234 396,001,325

Percentage in reference to
128 100 104
supplementary budget

Difference in reference to
105,196,220 0 15,149,091
supplementary budget in EUR

The realisation of integral funds compared to the applicable financial plan was 99.5 percent. The
realisation of appropriations was 67.6 percent, chiefly as a result of state property management, at
which the largest amount of unapplied funds will be transferred to the next year. The MoD integral
funds represent 96.4 percent and appropriations 3.6 percent of the financial plan realisation.

The table below depicts the portion of the MoD's financial plan in the national budget in millions of
Euros.

**2006** **2007** **2008** **2009** **2010** **2011** **2012**

RS National Budget 7,628.3 7,762.9 8,470.1 9,259.8 9,280.2 9,362.8 8,978.2

MoD’s Financial
446.7 488.1 546.3 549.8 552.6 448.3 396.0
Plan

The MoD’s financial
– 109.3 111.9 100.6 100.5 81.1 88.3
plan index

**%** **5.9** **6.3** **6.4** **5.9** **6.0** **4.8** **4.4**

#### 1.1 Structure of the used MoD resources by economic purposes

Structure of the used MoD resources by economic purposes for 2012:

  - Salaries in the amount of EUR 267.1 million represent 67.4 percent of the total MoD
expenditure. In the recent years, the portion intended for salaries is growing, in particular on
account of lower investments, nonetheless, the value of salaries is decreasing; in comparison
with 2011 the salaries are lower by a good EUR 17 million, while in comparison to 2009, when
they were the highest, the salaries are lower by EUR 25 million.

  - Current expenditures amount to EUR 83.9 million, which represents 21.2 percent of the total
spending. Due to the ageing of the equipment, the maintenance costs are increasing; fixed
operating costs also present a large part of expenditures.

  - Investment expenditures stand at EUR 30.1 million, accounting for 7.6 percent of the total
MoD expenditure. Since 2007, the investments portion has been decreasing; the sole
exception was the year 2010 due to the use of the clearing debt.

  - As much as EUR 837,000 were used for purposes of research and development, which
accounts to 0.2 percent of the total MoD expenditure. In the recent years, the portion of these
resources has also substantially decreased.

  - The dedicated inflows were realized in the amount of EUR 14.1 million, accounting to 3.6
percent of the total MoD expenditure. More than half of the resources were intended for fire
safety and the rest was intended for the management of the state property and the MoD's own
activities.


-----

The pie chart below shows the structure of the resources consumption at the MoD by economic
purposes:

SALARIES:67,4

BASIC
DEVELOPMENT DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAMME AND CURRENT
(BDP) RESEARCH:0,2 EXPENDITURE
INVESTMENTS:7, :21,2
6

TOTAL EARMARK
FUNDS:3,6

The dynamics of individual categories of the MoD expenditures by economic purposes in the period
between 2006 and 2012 is depicted in the line chart below:


EARMARK FUNDS


-----

#### 1.2 Realization by direct budget users

The overview of the expenditures by budget users shows no greater differences in comparison to the
previous year. There was an increase in the share at the ACPDR for a 0.8 percentage point and an
equal reduction in the share in the SAF, while the shares of other users remained the same. Higher
realization of the ACPDR is influenced by additional flood-relief funds, which were immediately
transferred to the accounts of the Red Cross and Karitas organizations. The table presents the
realization by direct budget users:

**Budget user** **Realization in EUR** **Structure in %**

1911 Administrative part of the RS MOD 46,583,650 11.8

1912 ACPDR 33,790,506 8.5

1913 IRSPANOD 2,468,721 0.6

1914 Slovenian Armed Forces 312,366,445 78.9

1915 IRSD 792,003 0.2

**MoD total** **396,001,325** **100**

The line chart depicts the growth index of realization by budget users for the period 2006-2012:

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

2006/2006 2007/2006 2008/2006 2009/2006 2010/2006 2011/2006 2012/2006

Administrative part of the RS MoD ACPDR IRSPANOD SAF IRSD

#### 1.3 Realization by programme structure

In 2012, the financial plan was implemented on the basis of two policies with four development
programmes and six development sub-programmes involving 26 activities and 64 measures and
projects. The MoD's fundamental development policy is 13 – National Security, Defence and Foreign
Affairs with the development programme 1301 – Defence and Protection, and slightly less with the
development programme 1303 – Foreign Policy for the Financing of the International Fund for Mine
Disposal. Two other development programmes of the policy 02 are also used – Higher education,
science, technology and information society with the development programme 0202 – Scientific
research activity, and 0203 – Technology and information society.


-----

The table below presents an overview of funds spent by the MoD by programme structure for the year
2012:


**Policy** **Development**

**programme**


**Sub-programme** **REALIZATION**

**(2012)**


**STRUCTURE**

**(%)**


**_13 NATIONAL SECURITY, DEFENCE AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS_** **_395,163,990_** **_99.79_**

_1301 DEFENCE AND PROTECTION_ _394,953,990_ _99.74_

130101 Military Defence 312,366,445 78.88

130102 Protection Against Natural
36,049,227 9.10
and Other Disasters

130103 Defence System and Crisis
46,538,317 11.75
Management

_1303 FOREIGN POLICY_ _210,000_ _0.05_

130303 Development Cooperation
210,000 0.05
and Humanitarian Assistance

**_02 HIGHER EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND_**
**_837,336_** **_0.21_**
**_INFORMATION SOCIETY_**

_0202 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY_ _139,057_ _0.04_

020201 Research Projects and
139,057 0.04
Programmes

_0203 TECHNOLOGY AND INFORMATION SOCIETY_ _698,279_ _0.18_

020301 Support to Technological and
698,279 0.18
Development Projects

**MoD TOTAL** **396,001,325** **100**

#### 1.4 Defence expenditures1

In 2012, defence expenditures (DE) were realized in the amount of EUR 422 million or 1.19 percent of
the GDP in reference to the spring forecast of the Institute of Macroeconomic Analysis and
Development (UMAR) for 2013, and are EUR 7.6 million higher than the expenditure forecasts based
on the supplementary budget (index 102). The reason for the increase was the realization of the
defence system (financial plan of the SAF, of the administrative part of the MoD and the Defence
Inspectorate of the RS) which was higher for EUR 12 million, while the resources for pensions
decreased by EUR 4.4 million. The table bellow presents the defence expenditures:

**Supplementary**
**Adopted DE** **Realized DE**

**DE**

DE in million EUR 517.1 414.9 422.5

GDP in million EUR 35,466 35,466 35,466

**% of DE in GDP** **1.46** **1.17** **1.19**

1 Defence expenditures include the following budget users: 1911 Administrative Part of the MoD, 1915 IRSD,
1535 Office for the protection of classified information and military pensions.


-----

The line chart below presents the realization of defence expenditures as part of the GDP in the period
between 2001 and 2012. It is evident that defence expenditures as part of the GDP in 2012 are the
lowest after 2001.


Realized Realized DE


-----

### 2 PERSONNEL PLAN IMPLEMENTATION

#### 2.1 Personnel plan (PP) implementation in the administrative part of the MoD

The joint personnel plan of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia determined that the total
number of employees at the MoD on 31 December 2012 was limited to 1259 public employees.
However, the table below shows that, on that day, this number in the administrative part of the ministry
was lower by 69 employees and that the number of employees decreased since 2008. Lower number
of employees is a consequence of:

  - the limited employment in the state administration in accordance with the Fiscal Balance Act
(ZUJF);

  - a larger number of departures in comparison to the previous years. In 2012, as much as 79
public employees retired, which is the highest number of retired persons after 2004. For nine
of these, employment was terminated in accordance with the Fiscal Balance Act.


**Year**


**Allowed**

**situation based**

**on the PP**


**Realization of**

**Difference** **Index**
**the PP**


31 December 2008 1359 1378 19 101

31 December 2009 1328 1328 0 100

31 December 2010 1310 1300 –10 99

31 December 2011 1281 1274 –7 99

31 December 2012 1259 1190 –69 95

In reference to the joint personnel plan, it should be noted that the following are not included in the
permitted number of employees in the administrative part of the MoD:

  - Full-time employees with reduced working hours to compensate for phased or disability
retirement of public employee (there are no such cases).

  - Part-time employees replacing the temporarily absent public employees, the resources for the
wage compensations which are not provided from the body’s resources for maternity leave
and the child nursing and care leave, the sick leave for over 30 working days of absence or
the parental leave.

_Personnel fluctuation in the administrative part of the MoD_

In 2012, a total of 116 public employees left the administrative part of the ministry and 24 new arrived.
The difference between the arrivals and departures is -92. However, since public employees transfer
also within the ministry, the actual difference between the arrivals and departures is -74. Based on the
fluctuation overview, depicted in the graph below, it can be established that the largest number of
departures occurred in 2012, nonetheless, the number of arrivals also increased.


-----

#### 2.2 Implementation of the personnel plan in the SAF

Based on the joint personnel plan of the Government of the RS, the SAF planned to employ 7,600
members in 2012. The personnel plan realization was 98.5 percent. Out of a total of 7,484 SAF
members employed on 31 December 2012, there were 1,134 officers, 1,991 non-commissioned
officers, 3,296 soldiers, 247 senior military specialists, 358 junior military specialists and 458 civilians,
as depicted in the table below:


**Situation as of**

**31 December**

**2012**


**Status**


**Situation as of**

**31 December**

**2011**


**Difference** **Index**


Officers 1157 1134 –23 98

Non-commissioned officers 1993 1991 –2 99

Soldiers 3340 3296 –44 98

Senior military specialists 254 247 –7 97

Junior military specialists 369 358 –11 97

Civilian personnel 487 458 –29 94

**TOTAL** **7600** **7484** **–116** **98**

The quota of 7,484 members employed in the SAF also includes 47 people employed at workplaces or
assigned to duties in the administrative part of the MoD at which military service is performed in
accordance with Articles 47 and 48 of the defence Act.

The number of employees in the SAF reduced due to the limited financial resources for salaries and
consequently halted employment of new SAF members as a consequence of the Fiscal Balance Act.
Nonetheless, the structure of employees in the SAF remained the same, as the number of employees
reduced in all categories; therefore, the current ratio between the officers, non-commissioned officers
and the active component members is 1 : 1.8 : 2.9.


-----

_Employment in the Slovenian Armed Forces_

A total of 508 candidates applied for employment in the SAF in 2012. Based on the selection
procedures, 170 candidates were employed, 149 of which were soldiers.

_Voluntary military service_

In 2012, as many as 541 candidates applied for voluntary military service. However, 270 candidates or
90% of the planned 300 were deployed to the voluntary military service.

_Contract reserve component_

As much as 98 percent of the personnel plan regarding contract reserve members performing their
military service as contract reserve in the SAF was implemented. In accordance with the personnel
plan, the tendency in 2012 was mainly to maintain the manpower and extend contracts. On 31
December 2012, there were 1,583 members in the SAF contract reserve, 1,440 of which were
soldiers, 70 non-commissioned officers, 30 officers, 18 junior and 25 senior military specialists, as
depicted in the table below:


**Situation as of**

**31 December**

**2012**


**Status**


**Situation as of**

**31 December**

**2011**


**Difference** **Index**


Officers 29 30 +1 103

Non-commissioned officers 77 70 –7 91

Soldiers 1473 1440 –33 98

Senior military specialists 25 25 0 100

Junior military specialists 17 18 +1 106

**TOTAL** **1621** **1583** **–38** **98**

Last year, applications to perform military service in the SAF contract reserve was filed by 266
candidates, which is fitting given the limited possibilities for the admission of new candidates.
Contracts were concluded with 21 candidates.

Due to the rationalization measures and the optimization of the available financial resources in the
SAF only a few contracts were concluded; therefore, last year, 349 contract members were offered to
sign an annex on the extension of the contract period for two years, for which reason they were not
entitled to the long-service bonus. In the period concerned, 313 members or 89.6 percent signed the
annex on the extension of the contractual relationship.

Due to the rationalization of the SAF operation and, for the reasons of reduced financial resources, a
decision was adopted to cancel the call-up of contractual members to trainings in the second half of
2012. Hence, a total of 1566 members undertook 14,381 days of trainings in the previous year.

In 2012, procedures for the deployment of contract reserve members to perform military services
abroad were also carried out to a smaller extent. Hence, seven contract reserve members were
deployed to KFOR and two female contract reserve members from ROLE-2L MTF were deployed to
ISAF.

_Promotion of employment and service in the SAF_
The process of personnel acquisition for the employment in the SAF and for the performance of
military service in the SAF contract reserve includes not only the operational part but also the activities
oriented towards increasing the interest for employment in the SAF, conclusions of contracts for the
performance of military service and voluntary military service.


-----

In line with the provisions of the Military Service Act, a total of 10,046 conscripts got acquainted with
their obligations and rights. Over 200 promotional events were carried out at which different
possibilities were presented for the employment in the SAF, for the performance of military service in
the SAF contract reserve, voluntary military service and scholarship. The promotion was done also
through the website www.postanivojak.si which provided current news on the employment, voluntary
military service and contract military service in the SAF contract reserve as well as interesting news on
the life and work in the SAF units.

_Preparation of personnel for departure from military service_

For the SAF members who have gained the right to old-age pension in the current year, an info day
and a pre-retirement seminar were organised at which experts on gerontology, healthy diet, addiction
etc. presented the perils and opportunities of the third life period to the participants and gave them
advice on how to make a successful transition to that new life period in the best way possible.

_Care of former SAF members_

The MoD monitored the needs for the assistance to its former members who are socially, medically or
otherwise disadvantaged and in need of support. Support was provided in the form of humanitarian
and work campaigns, visits and regular contacts, counselling and organisation of voluntary work.

The second Intergenerational information and social centre (MIDS) was founded in Slovenska Bistrica.
The Adjovščina and the Slovenska Bistrica MIDS organised over seventy events which were attended
by 919 participants. The events included everything from regular recreation, lectures and thematic
workshops to hikes, excursions and several-day-long camps. In addition, six new intergenerational
groups for quality ageing were established. These groups (13 altogether) had as much as 130
members, 20 of which completed training for leaders of these groups.

A Voluntary intergenerational association of the RS MoD for quality ageing was also established. The
purpose of the association was to ease social distress in particular of the current and former MoD
employees and their family members, to defend them, strengthen their health and offer assistance
should their health be at risk.


-----

### 3 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLAN FOR THE ACQUISITION OF THE STATE’S PHYSICAL ASSETS

#### 3.1 Real estate

For purposes of the Poljče education centre, a plot on which a monument stands was acquired.
Consequently, the registration of the plot in the land register was arranged, which will allow for a
transparent management of the monument as a public cultural good. The signing of most of the
contracts for the acquisition of plots contributed to the arrangement of the land of the Slovenska
Teritorialna obramba Military Post complex in Šentvid. While the discussions on the purchase with two
other owners continue. For purposes of the arrangement of the perspective MoD area, an intention for
the purchase of an agricultural land in Vipava was published on the information board of the
Ajdovščina administrative unit. Due to the project of enlargement and modernization of the Cerklje ob
Krki Airport, the process of land purchase continued also in 2012. Based on the scope of the land
required for construction, 91 percent of the land was purchased. The ownership of all 19 plots required
for the construction of the airport was arranged with the Brežice municipality. The MoD initiated the
procedure of expropriation for six plots. For 18 people who co-own eight plots and are abroad
(unknown, missing or deceased), the procedure for the determination of provisional representatives is
in progress.

#### 3.2 Take-overs

In 2012, 273 take-over procedures were carried out (quality and quantity control and the book-keeping
of material resources) at which the MoD determined the compliance of items delivered by contract with
the contract. In 12 cases (4.4 percent) of quality control procedures, such great deficiencies were
determined that all items delivered by contract were rejected. In 11 cases the suppliers eliminated the
deficiencies, in one case, however, the order submitter withdrew from the purchase. Smaller
deficiencies, such as insufficient documentation, were determined in almost 40 percent of the takeovers. Nonetheless, the suppliers subsequently managed to eliminate all mistakes.

#### 3.3 Defence and confidential procurement

The MoD awarded 10 defence and confidential procurements in the total value of EUR 7,972 million
(VAT included). In accordance with the Decree on Defence and Confidential Procurement, the
purchases in the defence and confidential procurement area included mainly the following:

  - supply of the cryptographic equipment and the upgrade of the cryptographic network;

  - maintenance services for mobile radars EL/M 2016 NG;

  - purchase of spare parts and maintenance of military cargo and combat armoured vehicles of
the TAM producer;

  - construction and finishing works on facilities and platforms of the Cerklje ob Krki Airport;

  - equipping of SAF facilities with the technical protection systems.

Most purchases or services were carried out with a view to providing regular activity and permanent
readiness of the SAF in the implementation of statutory tasks. A certain part of contracts concluded in
2012 resulted in financial commitments also in 2013 and later. On the other hand, service contracts
(servicing, maintenance etc.) are usually concluded for a longer period of time (typically for two years
with the possibility of extension for the maximum of five years). Financial resources for the realization
of the listed contracts are provided on the basis of the MoD financial plan, on the part that refers to the
implementation of the construction and finishing works at the Cerklje ob Krki Airport and also from the
resources of the NATO Security Investment Programme. In comparison to the previous years, the
Report on defence and confidential contracts awarded in 2012 demonstrates a considerable reduction
in the number of implemented defence and confidential procurements and in the value of the contracts
concluded. In comparison to 2011, the number of defence and other confidential procurements
reduced by approximately 75 percent.


-----

#### 3.4 Plan for the acquisition of the state’s physical assets belonging to the SAF

The current plan for the acquisition of the state's physical assets for the year 2012 amounted to EUR
22.8 million or 7.3 percent of the SAF's current financial plan. The plan for the acquisition of the state’s
physical assets for 2012 was fully realized.

Due to a considerable reduction of financial means for investment, infrastructure and equipping of the
SAF on behalf of a supplementary budget in 2012, the purchase of equipment and investments was
either partially or completely cancelled, namely for:

  - light or medium wheeled armoured vehicles;

  - computer hardware and server equipment;

  - telecommunication means;

  - engineering equipment (mining, demining and demolition sets);

  - electronic, reconnaissance equipment for the battalion battle group (ISTAR);

  - kits for the destruction of CBRN EOD;

  - special units equipment;

  - equipment for operational tasks (equipment of offices/classrooms, camp equipment,
renovation of military topographic maps, CBRN protection equipment and decontamination
kits, veterinary assets and medical equipment);

  - fire-fighting vehicles, facility for a fire-fighting or rescue service and for the Cerklje ob Krki
Airport;

  - reconstruction of fences at the SAF facilities;

  - reconstruction of the facility no. 4 at the Andrej Čehovin Military Post;

  - construction of the CBRN technical facility – Peter Petrič Military Post in Kranj;

  - demolition of facilities no longer in use;

  - construction of investment maintenance of military infrastructure;

  - construction of investment maintenance of material resources.

Important purchases within the SAF in 2012 by individual projects:

  - EUR 3.39 million were intended for the purchase of SAF uniforms;

  - EUR 7.87 million were intended for the purchase of ammunition;

  - in reference to operational tasks EUR 808,000 were used for the purchase of:
– the equipment for the operation of the SAF in IOM;
– the equipment for regular activities (furniture, audio-visual appliances, equipment for the
8x8 medium wheeled armoured vehicles (SKOV) repair shops);
– the equipment for fire protection and protection at work;
– the consumable teaching aids;
– quartermaster resources and equipment (kitchen equipment);
– engineer equipment;
– sports equipment;
– veterinary equipment;
– medical equipment;

  - for the project of investment maintenance of material resources EUR 258,100 were used;

  - for the project of investment maintenance of military infrastructure EUR 1.53 million were
used;

  - for the project of equipping with the main equipment EUR 2.16 million were used for;
– the purchase of vehicles for the transportation of the CBRN containers;
– modernization of information projects;
– purchase of telecommunication equipment and its introduction to operational use
encompassing:
`o` the purchase of the ASOC system;
`o` the purchase of the warrior equipment (combat helmet);
`o` the charges for the importation of equipment on the basis of the Warsaw Initiative;

  - EUR 1.72 million were used for the project of the helicopters upgrade;

  - EUR 137,200 were used for the light wheeled armoured vehicles (LKOV) 4x4 project;

  - EUR 212,800 were used for the light wheeled armoured vehicles (LKOV) 8x8 project;

  - for the realization of the Cerklje ob Krki project EUR 3.05 million were used;


-----

  - EUR 569,000 were intended for the adjustment of infrastructure facilities, the wiring and the
setting-up of the optical network and for the acquisition of the project documentation, licences
and spatial plans;

  - for technical protection of the SAF facilities EUR 664,800 were used;

  - for the project of co-financing of the local infrastructure EUR 464,000 were used. Resources
were provided for co-financing of the Pivka, Postojna and Brežice municipalities.

#### 3.5 Plan for the acquisition of the state’s physical protection and rescue assets

On the basis of the adopted Plan for the acquisition of physical assets the purchase of special
protective and rescue equipment for the needs of the state’s protection, rescue and relief units was
carried out, as was the supplementation of national protection, rescue and relief reserves, and the
testing and developing of equipment. Major investments were the purchase of tents, tanks for the
contaminated sanitary and drinking water, the trailers for events of mass destructions, self-supporting
interceptive tanks, forklifts and folding beds. Moreover, the purchase of the following equipment was
carried out: computer and telecommunication equipment (purchase of computers, climatic appliances,
switchboard), public warning sirens, transportable cabinets for the archive, equipment of the Education
centre of the RS for protection and rescue with three units (establishment of a Wi-Fi connection in
Sežana, computer and audiovisual equipment). Furthermore, the purchase included equipment and
resources for the implementation of education and training, especially fire-fighting equipment (the
rescue platform stabilization system, kit of one-way hydraulics, tarpaulin, door-opening device, fire
fighting equipment, equipment for the monitoring of identification numbers in the fire-fighting depot).

On the basis of the plan for 2012, the following activities were carried out: investment maintenance,
renovations and adaptations as well as the reconstruction of facilities of the RS for protection and
rescue with three units and ACPDR branch offices, in particular for the adaptation of the Celje
Regional Notification Centre.

In accordance with the plan, the investments in the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster
Relief, Logatec Unit, were reimbursed to the Union of Veterans of the War of Slovenia, as determined
in the agreement on the budget for investments based on the contracts regarding the establishment,
development and operation of the Centre of War Veterans of Slovenia in Logatec.

With the resources of the fire fighting fund, the fire fighting equipment and the equipment required for
the activities of fire-fighting training were purchased: self-standing interception tanks, transportation
networks, dip pumps, water barriers, insulation breathing apparatus, preparations for the
demonstration of explosiveness of inflammable vapors, thermovision cameras, containers,
communication resources – radio stations and pagers. These resources were also used for the
recovering of the roof on the training facility, the repair of the wall on the fire house, the adaptation of
facilities for the establishment of the isolation breathing apparatus (IBA) polygon in Pekre, the project
documentation for the preparation of new wardrobes in Sežana and the preparation of project
documentation for the arrangement of polygons and the upgrading of the Training Centre for Civil
Protection and Disaster Relief of the Republic of Slovenia in Ig.

The plan for the acquisition of physical assets by means of the fire fund resources was not fully
realized in terms of the preparation of the IBA polygon in Sežana and the purchase of pagers and
radio stations for purposes of replacement of the worn-out equipment in fire fighting associations,
since the processes of the awarding of contracts that started in 2012 were not finished and will
continue also in 2013.


-----

### 4 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE PLAN FOR THE SALE OF STATE PROPERTY 

#### 4.1 Real estate

Due to the implementation of the Decree on the State Property Management in May 2012, the sale of
the real estates took place as late as in the fall of 2012, when five public auctions for the sale of the
real estates no longer required were organized. In this context, 25 apartments were sold at four public
auctions for EUR 1.004 million or, in other words, for EUR 32,000 more than all starting prices
together. One garage was also sold for EUR 11,300. The total value of all sold real estates was EUR
1.016 million.

#### 4.2 Movable property

In the annual plan for the disposal of the state’s movable property for 2012, two radar stations of the
type AN/TPS-70 were included that were not sold. A contract on coordination, organization and
counselling at the sale of both radars with associated equipment, documentation and spare parts was
concluded with the Avtotehna Company. Sold items included two sets of steel sticks in the amount of
EUR 12,700, seven used personal vehicles, one off-road vehicle, one cargo vehicle, three caravans in
the amount of EUR 6,501 and 1500 pieces of various non-formation combat uniform items in the
amount of EUR 3,350 not included in the plan. After unsuccessful announced intentions to sell the
overhead bridge crane and the steel sticks, the crane and the steel sticks were sold as raw material.

#### 4.3 Donations

Out of ten applications for the donation of the equipment (donation of non-formation quartermaster
items, such as shirts, pullovers, tent canvas, sleeping bags etc.) three were realized:

  - 350 pieces to the Zasavje District Association of the Veterans of the War for Slovenia
(OZVVS);

  - 1060 battle uniform shirts to the Slovenska Bistrica District Association of the Veterans of the
War for Slovenia (OZVVS);

  - 600 pieces – in the context of the EUFOR contingent the donation to the scout camp Stari
Grad Mostar.

Applications of various other societies, associations, institutions etc. were resolved negatively, as they
did not fulfil the necessary legal requirements.

#### 4.4 Revenues

Revenues form the sale of the MoD’s physical assets are booked against the MoD's task budget
heading and were used primarily for:

  - financing of the infrastructure facilities for the needs of the SAF (construction of the Škrilj firing
range and training area facility);

  - construction of a sports facility in the Peter Petrič Military Post in Kranj;

  - works on the air traffic control tower at the Cerklje ob Krki Airport;

  - purchase of the land for purposes of the Cerklje ob Krki Airport modernization;

  - completion of works on the facility in the Main Electronic Warfare Centre (GCEB);

  - placement of boundary stones around military posts;

  - routine and investment maintenance of facilities and installed infrastructure for the
requirements of the administrative part of the MoD;

  - maintenance of apartments owned by the MoD;

  - payment of the insurance premium for the protection of physical assets – real estates
managed by the MoD, and the financial interest for the administrative part of the MoD;

  - preparation of the investment documentation for construction works;


-----

  - establishment of the video control system and the system for automatic detection and the
reporting of burglary in the area of the Slovenska Teritorialna Obramba Military Post in
Šentvid.

The joint realization of the financial plan on both outlays added up to 31 percent. The unused financial
resources will be transferred to the 2013 budget period.


-----

### 5 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EDUCATION, TRAINING AND ADVANCED TRAINING PLAN

#### 5.1 Education, training and advanced training in the administrative part of the MoD, Inspectorate of the RS for Defence (IRSD), ACPDR and the Inspectorate of the Republic of Slovenia for Protection Against Natural and Other Disasters (IRSPANOD)

In 2011, the employees of the administrative part of the MoD participated in different forms of
education, training and advanced training based on the requirements of the working process and in
line with the MoD’s financial capabilities. Below is a detailed presentation of individual and advanced
training areas:

  - external functional training;

  - language training;

  - military training of public employees assigned to work posts at which military service is
performed;

  - education and training abroad.

_External functional training_

The employees were sent to external functional trainings carried out by different external institutions in
accordance with the needs of an individual ministry’s organizational unit workfield. A total of 1,239
MoD employees participated in external functional trainings. Their participation is presented in the
table below:


**trainings** **employees**

**number** **%** **number** **%**


**Realization based on**


**Organizational**

**units - OU**


**Planned**

**number of**

**trainings**


Internal MoD OU 399 154 40 847 18

ACPDR 204 46 22 316 15

IRSPANOD 143 16 12 59 27

IRSD 0 5 – 17 29

**TOTAL** **746** **221** **30** **1239** **18**

Due to the adopted Fiscal Balance Act (ZUJF) the realization of external trainings is much lower than
in the previous years. On the average, in comparison to the last year, 18 percent of employees who
work at the administrative part of the MoD took part in one of the forms of functional training.

_Language training_

Four employees enrolled on the courses organized by the School of Foreign Languages; all of them
attended an English language course. The Charles Nodier French Institute organized French
language courses that were attended by 12 employees. One employee attended a Russian language
course.

_Military professional training in workplaces at which military service is performed_

In 2012, two employees posted to military duties attended the Higher Staff Course.


-----

_Training abroad_

In 2012, 46 employees participated in different forms of training abroad, as depicted in the table
below:

**Participants**
**Country**

**Number** **%**

USA – IMET programme 11 24

Germany – Marshall Centre 5 10

Germany – NATO School
18 40
Oberammergau

Other trainings 12 26

**TOTAL** **46** **100**

#### 5.2 Education, training and advanced training in the SAF

In 2012, the only ones who continued the education were the SAF members – participants of the
module studies which are a combination of military and undergraduate studies for non-commissioned
officers at the Vocational College of Traffic and Transport or postgraduate studies in the context of the
Higher Staff Training in the Command and Staff School.

In 2012, 174 SAF members successfully completed the training for the acquisition of general higher
education, out of which 45 members concluded a contract on education with the MoD, while 129 did
self-studies.

17 SAF members who have concluded contracts on training with the MoD successfully completed the
language courses. 45 SAF members attended the English Language Refresher Course, while 780
candidates underwent the ALCPT placement tests.

As many as 5947 members of the SAF, the MoD, the Police and of foreign armed forces participated
in different forms of education and training in the organizational units of the Doctrine, Development,
Education and Training Command (DDETC). The planned education, training and advanced training
have already been completed by 5,465 candidates, while other 223 candidates continue their training,
which means a total realization of 95.6 percent.

In 2012, various functional and career education and training abroad were attended by 280 SAF
members, out of which 134 were officers, 102 non-commissioned officers, 25 soldiers, 18 military
specialists and one civilian. In 2012, the realization of all executed deployments to education, training
and advanced training abroad was 68 percent.


-----

### 6 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION PLAN

International activities were carried out within the programme of bilateral and multilateral cooperation,
the EU, NATO, CISM (Conseil International du Sport Militaire) and military and technical cooperation.

Based on the Annual plan of international cooperation for 2012, the MoD planned 1,443 events, out of
which 912 or 63 percent were realized, and 531 were not realized. The discrepancy between the
planned activities and the actual realization is still very large. At the same time, the number of new
unplanned events (altogether 241 were realized) that could not be foreseen during the annual plan
preparation period increased.

Initially EUR 545,000 were allocated for international military cooperation in 2012. However, financial
resources decreased by 30 percent due to the supplementary budget, that is to EUR 380,000, which
also contributed to the reduction of the planned events from the previous 530 to the current 501, out of
which only 238 activities or 48 percent were carried out. The reduction of resources can also be seen
in certain key areas of international military cooperation, among other things in Slovenia's
representation in other NATO working bodies and in bilateral cooperation with the countries of the
Western Balkans.

#### 6.1 International cooperation within NATO

The SAF carried out 93 NATO events, which is 70 less than last year. The main events at which the
SAF participated were the meetings of the military board at the level of chiefs of general staffs, which
discussed the possibilities of a joint use and sharing of forces and means as well as the adjustments
of the operation of defence systems, taking the reduction of defence budgets into account.

SAF representatives participated at meetings of various expert committees and working bodies of the
NATO union. Due to the reduction of financial resources a large part of the RS's tasks were taken over
by the Peacetime Structure of the Slovenian Armed Forces Abroad (MSSVT). Members of the MSSVT
principally participated in meetings of different committees and working bodies. In particular, their
participation at the meetings of the Logistic Committee’s working bodies, of the Verification
Coordination Committee, the NATO Defence Manpower Committee (NDMC) and at meetings of
various aviation and air defence committees were of special importance.

#### 6.2 International cooperation within the European Union

In the area of military cooperation with the EU, the SAF planned 23 events or a poor three percent of
all carried out events. The organization of a large part of events was taken over by the Military
Representation (VOPRE) which represented national interests in committees of the EU working bodies
within the EU Military Committee (EUMC), Military Committee EU+8 and the EU Military Committee
composed of the chiefs of general staffs. Altogether 47 meetings in various formats were organized. In
addition, the VOPRE representatives also participated in meetings, workshops, conferences and in
seminars in Brussels, namely:

  - in a logistic conference;

  - in seminar on the operation of special units under the Common Security and Defence Policy
(SVOP);

  - in a workshop and a seminar on the concepts of the EU;

  - in preparations on the ML 12 exercise, including a participation at the final planning
conference for the implementation of the exercise;

  - in a seminar on cyber security;

  - in a Workshop of the Naval Mine Warfare Education & Training (NMW E&T) working group.

#### 6.3 Bilateral cooperation

The bilateral cooperation programme was prepared together with 27 countries on the basis of umbrella
agreements on cooperation of states in the defence field. This points to the increase of the circle of
states with which the MoD is participating on the basis of bilateral programmes (in 2011 the


-----

cooperation programmes were concluded between 20 states). In accordance with the Declaration of
the National Assembly of the RS on the Western Balkans, the Guidance on the activities of the RS in
the Western Balkans and the Action Plan on the activities of the RS in the Western Balkans from
2011, the main effort of operation, in addition to the four neighbouring countries, was oriented towards
the states of this region, which presents 47 percent of all planned bilateral events.

In terms of bilateral cooperation we should mention the cooperation with Montenegro, where the
realization of events is the highest. The prevailing topics refer to the integration of Montenegro in EuroAtlantic Integrations. The most extensive programmes were prepared with Austria and Croatia.
However, the realization of activities with the latter, in reference to the previous year was considerably
lower (decrease from 85 percent to 55 percent), which, in addition to financial limitations, can be
attributed to the shutting down of military diplomatic representations.

In terms of bilateral cooperation with our strategic partners, partnership with France should be pointed
out, which has been formally arranged since 2011. The cooperation was good, even though the
planned bilateral cooperation programme was not fully realized.

#### 6.4 Multilateral cooperation

The SAF organized 36 multilateral events (15 less than in 2011), which amounts to 15 percent of all
implemented activities. Probably the most important form of multilateral cooperation for the SAF is
further development of the Multinational Centre of Excellence for Mountain Warfare which has already
started regular meetings of the working bodies and the Consultative Committee.

Multilateral cooperation oriented towards the control of the armament within the Organization of
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the regional initiatives linked to the Western Balkans. Special
attention was devoted to tasks deriving from the obligations of the Vienna 2011 document and the
International contract on open airspace. The MoD actively cooperated with the NATO members and
the signatories of the Agreement on Security and Cooperation in Europe. One of key achievements
that should be stressed is the continuation of preparations of the RS for the implementation of
conventional forces in Europe and the implementation of international education and training courses
from the verification field.

Slovenian representatives also participated in various meetings on the operation of the Multinational
Land Force (MLF), part of which is also an important and reputed conference on the combat against
terrorism in the South-Eastern Europe that has already surpassed the regional framework. In
cooperation with the Embassy of the United States of America, the Centre for Civil-Military Relations
from Monterey and the Institute for Corporate Security Studies, the SAF organized already the fifth
conference on this subject.

In the context of regional initiatives, the SAF’s participation in the Forum for Defence Cooperation in
the Western Balkans (Southeast Europe Clearinghouse – SEEC) should be pointed out. The SAF
representatives participated in the formation of the CBRN Defence training centre in Kruševac
(Serbia). Similarly as every year, the deputy commander of the Chief of General Staff attended the
meeting of the deputies of the chiefs of general staff, the South-Eastern Europe Defence Ministerial
(SEDM) that took place in Sofia (Bulgaria).

#### 6.5 Military–technical cooperation

11 events have been carried out as part of the military technical cooperation. Due to limited financial
resources, the SAF representatives attended only the professionally oriented and the most prominent
events on the provision of SAF’s combat service support, which includes maintenance checks of
military aircraft and helicopters, and the participation at military fair events.


-----

#### 6.6 Sports – CISM

The events of the International Military Sports Council (CISM) in total present approximately three
percent of all SAF’s international military cooperation events. With their role, these events greatly
contribute to the integration of the armed forces and the promotion of states in the field of military
sports, which can be seen also in other areas of the SAF's operation.

In the context of events organized by the CISM in 2012, the SAF’s sports representative teams
participated in 10 planned competitions abroad, two of which were world military championships - in
orientation (Denmark) and pentathlon (Finland) at which SAF members did not win any medals.

One SAF delegation member in CISM attended the CISM general assembly in Uganda and the
European CISM conference that took place in Lithuania.


-----

### IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RISK REGISTER

The risk register is a set of anticipated risks that could be a negative influence on the economical use
of the fiscal resources of the Republic of Slovenia and the attainment of the set goals and the set of all
measures that are prepared in advance and applied for preventive and timely reduction of the negative
influences of risks.

Based on the MoD’s risk register, 168 risks were anticipated for 2012. The level of risk is determined
based on the level of the risk probability estimate and the consequences influence estimate, which are
marked with numbers from 1 to 3, the higher value meaning greater probability of occurrence or a
greater influence of consequences of the realized risk.

The product of both assessments signifies the level of risk. Taking into account the value of the
product, four levels of risk have been determined:

  - 9 – a very high probability for the occurrence of the risk and the influence of the consequences
(red colour);

  - 6 – a high probability for the occurrence of the risk and the influence of the consequences
(orange colour);

  - 3, 4 – a medium level probability for the occurrence of the risk and the influence of the
consequences (yellow colour);

  - 1, 2 – a low probability for the occurrence of the risk and the influence of the consequences
(green colour);

11 risks or 7 percent out of all risks have been assessed with the highest level of risk, 49 or 29 percent
were attributed a high level of risk, 60 or 35.5 percent with a medium level of risk and 48 or 28.5
percent with a low level of risk, as depicted in the table below.

40%

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%

9 6 3-4 2 1

Risk structure 7% 29% 36% 21% 8%

93 risks or 60 percent of risks were realized at which appropriate measures were applied. The
measures were not applied at three of the realized risks or at three percent.

The structure of risks in reference to their type (strategic, project, procedural, normative, financial or
external risks) shows that the majority of risks are of procedural nature. Hence the risks with a very
high level of probability of occurrence are procedural risks (as much as 8 out of 11). At risks with a
high level of occurrence there are 27 procedural risks, 18 project-related risks, three strategic and one
normative.


-----

The predominance of procedural or project-related risks is a warning that processes and project
management should be given more attention in the future, as they directly influence the effectiveness
and efficiency of operation. In a metaphorical sense, it means that our goal in the short term period
must be to further endeavour for an effective use of the mentioned financial, personnel and material
resources and systematically direct them in the implementation of the key long- and medium-term
objectives, which will help attain at least a minimum level of ambitions in the establishment of
capabilities.

The ongoing economic recession presents a challenge in the development of the defence system and
the system of protection against natural and other disasters, as the risks for the realization of longterm objectives increased significantly. The resolution on the general long-term programme of
development and equipment of the SAF by 2005 which – as the highest development and guiding
document offers guidance for further development of the SAF and other parts of the defence system –
must be taken into account despite the current unfavourable conditions in reference to defence
resources (especially financial).

Effective implementation of measures for the management of risks and the prevention and mitigation
of their consequences greatly contributed to the further development of the defence system, which is
highly important in the ever more complex and unpredictable security environment.


-----

