# Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic 2005

_(unofficial translation)_

Introduction

I. Security interests of the Slovak Republic

II. Security environment of the Slovak Republic

III. Security policy of the Slovak Republic

_Security of citizens and of the state_

_Stability and predictability of the security environment_

Conclusion


-----

**Introduction**

1) The Slovak Republic is a sovereign state, which respects territorial
integrity and political independence of every state in conformity with the international
law, has no territorial claims on other states, and does not consider itself to be
directly military threatened by another state.

2) The Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic reflects fundamental
changes in the security environment of the Slovak Republic, its new commitments
and responsibility for participation in ensuring security and defence of the broader
community of democratic nations – allies and partners of the Slovak Republic
associated within the Euroatlantic structures.

3) The Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic lays down basic premises
for implementing security policy of the Slovak Republic with a view to guarantee the
necessary level of security for its citizens and for the state.

**I. Security Interests of the Slovak Republic**

4) The Slovak Republic adheres to the values of freedom, peace,
democracy, rule of law, justice, pluralism, solidarity, and human rights and
fundamental freedoms. The Slovak Republic guarantees security to its citizens
irrespective of their origin, social status and place of their stay in conformity with
international legal human rights standards, and in accordance with the Constitution of
the Slovak Republic. The security guarantee for the citizens is a basic prerequisite for
the exercise of their human and civil rights and for a harmonious development of the
society as a whole. The Slovak Republic will also guarantee, as appropriate, the right
to personal security to all categories of the population within its borders.

5) Security interests of the Slovak Republic, based on the above values
and reflecting the needs of its citizens and the state, are:

-  guaranteeing the security of its citizens and protecting their human rights and
fundamental freedoms;

-  guaranteeing its territorial integrity, sovereignty, inviolability of borders, political
independence, and identity;

-  developing democracy, rule of law, and market economy;

-  creating prerequisites for sustainable economic, social, environmental, and
cultural development of the society;

-  strengthening strategic transatlantic partnership, co-guaranteeing the security
of its allies;

-  improving effectiveness of international organisations which the Slovak
Republic is a member of, and supporting NATO and the EU enlargement;

-  developing good partnership relations and all forms of mutually beneficial
cooperation with the countries with which the Slovak Republic has common
interests;

-  contributing to strengthening and expanding freedom and democracy, respect
for human rights, rule of law, international law, peace and stability in the world.


-----

6) The role of the security policy of the Slovak Republic is to actively exert
influence on the security environment with a view to protect, promote, safeguard,
defend and assert security interests of the Slovak Republic. In pursuit of its security
interests, the Slovak Republic will exercise its sovereign right to guarantee its own
security, derived from the right to individual and collective self-defence laid down in
the Charter of the United Nations (UN).

**II. Security Environment of the Slovak Republic**

7) With its geographical location and its historical, cultural, political,
economic and other ties, the Slovak Republic is a part of the Euroatlantic space.
Individually or in cooperation with other countries and international organisations, it
safeguards and defends freedom, democracy, rule of law, and human rights in
harmony with the principles of the UN Charter and other international legal standards.

8) Through its membership in the United Nations (UN), the Organisation
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and other regional organisations
and structures, the Slovak Republic actively contributes to the efforts of the
international community to preserve peace and security in the world.

9) By acceding to the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) the
Slovak Republic became part of the collective defence and security system – a pillar
of the transatlantic security and stability – and its security is guaranteed by allied
commitments.

10) By gaining the European Union (EU) membership the Slovak Republic
acquired guarantees of political and economic stability, and a possibility to take an
active part in formulating, implementing, and strengthening the European security
and defence policy.

11) With accession to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) the Slovak Republic gained place among the most
economically developed countries of the world. Economic integration of the Slovak
Republic had resulted in the stabilisation of its market economy and enabled it to
participate in global economic cooperation and in the international system of the
provision of development assistance to less developed countries of the world.

12) The geopolitical situation of the Slovak Republic in Central Europe
predetermines its security policy. The Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland are the
members of NATO and of the EU, Austria is a member of the EU. Our largest
neighbour, Ukraine, declares its Euroatlantic orientation with the ambition to gain the
EU and NATO membership.

13) The membership of the Slovak Republic in the key international
organisations has fundamentally changed its security position and created new
conditions for pursuing its security interests. Direct involvement in the decisionmaking processes of these international organisations has increased the level of


-----

security guarantees provided by these organisations, and the degree of responsibility
of the Slovak Republic for security and stability in the world.

14) The basic tendency of the security environment development is growing
instability, uncertainty, and unpredictability in the world – the consequence of growing
number of failed states and negative influence of certain non-state actors. The
international community responds to these trends by making an effort to seek
common, effective and, in particular, preventive means in the face of such
developments.

15) Other tendencies that have an impact on the development of security
environment include growing globalisation, increased number of intrastate conflicts,
interdependent security environment, political and economic integration, uncontrolled
spread of information and military technologies, disparities in regional development,
unbalanced demographic development and migration movements, growing
intolerance and nationalism, increased dependence on vital natural resources and
their scarcity, and environmental degradation.

16) Constantly changing security environment of the Slovak Republic
entails changes in security threats and challenges that the Slovak Republic must
respond to. The security of the Slovak Republic and its citizens is inseparably linked
with that of its allies, and the country is facing similar threats and challenges as other
countries in the Euroatlantic space.

17) The greatest threat with potentially the most serious consequences for
the Slovak Republic and its allies is a possibility of acquisition and use of weapons of
mass destructions and certain WMD carriers by terrorist groups and/or failed states.

18) **Terrorism represents a global strategic threat for the Slovak Republic.**
Terrorism uses ideologies that promote racial, ethnic and religious hatred, violence
and genocide, and endeavours to undermine basic democratic values of the society
such as openness, freedom of individuals, value of human life, and tolerance. Its
main targets are civilians and state’s strategic infrastructure with the aim to inflict
mass casualties, damage, provoking fear, and creating the feeling of endangerment.
In order to secure a rapid and irreversible attainment of its goals, it strives to gain
possession of weapons of mass destruction and their carriers. Several European
states are considered to be potential targets for terrorists, and Europe is one of the
bases in which they operate.

19) Strategic global threats to the Slovak Republic also include
**proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their carriers. Both state and**
non-state actors’ access to WMDs is increasingly easier due to the scientific and
technological progress, mobility of scientists, illicit trade in radioactive materials and
dual-use of goods, and disregard for recognised international standards. At the same
time, inhibitions to use such weapons are weakening. Uncontrolled proliferation of
conventional weapons, especially in conflict-ridden regions remains a serious
problem.

20) Another threat is represented by **failed states that are not capable or**
willing to secure basic functions of the state, which are: guarantee of their own


-----

security, respect for human rights and freedoms of their citizens, and fulfilment of
their international commitments. Thus they are becoming a threat for their
surroundings and contributing to regional instability. Such situation creates
favourable conditions for the abuse of power, incitement to intolerance between
ethnic groups, suppression of democracy and of the civil society, violation of human
rights and freedoms, corruption and human and drug trafficking, and arms trade. The
failed states often become bases for terrorism and extremist groups and networks,
havens for organised crime, and a source of illegal migration.

21) Persistent **regional conflicts threaten not only regional stability, but**
also security in the Euroatlantic space. They often arise from increasingly frequent
intra-state conflicts. They are accompanied by increasing extremism, weapon
acquisition efforts, poverty, and massive migration. Such conflicts often lead to the
state failure or creation of a pseudostate, and thus challenging the internationally
recognised state borders. These unstable areas are marked by excessive
accumulation of conventional weapons, mainly small and light arms, creation of
conditions for organised crime which, in turn, have an adverse impact on the
economic development of these regions. The failure to address certain long-standing
conflicts undermines the trust in the international security system.

22) **Organised crime constitutes a direct threat for the Slovak Republic.**
Using technological progress and new communication methods, it endeavours to
penetrate all spheres of public life. Its main fields of operation are illegal production
and distribution of drugs, migration, human trafficking, prostitution, computer piracy,
thefts of intellectual property, financial crime, etc. International organised crime is a
source of financial and human resources for terrorism, is involved in the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, and actively exploits regional instability resulting
from conflicts and weakened authority of failed states. As a global phenomenon, it
threatens not only security and economic stability of states, but it also contributes to
destabilisation of the global economic order. Its activities undermine integrity of the
states, pose a risk for the functioning, independence, constitutional and democratic
character of their bodies, and financial institutions. Organised crime also uses and
spreads the corruption and creates an illegal economy.

23) Computerisation of the society has reached a high level and keeps
growing. High-performance technical systems, revolutionary information and
communication technologies, increasingly faster transmission, and global
accessibility of data, are the trends that transform post-industrial society into an
information society. **Vulnerability of information and communication systems,**
their overloading, unauthorised access to information, spread of computer viruses,
and misinformation constitute growing threats for the Slovak Republic.

24) Europe faces the threat of **illegal and uncontrolled migration fuelled**
mainly by adverse socio-economic situation and population growth in its neighbouring
regions. Combined with the surge of a populist wave and with inexistent or
inadequate integration capacity of the EU, this creates preconditions for the growth of
intolerance that hinders the satisfaction of the need for legal migration as such. Up to
this date, the Slovak Republic has only been a transit territory for migrants. However,
its economic growth in the forthcoming years may increase the threat of illegal and
uncontrollable migration; moreover, the Slovak Republic is gradually becoming also a


-----

final-destination state. At the same time, illegal migration is often associated with
various forms of organised crime.

25) **The activities of foreign intelligence services aimed against the**
interests of the Slovak Republic, using both, traditional and non-traditional methods,
new technologies, and taking interest in all the spheres of life of the society,
represent a permanent security threat for the Slovak Republic. By accession of the
Slovak Republic into the NATO and the EU structures, it is reasonable to expect that
such activities of the third-state services, which are not members of the Euroatlantic
structures, will intensify.

26) Continued globalisation has both positive and negative implications for
the Slovak Republic. Unpreparedness of the state for a flexible response to
globalisation constitutes a major security challenge. Globalisation gives a rise to the
phenomena and processes that are outside of the state control, erodes the difference
between internal and external security, and blurs the lines between domestic and
foreign policy. Global economic operators have an ever-greater influence on
developments in the world. The information technologies boom and wide Internet
availability facilitate an access to weapons systems and production instructions, and
to other types of know-how needed to plan and carry out the attacks. Financial
markets operating on a global scale enable terrorist organisations to transfer money
without any involvement or knowledge of the states.

27) Globalisation is also directly linked with the **increasing influence of**
**non-state entities** on security and stability in the world. States are gradually losing
their monopoly position to guarantee their own security and the use of force. The
ability of a state, an entity under international law, to act as a key player in
international relations has been challenged by non-state groups, organisations, and
supranational networks.

28) The deepening economic imbalances in the world represent a source
of growing tensions and instability and contribute to the emergence of security risks.
Economic and social backwardness of less-developed states and regions results in
large disparities in the standard of living of their populations, and ultimately breeds
dissatisfaction and radicalism. Unbalanced economic development creates fertile
conditions for extremism and terrorism, abuse of religious beliefs and traditions,
growing religious fanaticism, emergence of authoritarian regimes, and illegal
migration. These differences often create a feeling of endangerment, and lead to
attacks against new democratic institutions, civil freedoms, development of economy
and culture, or at least to their considerable restrictions.

29) Growing globalisation, integration, and labour migration result also in
the perception that the standard of living, culture, and the identity of a population is
being endangered. This often encourages **radical nationalism and intolerance,**
frequently fuelled by political populism. Radical movements use a political
organisation and state-of-the-art technologies to spread extremist nationalistic,
political, and religious fanaticism.

30) Increasing demand for energy and raw materials, intensity of industrial
sectors, and growing demands for a quality of life deepen the dependency of states


-----

**on vital resources including food, and increase the likelihood of emergence of raw**
material and energy crises. Non-renewability of the most resources makes this
dependency even greater. High dependency on steady supplies of raw materials,
energies, non-renewable resources and their transport may jeopardise not only
economic prosperity and stability of the state, but also its security. Competition for
these resources and raw materials may lead even to armed conflicts. Irrational and
ineffective exploitation of natural resources may result in their depletion and
irreversible damage to the environment.

31) **Natural disasters, accidents and catastrophes represent a**
permanent large-scale threat to the lives and property because of their
unpredictability, nature, and consequences. **Environmental changes, air pollution,**
shortage of drinking water, and disruption of natural ecosystems result in the
deterioration and even endangerment of life on Earth.

32) **Unbalanced demographic development has an adverse influence on**
the social system, which may lose its ability to function, thus endangering social
stability in the state. Migration is an important factor in the social demographic
development. Globalisation increases the potential for a rapid **dissemination of**
**infectious diseases.**

33) Security threats and challenges are dynamic and intertwined, and are
subject to change, related to local, regional, and global conditions.

**III. Security Policy of the Slovak Republic**

34) **The key objective of the Slovak Republic’s security policy is to**
**guarantee the security of the state and its citizens in a stable and predictable**
**security environment.**

35) To attain this objective, the Slovak Republic will apply the following
principles: sovereign right to guarantee security of the state and its citizens; right to
an individual and collective self-defence; indivisibility of security; solidarity and
engagement; prevention of potential threats and conflicts; preference for peaceful
means of conflict resolution; effective functioning of the system of international
standards; coordination of common actions of the international community;
comprehensive approach to ensure security of citizens and of the state; the use of all
available national and international instruments and means in conformity with its legal
system and commitments; credibility of the state in the system of international
relations and security; information and active participation of citizens.

36) Effectiveness of the Slovak Republic’s security policy is based on: the
effective state apparatus, active efforts of the Slovak Republic in the international
context, degree of cooperation between state authorities and local and regional selfgovernment, non-governmental organisations, legal and physical persons; the
degree to which its citizens identify with security objectives; and the ability of the
government to garner support of the general population for these objectives.


-----

37) An important component of the Slovak Republic’s security policy is its
**security system. This consists of a multi-faceted complex comprising foreign policy,**
economic, defence, internal security, social, rescue, and environmental instruments
and their mutual links. The basic prerequisite for the management, construction, and
development of the security system of the Slovak Republic is an effectively
functioning system of legislative, executive, and judicial branches. These branches
are responsible for both, the development and functionality of crisis management
tools, and for the timely adoption and implementation of measures aimed to
guarantee the security of citizens and of the state.

38) The development of the security system of the Slovak Republic will take
into account the Slovak Republic’s security potential and evaluate its security
environment. The security system of the Slovak Republic will have the capacity to:
secure an uniform system of management in all crisis situations; identify emerging
crisis situations and carry out early warning; analyse the impact of a crisis situation
on the security interests of the Slovak Republic and propose the necessary steps that
the Slovak Republic should take in order to face the situation most effectively;
prevent the emergence of crisis situations and, should they arise, eliminate them right
at the outset; respond to the most probable risks, make adjustments in the light of
changes in the security situation, including response to unexpected threats; secure
rapid elimination of the consequences of a crisis situation and restore the initial
conditions; and ensure continuity of the state’s functioning.

39) Traditional instruments of security policy of the Slovak Republic are its
**Foreign Service and the armed forces. Other instruments include:** **intelligence**
**services;** **armed security corps** (police corps, railway police, corps of prison and
court guard); **security corps** (customs administration corps); **rescue corps and**
**rescue services** (fire and rescue service, mining rescue service, mountain rescue
service and medical emergency services); economic mobilisation entities; entities
**operating on the financial market** (banking, capital market, insurance) and the
**institution responsible for the protection of classified data.**

40) The other instruments for the implementation of the security policy
include **international and regional institutions and associations that the Slovak**
Republic is a member (the UN, the EU, NATO, the OSCE, the OECD, the Council of
Europe, the Visegrad Group, the Central European Initiative and others), **non-**
**governmental organisations,** **international agreements, conventions, treaties,**
**norms and standards, and the media.**

41) In the pursuance of its security interests, the Slovak Republic is
determined to use all security policy instruments in compliance with the international
law and its international contractual and political commitments.

**Security of the State and its Citizens**

42) The security policy of the Slovak Republic will enable the Slovak
Republic to flexibly respond to the changing security threats and challenges, aiming
for limiting and eliminating their negative impact on the security of the state and its
citiyens. While implementing its security policy, the Slovak Republic will assure that


-----

individuals are guaranteed safety and basic living conditions, and that they are
protected from violent threats threatening their rights, safety, and lives.

43) The Slovak Republic will also create conditions for an active
involvement of its citizens in the implementation of its security policy through the
education and raising awareness of the professional and general public. The
government will pay attention to an active provision of information concerning
security and security environment, take measures to guarantee security of the state
and its citizens in order to improve the level of transparency and understanding of the
security policy.

44) The Slovak Republic condemns all forms of terrorism irrespective of its
origin and its ideological, political, ethnic or religious underpinnings, engaging them in
counter-terrorism both, individually and as a part of the international community. The
Slovak Republic will develop and implement legislative and institutional framework for
the fight against terrorism in accordance with its national Action Plan, in order to
expand the capabilities of Slovak intelligence services, specialised units of the Police
Corps and authorities active in criminal procedure for the prevention, detection,
investigation and prosecution of criminal offences of terrorism. This shall improve
coordination between the transmission of information and cooperation with partner
security services, state authorities and institutions in other countries in the areas of
prevention, identification of perpetrators, verification, investigation and prosecution of
terrorist acts. The Slovak Republic will make an effort to restrict an access of
terrorists to financial and material resources and weapons, mainly to the weapons of
mass destruction. Possession of WMD by terrorists represents an acute and high risk
to which the Slovak Republic will respond adequately, including active preventing
disarmament, even involving the use of military force in cooperation with its partners
and allies. The Slovak Republic will guarantee the security of its critical infrastructure
from terrorist attacks.

45) The Slovak Republic will conduct active policy of global armament and
disarmament control aimed, as a priority, at the fight against **proliferation of**
**weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and the means of deployment. It will support**
all efforts that aim to enhance effectiveness, comprehensiveness, universality,
verifiability and applicability of the existing international standards in this field. It will
support effective enforcement of sanctions and the development of new instruments
in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation of WMDs. Its armament and
disarmament control policy will continue to be focused also on the area of
conventional weapons. Using the instruments such as the licensing policy and export
control of military material and dual-use technologies of nuclear, chemical, and
biological nature, the Slovak Republic will prevent their misuse (use) for other than
intended purposes. The Slovak Republic will coordinate its policy and activities in this
field through multilateral regimes of export controls and initiatives aimed at the
prevention of unlawful acquisition of high-risk goods, materials, and other items of
military significance. It will make all possible efforts and take measures, in
cooperation with NATO, the EU and other international organisations, to minimise the
consequences of the potential use of WMDs against the citizens of the Slovak
Republic, its armed forces engaged in operations abroad, and against our allies. It
will take measures that are necessary to strengthen the protection of its citizens and


-----

its territory against all possible use of WMDs, and will take part in the missile defence
systems and programmes.

46) The Slovak Republic will actively help restore basic functions of **failed**
**states. In fulfilling this goal, the Slovak Republic will pursue, as appropriate, the**
policy of assistance and of sanctions. The Slovak Republic will support the adoption
of effective instruments by regional and international structures to address the
economic, social, and political reasons for the failure of states. The Slovak Republic
will provide development assistance with a view to support economic transformation
and the development of democratic structures of failed states. When providing
assistance aimed to build democratic institutions and the civil society, the Slovak
Republic will actively cooperate with non-governmental organisations and citizens’
associations.

47) The Slovak Republic will actively contribute to the prevention of
**regional conflicts and their escalation, participate in their elimination and in the**
restoration of stability, and support active protection of the civilian population of
conflict regions. Prevention of such threats, resolution of conflicts, and subsequent
reconstruction of affected regions are impossible without the involvement of
international organisations reinforcing one another, mainly the UN, NATO, the EU
and the OSCE. The Slovak Republic will support all efforts aimed to enhance the
effectiveness of such international organisations, their capacity to act and ability to
prevent and resolve regional conflicts, and will take active part in the crisis and postcrisis management. The Slovak Republic will support the adoption of international
standards that will enable a more effective resolution of internal conflicts. The Slovak
Republic will contribute to these goals through its military and civilian capabilities and
through development assistance in line with its possibilities, interests, commitments
and priorities, and in compliance with the relevant concepts of participation of the
Slovak Republic in international crisis management.

48) The Slovak Republic will continue to create and strengthen the legal,
economic, media environment, and the means of repression designed to prevent and
suppress **organised crime. Intelligence services, police, prosecution, and judicial**
authorities will actively fight against organised crime and corruption at all levels. The
Slovak Republic will strengthen legal certainties of its citizens related to the
protection of private property, and increase emphasis on the protection of public
property, and public order. The Slovak Republic will support the international
cooperation of national law enforcement structures and make an effective use of
international structures for fighting organised crime.

49) The Slovak Republic will adopt measures to reduce **vulnerability of**
**critical** **infrastructure** **elements,** **with** **emphasis** **on** **information** **and**
**communication systems, and to minimise negative consequences of attacks**
against them. It will continue to work towards ensuring security and integrity of
information and communication systems, in particular the systems that are essential
for securing basic functions of the state. It will continue to cooperate with foreign
partners in order to maximise the security of the systems of mutual communication
and information exchange, in particular in the area of the transmission and protection
of classified data.


-----

50) The Slovak Republic will adopt all measures aimed to reduce **illegal**
**and uncontrollable migration and to eliminate human trafficking. It will harmonise**
its policies and legislation towards aliens and asylum seekers with the other states of
the Euroatlantic community. It will support international cooperation in the protection
of borders and will ensure a timely and full implementation of measures necessary for
the accession of the Slovak Republic to the Schengen Agreement within the EU
framework.

51) The Slovak Republic will conduct an adequate protection of classified
information, disclosure of activities of foreign intelligence services aimed against
the interests of the Slovak Republic, and reduction of vulnerability of the Slovak
Republic and other allies caused by such activities. On the basis of partnership, it will
deepen cooperation with the NATO and the EU intelligence services in the areas of
mutual interest.

52) The Slovak Republic perceives **globalisation as an important factor**
that shapes the security environment. In its security policy, the Slovak Republic will
take measures that will enable it to use its developmental potential. At the same time,
it will adopt measures to minimise its negative consequences, in particular
environmental degradation, excessive exploitation of non-renewable resources, and
unbalanced economic and social development of regions.

53) The Slovak Republic will actively cooperate with **non-state actors**
(non-governmental organisations, private sector) in addressing the problems of failed
states, regional and domestic conflicts, the problem of arms trade, human trafficking,
generating and distributing humanitarian and development assistance, and in other
fields. At the same time, it will take part in eliminating the influence of paramilitary
structures whose objective is to weaken or remove legitimate and lawful government.

54) The Slovak Republic will actively participate in putting an end to the
**deepening of economic imbalances in the world by implementing the objectives**
of the World Trade Organisation (WTO). The Slovak Republic will contribute to the
liberalisation of the international trade by applying the principles of transparency and
predictability, the principle of increasing the involvement of the developing and less
developed states in the international systems of economic cooperation. The Slovak
Republic as a member of the EU supports the conclusion of the bilateral regional
economic and trade agreements with the Third World states. The trade policy of the
Slovak Republic will be in accordance with the provision of development assistance
by the Slovak Republic. The Slovak Republic will provide such assistance to the
developing states directly (bilaterally), or through the intermediary of multilateral
donors; thus contributing to the elimination of economic imbalances in the world.

55) The Slovak Republic will identify and punish every expression of
**radical nationalism, intolerance, political, and religious extremism. Moreover,**
the Slovak Republic will adopt preventive measures in the social field, education and
in the shaping of public opinion with a view of promoting tolerant coexistence of
nations, ethnic and religious groups in the society, and in the world.

56) The Slovak Republic will reduce negative consequences of
**dependence on vital raw material resources by reducing energy and raw material**


-----

intensity of its economy, through the diversification of these resources, ecological
exploitation of natural resources, better use of renewable resources, and also
through its concrete participation in improving the security and stability of the regions
and countries that extract and transport such commodities. The Slovak Republic will
meet the NATO and the EU’s requirements regarding the energy security, mainly in
terms of crude oil. In parallel, the Slovak Republic will minimise the risk of its
economy failure caused by the lack of stockpiling of the strategic and/or vital raw
materials (including foodstuffs). The Slovak Republic will adopt all necessary
measures to enable the state authorities to use available instruments for minimising
negative consequences of the weakened state security in order to restore the initial
conditions.

57) The Slovak Republic will protect the environment both in its immediate
vicinity and on the global scale. The Slovak Republic will continue to strengthen the
measures to guarantee the security of its own nuclear installations. In the
environmental field and in an effort to improve its ecological security, the Slovak
Republic will actively operate within the cross border cooperation framework. It will
step up its efforts in the area of environmental monitoring and in ensuring effective
crisis management in case of natural disasters, accidents, and catastrophes.

58) The Slovak Republic, as a part of the international system, will create
prerequisites and adopt measures, mainly through the World Health Organisation,
necessary to ensure its readiness to identify, verify, and respond to the risk of
**epidemics in order to minimise the impact of epidemics on its citizens, the economy**
of the Slovak Republic and on the other states. The Slovak Republic will provide an
active assistance to those developing states, where the health system and available
resources are not adequate for an epidemic prevention. The Slovak Republic will also
prepare all necessary measures to protect its citizens from bioterrorist attacks.

59) The Slovak Republic will adopt all necessary measures to improve its
negative **demographic development trends. In an effort to achieve balanced**
demographic development, it will take steps to improve the socio-economic situation
of young families, upgrade the quality of healthcare, and promote healthy lifestyles.

Stability and Predictability of the Security Environment

60) The security of the state and its citizens can be achieved only in a
stable security environment with predictable development trends. Such environment
is created by the means of firmly anchoring the Slovak Republic within the system of
international standards and institutions that help to create stable and transparent
environment and increase its trustworthiness in international relations.

61) The Slovak Republic will conduct a transparent security policy designed
to strengthen its foreign policy and economic influence on the international
environment, and its credibility and recognition in the system of international relations
and security, so that the Slovak Republic is not perceived as a threat or as a source
of threats.


-----

62) In the pursuit of its security interests, the Slovak Republic will use its
membership in the international and regional organisations and associations, and will
improve their capabilities, flexibility and their mutually reinforcing cooperation.

63) In response to the new security threats and the unpredictability of the
security environment, the Slovak Republic will also support the creation of _ad hoc_
political or military partnerships and coalitions with the aim to avert or secure effective
defence against such potential threats.

64) International standard-setting institutions, lead by the UN, play an
irreplaceable role in maintaining the transparency and stability of the security
situation in the world. Changes in the nature of security threats must be reflected in
the very form of security institutions and in the international law. The Slovak Republic
will advocate universal validity of the existing international standards, improvements
in the system of their implementation, observation of the commitments arising from
them, including through the introduction and strengthening of verification instruments,
and the role of relevant institutions. This approach will also evaluate the adherence to
international standards and, where appropriate, imposition of effective sanctions in
case of violations of international conventions, norms, and standards. The Slovak
Republic will support all necessary steps aiming for further improvements of the
effectiveness and comprehensive character of such instruments, and adoption of new
international standards, which are necessary to strengthen security and stability.

65) The security policy of the Slovak Republic is based on the principle of
indivisibility of security. The security of the Slovak Republic is interlinked with the
security of other states within the Euroatlantic area, and it is directly related to the
global security. The level of our security reflects our ability to cooperate and
participate in the resolution of conflicts beyond our borders, wherever there is a
source of threat or instability. Security of the Slovak Republic is not limited only to the
defence of its territory. In the spirit of solidarity and in cooperation with the
international community, the Slovak Republic is committed to take an active stance in
guaranteeing security and stability, and to alleviate the consequences of crises
afflicting other states and nations. The Slovak Republic will consult security issues
with the objective of building consensus between the allies and partners concerning
the way of addressing common security threats.

66) The Slovak Republic perceives the freedom of individuals and
democracy as guarantees of security in the world. The Slovak Republic will support
the observation of human rights and encourage spreading and deepening of freedom
and democracy, building of states governed by the rule of law and civil societies in
the world, and of institutions fostering these values. The Slovak Republic will support
the intervention of the international community in cases where a state fails to ensure
protection to its citizens or deliberately denies the rights and freedoms to its citizens,
mainly in context with humanitarian crises or genocide.

67) The Slovak Republic guarantees its security and active development of
the security environment mainly within the framework of its NATO and the EU
membership, in cooperation with its allies and partners. NATO and the EU
enlargement resulted in the stabilisation of the Euroatlantic security area; however,


-----

persistent security threats originating beyond the NATO and the EU borders may
have a decisive impact on the security of the Slovak Republic.

68) The Slovak Republic’s NATO membership constitutes a guarantee of its
security and it is an instrument for enforcing its security interests. The Slovak
Republic will act on NATO behalf, which the only remaining key platform for
multilateral and bilateral cooperation in the security and military fields in the
Euroatlantic space. The Slovak Republic will endeavour to make NATO the key
forum of transatlantic dialogue, of political and security cooperation between the
European and North American members of the Alliance, in order to preserve its
internal unity and mutual solidarity of its members. The Slovak Republic will support
the transformation of NATO and its adaptation to meet new types of threats and
challenges. The Slovak Republic will reform and build its security system in order to
be able to participate in the development of the necessary NATO capabilities,
including participation in the “out of area” missions and operations. The Slovak
Republic will continue to perceive further NATO’s enlargement in order to strengthen
the zone of security and stability within the Euroatlantic space. The Slovak Republic
will develop its cooperation with the countries participating in Euroatlantic partnership
structures and the countries of the Mediterranean Dialogue and of the Istanbul
Cooperation Initiative. The Slovak Republic will support high-level NATO and EU
meetings as well as their day-to-day working meetings as an expression of their
crucial strategic partnership. It will support the development of an effective dialogue
and cooperation between NATO and other international institutions, mainly the UN
and the OSCE.

69) The Slovak Republic will jointly formulate and implement the common
foreign and security policy of the **EU. The Slovak Republic will contribute to the**
implementation of the European integration objectives and to the creation of a
civilizational, civic, legal, internal-security and economic space, which will be capable
of its own dynamic and sustainable development. The Slovak Republic will assert the
fulfilment of the objectives laid down in the European security strategy, and will
strengthen its crisis management capabilities with the objective of contributing to the
EU-led operations and missions. It will support building the European Security and
Defence Policy operational capacities in order to ensure their complementarity with
the capabilities of NATO and with our interests in NATO. In harmony with the EU
solidarity clause, the Slovak Republic will help the states attacked or threatened by
terrorist attacks or hit by natural disasters. The Slovak Republic will support the
development of activities of the European Defence Agency with emphasis on full
involvement of the Slovak industrial and technological base in building the European
defence market. The Slovak Republic will support further enlargement of the EU,
which is one of the most effective ways of overcoming instability and achieving
prosperity within the united Europe. The Slovak Republic will contribute to the
formulation and implementation of common internal security policy including asylum,
migration, and visa policy.

70) The Slovak Republic will support the **UN reforms, which will enhance**
the ability of this organisation to resolve crisis situations in the world, improve the
organisation of its activities, and improve the effectiveness of its cooperation with
regional organisations, in particular NATO and the EU. The Slovak Republic will
support the adoption of universal international standards, mainly in the area of the


-----

fight against organised crime, terrorism, armament and disarmament control,
reduction of tensions between the developed and the developing world, observation
of human rights, and environmental upgrading. The Slovak Republic will continue to
take part at the UN peacekeeping and humanitarian operations.

71) The Slovak Republic will advocate in favour of a consistent use of the
existing instruments of the OSCE. It will support the OSCE’s reform with the objective
to adapt its activities to the new security environment in the world in conformity with
the OSCE Strategy to Address Threats to Security and Stability in the 21[st] century
and the principle of balance between its three – human rights, security and economic
– dimensions. The Slovak Republic will take an active part at OSCE missions.

72) As a member of the **Council of Europe, the Slovak Republic will**
actively endeavour to make use of the potential of this paneuropean forum for
addressing political issues and the protection of human rights. The Slovak Republic
will use the **OECD as a platform to acquire and exchange experience with the**
economically and politically most developed countries of the world. Regarding
regional groupings, the Slovak Republic attaches and will continue to attach special
significance to the Visegrad Group because of common interests and objectives and
the efforts at safeguarding stability and development of the Central European region.
The objective of Slovakia’s membership in the Central European Initiative is to share
concrete experiences with the countries that have an ambition to integrate into the
Euroatlantic structures.

73) A special place in the enforcement of security interests of the Slovak
Republic will be assigned to the relationships between the Slovak Republic and the
**United States. The U.S. is a strategic ally of the Slovak Republic. The Slovak**
Republic will strive for an active involvement of the United States in the building of a
stable and secure Europe.

74) The **neighbour states represent a special significance for the Slovak**
Republic, which we are tied to by our NATO and the EU membership, common
values, interests, and close cultural and historic ties. In the relationships with these
countries, the Slovak Republic will conduct the policy of good and mutually beneficial
neighbour relations. An important security factor in the framework of the region is the
application of European standards for the protection of national minorities and
compatriots.

75) The Slovak Republic supports **Ukraine as an independent and**
sovereign state within its current borders. The development of its plural democracy,
political and economic stability, which are prerequisites for regional security and for
security of the Slovak Republic, is crucial. Our support will advocate the necessity for
the continuation of active dialogue with Ukraine as an important partner for the transit
of strategic raw materials. The Slovak Republic is committed to Ukraine’s NATO and
the EU membership once it has fulfilled the relevant criteria. It will support joint
actions aimed against organised crime, illegal migration, and measures to guarantee
security and gradual liquidation of military equipment, weapons and ammunition in
Ukraine.


-----

76) The Slovak Republic will support both the European and Euroatlantic
integration of the **Western Balkans. It will contribute to the political and security**
stabilisation of the countries in the region, and to the elimination of security threats
originating in this area that result from slow economic and socio-political changes,
uncertainty in the building of multiethnic societies and insufficient progress in the
building of functioning governments in certain states. The Slovak Republic will
contribute to prevention of the penetration of organised crime, expansion of arms
trade and of trafficking in drugs and people, terrorism, and illegal migration from that
region.

77) The Slovak Republic will advocate for a broader involvement of the
states of the **Commonwealth of Independent States in terms of cooperation with**
the transatlantic and the European structures. The Slovak Republic will support the
strengthening of democracy and rule of law in Belarus, and the resolution of conflicts
and crises in Moldova (Transnistria), in the South Caucasus and Central Asian
regions aiming to increase their security and stability, taking into an account their
strategic raw material resources and their key role in the fight against terrorism,
spread of drugs, and illegal migration.

78) The Slovak Republic considers **Russia, owing to its natural resources,**
and its economic, human and military – especially nuclear – potential, to be an
important entity that will influence the security situation in the Eurasian region. It will
build its relations with Russia on the principle of mutually beneficial economic
cooperation. As the NATO and the EU member, the Slovak Republic will support the
development of strategic partnership between these organisations and Russia, which
includes an open dialogue regarding the sources of instability and potential security
threats. The Slovak Republic will contribute to the continuation of political
transformation, consolidation of democracy, and economic reforms in Russia.

79) In shaping its security environment, the Slovak Republic will pay an
increased attention to the **Mediterranean region. It will become more actively**
involved in addressing the problems of the **Middle and Near East. The Slovak**
Republic will support the strengthening of democracy and of the rule of law in these
regions. The Slovak Republic considers peaceful resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict to be a strategic priority for the European security policy. The Slovak Republic
will take a committed approach to the stabilisation of the Middle East, which is a
continuous source of religious extremism, terrorism, international crime, illegal
migration, and a possible spread of WMDs. In the Mediterranean region, the Slovak
Republic will contribute to overcoming economic stagnation and poverty, and to the
suppression of the spread of illegal migration, organised crime, and terrorism to
Europe.

80) Regarding the global security environment in Africa, **Asia, and Latin**
**America,** the Slovak Republic will adequately contribute to eliminate regional and
internal religious and ethnic conflicts, reducing poverty, improving health situation,
curbing illegal migration and drugs trafficking, and non-proliferation of WMDs and the
means of their deployment. The Slovak Republic will support the strengthening of
democracy, the rule of law, and market economy in these regions.


-----

**Conclusion**

81) The Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic will be revised as needed
to reflect crucial changes in the security environment, new developments in the
security policy of the Slovak Republic in the light of its strategic interests, or new
possibilities of and needs for guaranteeing the security of citizens and of the state.

82) The Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic is complemented with
other partial strategies and concepts in individual fields of security, including the
Defence Strategy of the Slovak Republic.

83) This Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic replaces the Security
Strategy of the Slovak Republic approved by the National Council of the Slovak
Republic on 27 March 2001.


-----

