-----

-----

# Table of Contents

##### FOREWORD


-----

# Foreword

ardly any area in the modern world is evolving as quickly as the challenges posed by the state‘s
cybersecurity governance. A thorough setting of processes, procedures and objectives needs to be fully

### H

adapted to the dynamics of this trend.

A new National Cybersecurity Strategy is emerging at a time when it may seem too late for taking many
measures. Various attackers make great strides every day. It is possible that even at this moment anyone can
be a target of a cyberattack without realizing it.

The state and its critical infrastructure have been a target of both state and non-state actors for a long period.
Today, cybersecurity incidents are often sophisticated and creative. Approach to them should be exactly the
same. The intention of the National Cybersecurity Strategy for the years 2021-2025 is simple – to prepare and
bring Slovakia to the level at which it is always one step ahead of a potential threat.

Each of us wants a modern, digitized country in which instead of standing in rows, we can arrange
comfortably everything from our home or offi ce. However, the comfort of modern conveniences requires
even greater vigilance. The document names the principles on which the strategy of the Slovak Republic is
based, identifi es cyberspace threats and clearly defi nes the objectives or directions that the country must
take in protecting not only the virtual world.

The vision of the National Security Authority is to strengthen and create an open, free and secure cyberspace
for everybody.

A precondition for success in collective security is in particular a common interaction. Each entity is only as
strong as its weakest element. Any strategy is essentially intended to unite individuals into groups, groups
into organisations and organisations into a system with a common objective.

The National Cyber Security Strategy, elaborated by the National Security Authority, is therefore intended for
anyone involved in any way in building a cybersecurity governance system of the Slovak Republic. It is and
will be the umbrella document on which the basic direction of the country in this fi eld is based.

**Roman Konečný**

Director of the National Security Authority


-----

# 1. Introduction

he modernization of society through information
and communication technologies, its digitalization

### T

and the development of innovative services is an
undeniable fact that has become a natural part of
our lives. Nevertheless, the development that comes
with expansion of opportunities must be balanced by
responsibility for the risks that emerge simultaneously
as a forfeit for the benefi ts of the digital society.

Cybersecurity is a state in which information systems
and services are resilient to current threats and
vulnerabilities, and ready to detect and handle
cybersecurity incidents, recover data and processes,
and minimize consequences. Nonetheless,
cybersecurity is not an issue concerning only particular
organizations and entities that protect their assets by
taking appropriate measures.

Informatization of the public sector, automation
of manufacturing and other processes that were
performed manually in the past, constant development
and easy availability of technologies, their ease of
use in a wide range of common activities create a
space in which, apart from undeniable advantages,
threats arise, targeting critical and sensitive systems
and services of the state. They can result in a breach
of citizen‘s trust in the government, cause extensive
fi nancial and economic damages, and potentially
cause injuries or a loss of life.

The information and cybersecurity governance
system, the goal of which is to ensure a high degree
of resilience of systems and services as well as
eff ective detection and response capabilities, is a
strategic security interest of the Slovak Republic.
A comprehensive concept of information and
cybersecurity governance, strategic direction based
on clear principles and exactly defi ned strategic
objectives are the basis for a well-developed system
that can fl exibly respond to current threats and ensure
a high level of cybersecurity at national level. This is the
concept of the National Cybersecurity Strategy for the
years 2021 - 2025.

The history shows that the National Cybersecurity
Strategy for the years 2021-2025 (hereinafter referred
to as the „National Strategy“) is not the fi rst strategic
document created at the national level. In 2007, a
strategy of information security was created together
with an action plan, and subsequently the Cyber
Security Concept of the Slovak Republic for 20152020 (hereinafter referred to as the „Concept“) was
introduced, which was the fi rst comprehensive
plan defi ning the cybersecurity principles, rules
and objectives. The measures framing the Concept
focused on creating an institutional framework
for governance, adopting appropriate legislation,
developing basic mechanisms for cyberspace


governance, developing an education system, creating
a risk management culture, active international
collaboration and supporting science and research.
Along with the Concept, the Action Plan for the
Implementation of the Cyber Security Concept of the
Slovak Republic for 2015-2020 (hereinafter referred
to as the „Action Plan“) was created, defi ning specifi c
tasks related to individual measures, entities in charge
and responsibilities of participating bodies, as well as
the time frame for the task completion. Within the time
period defi ned for the Concept and the Action Plan, it
was possible to create a stable institutional framework
for cybersecurity governance, adopt a historically fi rst
comprehensive legislation in the fi eld of cybersecurity
and to create specialized entities for cybersecurity
incident handling.

Cyber threats as well as cybersecurity are constantly
evolving. New targets and vectors of cyberattacks
are constantly emerging, and are becoming more
widespread, more frequent and more sophisticated.
Some states and non-state actors resort more and
more to pursuing their goals through unfair cyber
activities. These can take several forms, including
critical infrastructure attacks, cyber espionage,
intellectual property theft, cybercrime, and
cyberattacks as part of hybrid threats. Cyberspace
is increasingly becoming an area of strategic
confrontation among states, refl ecting a dynamic
geopolitical environment and eff orts to change the
current international order. Technological innovations,
including cybersecurity innovations, are becoming an
instrument of confrontation and growing tensions in
the political, economic and security fi elds.

The good news is that the strategic direction of
the cybersecurity system can build upon the solid
foundations laid by the Concept and developed by its
Action Plan, even though some of the goals have not
yet been achieved.

The new strategy expands on the previously carried
out activities and its ambition is to respond in a
modern way to current and future security threats,
defi ne the principles of the cybersecurity system and
to determine strategic objectives, the achievement
of which will ensure a higher level of security in the
cyberspace of the Slovak Republic. The National
Strategy is intended for all entities that participate
in building the cybersecurity system of the Slovak
Republic and is a key document from which the basic
direction of the Slovak Republic in this area comes
from.

The vision of the National Strategy is to strengthen
and create an open, free and secure cyberspace for
everybody.


-----

# 2. Principles

###### ybersecurity of the Slovak Republic is addressed by a complex system that includes not only regulations but also practical activities, such as risk management, detection

# C

###### and cybersecurity incident handling, system recovery, education, dissemination of security awareness and, last but not least, research and development of cybersecurity tools and processes. In order for such a large-scale system to work and for the various stakeholders to work together to maintain and develop it, the fundamental principles, based on the democratic values of the rule of law and refl ecting a modern approach to national cybersecurity and international cooperation in this fi eld, must be respected.

##### 2.1 Fundamental human rights and freedoms come fi rst in cyberspace


yberspace is a place where an increasing number
of users meet with the ongoing digitalization, where

### C

they not only realize their needs, but also pass on part
of their identity and privacy. We use the Internet for
communication with our families and friends, purchase
of consumer goods, paying bills or for managing our
smart homes. Cyberspace is also a special operational
domain, recognized by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.

Like the physical world, the cyberspace is not an
ideal place as well. In the last two decades, we have
witnessed an increasing frequency of cyberattacks,
greater sophistication of attackers and increasing
losses on the part of victims. The Slovak Republic
promises to respect fundamental human rights as
defi ned in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and promotes the position that human rights are
enforceable both in the „offl ine“ and in the „online“


space. The Slovak Republic upholds and enforces
this position in the long term and commits to other
states with the same value system, and also supports
the responsible behavior of states and a uniform
interpretation of international law in cyberspace.

We have to consider the cyberspace as the equivalent
of the physical world, together with the application of
clear rules that will respect the fundamental human
rights and freedoms stipulated by the constitution,
including the right to privacy, so that it is not only
secure but also open, free and accessible to
everybody concerned. The security of cyberspace
must be interconnected to its freedom, and
fundamental human rights and freedoms in the digital
space can only be guaranteed if the digital sovereignty
of the states of the European Union as a whole is
preserved, which also ensures the independence and
sovereignty in cyberspace.


-----

##### 2.2 Cybersecurity governance system based on legality and mechanisms  of the security system of the Slovak Republic


he Slovak Republic is a country governed by
democratic values ensuring the rule of law. The

### T

cybersecurity governance system therefore respects
the principles that are inherent in the Slovak Republic
and which create an environment where the laws,
rights and freedoms of citizens are respected. The
cybersecurity governance system fully respects
the Constitution of the Slovak Republic and the
applicable and eff ective laws, while also relying on
the Government‘s Policy Statement in the strategic
objectives and tasks of the National Strategy.


The National Strategy has a legal basis in Act No.
69/2018 Coll. on Cybersecurity and on Amendments
and Supplements to certain Acts (hereinafter referred
to as the „Act“ or „Act on Cybersecurity“) and refl ects
the mandatory content enshrined in Directive (EU)
2016/1148 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 6 July 2016 concerning measures for a high
common level of security of network and information
systems across the Union and has been transposed
into this Act. It also refl ects the strategic direction in the
fi eld of security and observes the principles enshrined
in the Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic.


#### 2.3 Comprehensive (universal) approach to cybersecurity issue


here is no universal guide to ensure the security of
cyberspace. It is a continuous process that must

### T

react to many complex aspects. At the same time,
it is necessary to remember that the technological
progress of society and modern technologies that
penetrate our lives are developed much faster than the
rules of their safe use.

The cybersecurity issue needs to be addressed in
such a way that its solution is reliable, comprehensible
and understandable. It is not suffi cient to develop
individual cybersecurity components, but there
must be clear relation between these components,
forming a functional system. Cybersecurity is not a
stand-alone entity. It is important to understand that
ensuring a high level of cybersecurity is a means of
successful socio-economic development of society
and enhancement of the state‘s resilience to security
threats. An integrated link of cybersecurity to other


sectors, and understanding of interactions between
security and the functioning of society constitute an
essential component of the rationale and importance
of addressing the cybersecurity at national level.

Cybersecurity and information security are dedicated
to the protection of information assets. Information
security addresses the security of assets regardless
of where and how the information is processed, and
cybersecurity deals with the security of only a certain
part of information assets, namely those processed
in virtual space. Data will become information when
they acquire some signifi cance, meaning, and
mainly the value. In this context, both cybersecurity
and information security ensure the security of any
information, including personal data. The overlap
of cybersecurity and information security with the
protection of personal data is the achievement of their
objective – the protection of any data and information.


#### 2.4 Risk management as a key element of the national cybersecurity  governance system


ybersecurity measures must always be
proportionate and balanced to the risk they are

### C

designed to mitigate. Risk analysis is an essential
activity to determine the current status of assets and
threats, vulnerabilities, severity of risks and potential
impacts. Such analysis results in a quantitative
or qualitative assessment of current risks and
consequently, it is possible to identify precisely the
measures to mitigate these risks.


The cybersecurity governance system at both national
and sectoral levels is based on the risk management
approach, as a comprehensive and precise method
for identifying risks at diff erent levels of cybersecurity
governance. Risk identifi cation at diff erent levels will
allow making decisions on targeted and eff ective
measures that will not incur disproportionate costs and
will identify specifi c steps to be taken to achieve a high
level of cyberspace security.


-----

##### 2.5 Support, cooperation and prevention


ybersecurity must be understood as a common
interest of the state, its citizens, commercial

### C

and non-commercial organisations. Therefore, it
is necessary to create rules in the form of laws,
regulations, methodologies and technical standards,
but at the same time, it is necessary to create these
rules so that they are truly enforceable.

Given the nature of the cybersecurity system and
its complexity, it must be the interest of the state
to support respective involved entities in taking the


necessary measures, to cooperate with them on
creating rules and standards, as well as to educate
these entities suffi ciently and to share experience with
them. The state through its support and cooperation
makes eff orts to build a mutual trust of involved
entities. Repression and sanctions must be a means of
„ultima ratio“, i.e. an instrument that will only be used
as a last option when all other mechanisms of the
cybersecurity system fail or do not have a required
eff ect.


#### 2.6 Continuous capacity building in the fi eld of cybersecurity


yberspace, as a security environment, has an
unstable and constantly evolving nature, in which

### C

changes take place much more dynamically than
in the physical world. Therefore, the cybersecurity
governance system must adapt quickly to any
changes, existing or potential threats, as well as to
security challenges such as modern technologies and
innovative services.


Because of a constantly changing environment, it
is necessary to build continuously cybersecurity
capabilities. This activity includes, in particular,
the strengthening of professional personnel,
development of appropriate technical tools, as well
as implementation of appropriate processes for
cybersecurity governance at all levels.


-----

# 3. Threats

###### n cyberspace, there are countless threats every day that often escalate into real attacks. Although these threats and vulnerabilities vary in nature and form and their anticipation

# I

###### is almost impossible, there are several specifi c types of threats and vulnerabilities, which if not solved, assuming in the medium-term, can cause a serious breach of cybersecurity system principles. From a strategic point of view, these are the challenges that need to be adequately addressed.

##### 3.1 Continuous development of new techniques and methods of attacks


ust as security solutions evolve, the new techniques
and methods of cyberattacks also develop.

### J

The opportunities for attackers and their tools are
constantly evolving, and the response – appropriate
security tools – may be late in many cases, or
insuffi cient. Attackers respond in real time to emerging
vulnerabilities in products and services, and are
constantly improving in the use of social engineering
methods. In addition, potential attackers have a time

##### 3.2 Vulnerable users

ulnerability does not have to be only technological
in nature. Just as a computer or server can be

### V

vulnerable due to security bugs in the software or due
to misconfi guration, so the user himself can cause
the vulnerability – for example in the form of a lack of
security awareness, neglect of duties, or a low loyalty
to his employer. Incorrect user interaction, insuffi cient
risk assessment or ignorance of the basic security


advantage. Preparing for an attack, preparing the tools,
exploring the environment, and phishing campaigns
may potentially take much longer time compared to
the time available to defenders when responding to an
ongoing attack. There is also a growing trend in selling
of attacks and attack tools (so-called Hacking as a
Service), which allows less experienced attackers to
perform sophisticated and devastating attack types.

principles result in easy intrusion of the attacker into
the organisation‘s systems. This can be done by
one employee who for example will open a harmful
attachment to an e-mail or will click on a malicious link.
Rise in digitalization at the level of organisations poses
a problem with an insuffi ciently developed culture of
risk management and the dissemination of security
awareness.


-----

##### 3.3 Attacks targeting ordinary users with (cumulative) heavy fi nancial  losses


yberattacks are not limited only to business
entities and state institutions. Attacks on ordinary

### C

users, individuals, are also sensitive issues. Ordinary
users experience the distribution of a malicious code,
phishing campaigns, collection of personal data and


other similar types of attacks, whereas the loss for
each individual case may be relatively small, but
cumulatively for each type of an attack with a wide
range of victims, it can reach very high fi gures.


#### 3.4 Increasing number of technological vulnerabilities


n the vast majority of cases, vulnerability is a technical
gateway of the attacker to reach the victim if allowed

### I

by the victim. The number of vulnerabilities is growing
in direct proportion to the development of the
digital society and technological developments. The
development of most new technologies is dynamic,
with insuffi cient emphasis on security in the initial
phase of their development, as the functionality
and design take priority over security. There is also a
problem with subsequent updates of technologies

#### 3.5 Lack of professional staff

he subject of security in an organisation is not
considered as a standard, but usually only as an

### T

obligation that has to be fulfi lled by law. For this reason,
particular entities allocate a minimum number of staff
for security, who is often insuffi ciently qualifi ed, lacks
experience in risk management and application of
security measures, and lacks suffi cient support from


since due to a new functionality, new and serious
vulnerabilities emerge or technologies lose support for
updates from the manufacturer very soon after they
are launched, often present with critical vulnerabilities.
Technical vulnerabilities often play an important role in
supply chain attacks, i.e. intentional vulnerabilities left
in the product by the manufacturer or implemented
by another actor in order to exploit potentially this
vulnerability to their advantage.

the management and funding of their activities. Many
times, the organisation‘s security is addressed only
formally „on paper“, without real implementation of
basic security measures, whereas defi ned processes
are not respected or are circumvented without taking
responsibility.


#### 3.6 Lax approach to requirements arising from legislation or  standards


mplementation of security measures is a standardized
operation that is determined by law, implementing

### I

regulations or a non-legislative standard. An
insuffi ciently serious approach to such requirements
leads not only to incomprehension of the existence

#### 3.7 Low level of security awareness

wareness of dangers and risks in cyberspace is
an area that fundamentally infl uences the attitude

### A

of users entering this space and their own security.
The lack of users‘ interest in their security stems in
particular from the lack of knowledge and experience


of security measures, but also to the emergence of a
weak spot of the organisation, which then becomes
more vulnerable to attacks both from the outside and
the inside.

in cybersecurity, making them an ideal target for
attackers. In addition to this, users often lack suffi cient
knowledge in the fi eld of personal data protection,
which results in its leakage or provision without the
necessary purpose.


-----

##### 3.8 Abuse of new technologies to execute attacks


he existence and easier availability of new
technologies, such as artifi cial intelligence

### T

applications and the Internet of Things (IoT)
applications, allows attackers to execute more

##### 3.9 Weak detection

etection of cybersecurity incidents, intrusion
and attack attempts or successful attacks is a

### D

demanding process, requiring suffi cient personnel
and technical capability. At national level, several
factors enter into the process, from the legislative
framework that allows the state to carry out incident
detection activities up to the willingness of entities


sophisticated cyberattacks, increases their reach and
allows more effi cient covering of perpetrator‘s tracks
or complications of analytical activities in handling
cybersecurity incidents.

to report cybersecurity incidents. If the level of
detection and reporting of cybersecurity incidents
does not increase continuously, it may cause incorrect
conclusions leading to a reduction in cybersecurity
investments, and thereby an increase in vulnerabilities
of cyberspace users.


##### 3.10 Abuse of advanced encryption techniques in cyberattacks


ttackers use data and communication
encryption on several levels. First to protect the

### A

communication of their own attacking infrastructure,
including the victim‘s devices, so that it is very diffi cult
to decrypt such communication in real time and
to detect its purpose. However, encryption is also


used in more frequent ransomware attacks, in which
the attacker encrypts the victim‘s data in order to
block the access to them. This may result not only in
unavailability of data but also of services provided on
the devices.


-----

##### 3.11 Slow enforcement of criminal law in the fi eld of cybercrime with  uncertain outcomes


he term of cybercrime is not explicitly defi ned in
the Criminal Code or in a similar normative legal

### T

act. However, the extant Criminal Code defi nes certain
facts of crimes constituting together cybercrime.
The defi nition stipulated in the Council of Europe
Convention on Cybercrime was ratifi ed by the Slovak
Republic and will be used for the purposes of the
criminal law practice.

Not every cybersecurity incident is an act of
cybercrime, but every act of cybercrime is a
cybersecurity incident. However, the statistical
systems of prosecuting authorities do not adequately
record criminal acts for facts of crimes in the fi eld of
cybercrime which reduces a real picture of the extent
of this type of crime. This leads not only to the slow
development of criminal law in the fi eld of cybercrime,


but also to understaffi ng of personnel responsible for
detection and clarifi cation of such criminal activity.

The lack of competence of investigators to investigate
criminal acts in the fi eld of cybercrime, together with
the slow specialized training system for prosecuting
authorities and judges, lead to an unsatisfactory speed
of criminal proceedings, which often reduces the
chances to detect a perpetrator of the cybercrime.
This is also caused by the lack of experts and expert
organisations registered in the relevant expert sectors.
Another serious problem is that victims do not report
a signifi cant number of criminal acts in the fi eld of
cybercrime, and this also brings a misrepresented
picture of the extent of this crime in the Slovak
cyberspace.


##### 3.12 Attacks on critical infrastructure of the state, state authorities and  defence mechanisms with a power and political background


yberattacks are more frequently becoming a tool
of jockeying for power among states. Attacks

### C

by state and non-state actors on critical assets and
state institutions pose a real threat that can seriously
undermine the state‘s security capabilities and social
stability, or can cause signifi cant economic damages.


Cyberattacks are also a tool for espionage, the
purpose of which is to obtain sensitive or classifi ed
information of a foreign state and to gain economic,
military or other advantage. More and more states are
building off ensive capabilities in cyberspace, allowing
them to establish power or political dominance.


##### 3.13 Illegal activities beyond the cyberspace


yberspace is also used for a spectrum of activities
going beyond it. These include the dissemination

### C

of child pornography, operation of e-stores with illegal
and prohibited goods, dissemination of drug addiction
or extremist materials, as well as disinformation and
propaganda. Although cyberspace is only a means of
disseminating and sharing this content, an insuffi cient


addressing of this issue at strategic level leads to an
uncontrolled and widespread dissemination of illegal
content. Cyberspace is also a domain for hybrid threats
that can jeopardise the fundamental functioning of
state processes, weaken citizens‘ trust in the state or
cause a public nuisance.


-----

# 4. Strategic objectives

###### overnance of cybersecurity system does not only require well-defi ned rules and the implementation of necessary security measures. At national level, cybersecurity

# G

###### must be perceived as a strategic interest of the state, protecting state assets, and as one of the key services that the state provides to its citizens and entrepreneurs. The very implementation of the state‘s activities in the fi eld of cybersecurity must be based primarily on fundamental strategic principles, while at the same time it must refl ect timelessly the threats that endanger and may endanger cybersecurity and the system that governs cybersecurity at national level.

 In order for the strategic principles of cybersecurity to be met and the response to threats to be suffi cient, clear and measurable strategic objectives need to be set, and once they are met, it will be possible to objectively assess their impact on improvement of the cybersecurity system in the Slovak Republic.

 Based on strategic principles and defi ned threats, the following strategic objectives have been identifi ed.

##### 4.1 Reliable state prepared for threats


ybersecurity is the responsibility of every citizen
of the Slovak Republic, however security cannot

### C

function without the existence of mechanisms at
national level that determine the cybersecurity policy,
its governance system, as well as processes for
detection and handling of cybersecurity incidents,
professional capacity building and dissemination of


situational and security awareness. At the same time,
building trustworthiness requires from the state to
carry out the above activities in accordance with the
Constitution of the Slovak Republic and other laws and
apply fundamental human rights and freedoms only to
a necessary extent.


-----

##### 4.1.1 Initial conditions

he state is gradually building cybersecurity
capacities and capabilities, addressing in particular

### T

the shortage of professional personnel.

The state relies on the citizen being the end user of
any security services, but without providing him with
suffi cient information on how to use these services
safely.

The state is gradually developing competencies and
capabilities in the fi eld of certifi cation of cybersecurity
products, processes and services.

The state is gradually building capabilities to detect
and handle cybersecurity incidents, focusing on
capability development mainly at national, not sectorial
level.

#### 4.1.2 Goals to be achieved


There is no uniform process for attributing
cybersecurity incidents and subsequent diplomatic
and legal mechanisms.

Detection of incidents in respective sectors and in
critical infrastructure and their subsequent reporting to
authorities have major shortcomings, thus reducing the
visibility and knowledge of the cybersecurity authority
about the status of cybersecurity.

The state is gradually building competence for
conformity assessment and cybersecurity audit.

Cybersecurity risk management across sectors is
carried out unsystematically or is not carried out at all.


uilding a suffi cient professional personnel base for the information and cybersecurity governance system
not only at national level but also at sectoral level.

### B

Cooperation between the state and the citizen at the level of providing suffi cient information and
recommendations, and the implementation of actions that the citizen will tangibly experience as an increase
in their own security and the security of the national cyberspace.

Creation and use of certifi cation schemes for a wide portfolio of product types, processes and services.

More improved technical, organisational and personnel security, based on the use of modern approaches to
cybersecurity for detection and handling of cybersecurity incidents.

Capability development to detect and handle cybersecurity incidents at all levels.

Eff ective cooperation of stakeholders at all levels in addressing information security and cybersecurity.

A well-confi gured process of technical, as well as political attribution of cybersecurity incidents.

Systematic and continuous cybersecurity risk management across sectors.

Improving the detection of cybersecurity incidents at sectoral level, improving and simplifying the
cybersecurity incident reporting not only for liable entities, but also in voluntary reporting.

Support of the competence of entities in the fi eld of business continuity management.


-----

##### 4.1.3 How to achieve the goals

In order to achieve the goals of this strategic objective, it is necessary to focus on:

     - creation of the concept of „safe Internet for all“,      - development of capabilities in the fi eld of detection
which combines the enormous eff orts of the state and collection of security-relevant events in the
to ensure a high level of cybersecurity with the national cyberspace, as well as development of
responsibility of individuals for carrying out activities capabilities in the fi eld of event evaluation and
aimed at their own security, incident detection by modern techniques in the

national cyberspace using various forms, algorithms

     - fl exible response of the state to new technologies, and technologies, including the artifi cial intelligence,
so that a risk analysis is always carried out and the
possible security impacts of these technologies on      - development of capabilities in the fi eld of security
the essential and critical assets of the state as well incident handling and automation of processes
as on the citizen, are defi ned, in this area using machine learning, as well as

development of capabilities to respond to severe

     - preparation of legislative proposals, which will be security incidents on site at operators of essential
comprehensible, actually applicable and will not services with the necessary equipment and
impose disproportionate economic, personnel or capacities,
organisational costs on liable entities,

                                  - integrating of extant escalation procedures for

     - integrating of extant regulations in the fi eld of incident reporting so that respective entities do not
cybersecurity so that respective entities do not have have to apply multiple legal regulations on the same
to apply multiple legal regulations on the same issue,
issue,

                                    - creation of a technical and political incident

     - holding a professional dialogue of the state with attribution process, together with determination of
stakeholders and professional associations in case responsible institutions and legal mechanisms and
of amendment of legislation and rules of regulation, mechanisms of cyber diplomacy,

     - introducing viable cybersecurity risk management     - strengthening of analytical capacities in the fi eld
processes, of security threats, specializing in cybersecurity

incident attribution,

     - development of certifi cation as a tool for more
trusted products, processes and services in the fi eld       - eff ective performance of active and passive cyber
of cybersecurity, intelligence aimed at gathering, aggregating and

evaluating of information on activities in cyberspace,

     - implementation of European certifi cation schemes posing a threat to the security of the Slovak
in the fi eld of cybersecurity into national certifi cation Republic,
procedures,

                                 - setting up rules and mechanisms for blocking

     - application of a coherent concept of crisis of abusive content, especially control servers of
management in the fi eld of cybersecurity, with links attackers, devices spreading malicious code and
to integrated national and international mechanisms, devices attacking foreign infrastructure for the

purpose of denial of service,

     - continuous strengthening of technical,
organisational and personnel capacities for      - development of education and training concept
detection and handling of cybersecurity incidents at for personnel in public administration, aimed at
national level and within individual sectors, including recruitment, maintenance, security and career
the critical infrastructure, progression, as well as increasing and maintaining

their professional competence,

     - eff ectiveness and legitimacy of services provided for
the citizen in the fi eld of cybersecurity,       - creation of suitable motivational and reward tools

for professional staff in public administration in order

     - establishment of a viable system of continuous to balance conditions of public administration and
capacity building of professional personnel, the private sector.


-----

##### 4.2 Eff ective detection and clarifi cation of cybercrime


he number of cybersecurity incidents, which are
also criminal acts of cybercrime, is constantly

### T

increasing. Attackers are more sophisticated, and
attacks are more diffi cult to detect. Victims suff er
great damage, which poses a threat to their economic
existence. Cyberattacks are very well organised and

##### 4.2.1 Initial conditions

ybercrime, or criminal acts of cybercrime are
settled in legislation but practical enforcement

### C

of the law in this area faces legislative obstacles that
complicate operative detection and clarifi cation of this
type of crime.

Criminal acts of cybercrime are often not reported,
and therefore the real extent of this type of crime at
national level is not visible.

Legislation at international level is not unifi ed.

Prosecuting authorities do not have suffi cient
capacities to fi ght cybercrime, particularly at the level
of basic departments when reporting this type of
criminal act.


well timed and attackers usually sweep their tracks
very well, and their detection is very diffi cult. The
attribution of attackers is a very demanding process
that requires suffi cient personnel and well-confi gured
processes.

The National Expert Group on Fight against
Cybercrime operates at national level, associating
both state organisations and some private sector
organisations.

There is a national network of prosecutors to fi ght
cybercrime. The Public Prosecutor‘s Offi ce of the
Slovak Republic is also involved in the European
Judicial Network to fi ght cybercrime and cooperates
with Eurojust and other national and international
organisations.

Education in the fi eld of cybercrime takes place
through specifi c activities of the Public Prosecutor‘s
Offi ce, the Police Force and the Judicial Academy of
the Slovak Republic.


-----

#### 4.2.2 Goals to be achieved

uffi cient capacities allocated to fi ght cybercrime, eff ective cooperation of stakeholders, speed of criminal
proceedings, as necessary for detection and clarifi cation of cybercrime.

### S

More criminal acts of cybercrime reported and investigated.

Better coordination of procedures in the fi eld of cybercrime and their integration at international level.

Active cooperation in the fi eld of cybercrime between stakeholders at national level and sharing of relevant
information.

Specialization of prosecuting authorities in the fi eld of cybercrime from basic departments of the police force
up to the public prosecutor‘s offi ce and courts.

Development of education activities in the fi eld of cybercrime.


##### 4.2.3 How to achieve the goals

In order to achieve the goals of this strategic objective, it is necessary to focus on:

     - streamlining and acceleration of operational and     - defi ning the term of cybercrime in the Criminal
investigative procedures in the fi eld of detection and Code,
clarifi cation of cybercrime,

                                  - continuing a dialogue on integration of cybercrime

     - allocation of suffi cient personnel capacities to solve processes at international level,
cybercrime at the level of regions and districts so
that there is a suffi cient number of specialists among       - improving the education framework for prosecuting
operative staff , investigators, prosecutors and judges authorities and courts in the fi eld of cybercrime,
specialized in this area,

                                  - continuous raising of security awareness in the

     - improving cooperation between entities involved in fi eld of cybercrime with a focus on wide range of
cybercrime, population and the most vulnerable groups (children

and seniors).

     - accelerating the response of the legal system to
emerging threats in the fi eld of cybercrime,


-----

##### 4.3 Resilient private sector

perators of essential services in the private sector
are a key element in providing a wide portfolio

### O

of services to citizens, the private sector as well as
the public administration. According to the Act on
Cybersecurity and the Act on Critical Infrastructure,
elements of critical infrastructure are stipulated by
default as essential services and their operators
are operators of essential services. These services
and their operators are extremely critical to ensure

##### 4.3.1 Initial conditions


a smooth running of companies. These companies
have a large number of customers or a signifi cant
economic impact, an important role in the protection
of human life and health, the impact on public order
and security, and the impact on the mobility of
persons or the transport of goods. Their security is
therefore an important factor, enabling not only the
continuous provision of essential services, but also
their development.

from their weak security awareness in the fi eld of
cybersecurity and information security.

The Act on Cybersecurity has a cross-sectional nature,
and therefore introduces only minimum security
requirements that can be implemented uniformly
across all sectors. However, these uniform minimum
requirements are not suffi cient in several sectors.


here are major diff erences in cybersecurity and
in the implementation of security measures

### T

of operators of essential services across diff erent
sectors. Operators of essential services, even in the
private sector, take cyber regulation only as another
legal obligation. Operators of essential services take
application of corresponding security measures
vaguely, to a large extent, which stems mainly

#### 4.3.2 Goals to be achieved


ector-specifi c security requirements complementing the basic minimum legal requirements, ensuring
high-level cybersecurity, with regard to sectoral needs and specifi cs.

### S

Cybersecurity awareness of operators of essential services and operators of critical infrastructure in the
private sector as an essential part of their operation, not just as further state regulation.

Well-functioning public-private cooperation not only in the fi eld of regulation, but especially in sharing of
security information, experience and in further development.


##### 4.3.3 How to achieve the goals

In order to achieve the goals of this strategic objective, it is necessary to focus on:

    - a sector-specifi c approach in the fi eld of     - development of eff ective cooperation, information
cybersecurity, focusing on sector specifi cs, sharing and expert discussion of the public sector

and the private sector.

    - providing support to both operators of essential
services and operators of critical infrastructure in
the private sector in taking of appropriate security
measures,


-----

##### 4.4 Cybersecurity as an essential part of public administration


ot only the services provided by private companies
but also those provided by the state must function

### N

well in cyberspace. The services provided by the state
to its citizens must be secured adequately to prevent
abuse of sensitive or personal data in the context of

##### 4.4.1 Initial conditions

perators of essential services in the public sector
often respond vaguely to the obligation of taking

### O

appropriate security measures, mainly due to a lack
of security awareness among operators and their
suppliers in the fi eld of cybersecurity and information
security. Cybersecurity in public administration has
additional security regulation as stipulated by the Act
on Information Technology in Public Administration;
however, this regulation is often not implemented

#### 4.4.2 Goals to be achieved


Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament
and of the Council. Operators of essential services
operating within the public administration are a specifi c
category and their security must be an essential part of
their existence.

or suffi ciently implemented. Designing the state‘s IT
infrastructure has usually not respected or does not
respect security rules and the situation is the same for
its operation.

The security of the state‘s electronic services has
not been evaluated in the long term and the security
aspect is not provided suffi ciently to the citizen.


he „security by design“ rule as mandatory in the design, procurement, creation, implementation and
operation of the state‘s systems and services.

### T

A citizen must perceive that the services provided by the state, as well as their own activities, are safe.

Risk management of cybersecurity and information security in public administration must be a viable process
that minimizes risks at all stages of the system‘s life cycle from preparation of specifi cation, procurement,
architecture design, implementation, operation and maintenance up to decommissioning. The governance
of cybersecurity and information security must be a natural part of the governance of public administration
information systems.


-----

##### 4.4.3 How to achieve the goals

In order to achieve the goals of this strategic objective, it is necessary to focus on:

    - application of a systematic approach to    - increase in protection of operators of essential
cybersecurity based on risk analysis and risk services in public administration from the
management in each relevant area, whereas perspective of cybersecurity so that their audit
each analysis must be based on the plan and and regular inspections of implemented measures
methodology of integrated risk analysis and risk will permanently demonstrate a positive trend in
management, improving the situation of cybersecurity in public

administration,

    - providing the state’s secure and accessible
electronic services to each citizen, with the      - setting up security rules of a supply chain for the
possibility of an adequate equal use of electronic state’s IT infrastructure so that unforeseen security
tools, incidents can be prevented and the supplier cannot

obtain a specifi c or exclusive position, which could

    - improvement of the process of design, procurement, jeopardise the security of the operation of the state’s
creation, implementation and operation of the state’s IT infrastructure,
IT infrastructure, from the beginning paying attention
to cybersecurity so that vulnerabilities or threats      - giving continuous and comprehensive support
do not arise when using these services (paying of cybersecurity solutions and governance to
attention to the principle of “security by design”), organisations of public administration from the

central level.

    - improvement of professional capacities in public
administration,


-----

##### 4.5 Strong partnerships

ecurity in general is one of the primary interests
of any democratic country with the rule of law.

### S

The fi eld of cybersecurity is no exception, and it is
more globalized as cyberattacks do not recognize
national borders and attackers need not be explicitly
citizens of the country in which the attack originates
from. Therefore, it is very important that the state

##### 4.5.1 Initial conditions


he state is gradually building and maintaining
cybersecurity relations, in particular at the level

### T

of the European Union (EU), the United Nations (UN),
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the
Council of Europe and the Organisation for Security
and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). It also has
concluded bilateral agreements (memorandum of
understanding) with several countries and supports
selected international initiatives in order to strengthen
international cybersecurity.

The Slovak Republic actively participates in the
processes of policy-making and strategic documents
creation in the international environment. It is also
involved in common mechanisms for confi dence
building and capacity building.

#### 4.5.2 Goals to be achieved


creates very strong partnerships at international
level, exchanges experiences, knowledge and
information, and afterwards applies them at national
level. Cooperation and confi dence building between
entities of public administration, the private sector and
academia ensures the cybersecurity development.

The National Cyber Security Centre SK-CERT is an
active member of the European network of national
CSIRT units. Various Slovak CSIRT units are active
members of international CSIRT organisations.

At national level, the state builds relations with
operators of essential services and digital service
providers, through both formal and informal channels.

The state is also active through its representatives in
the European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA),
and develops its activities in the network of national
cybersecurity competence centres.

The Slovak Republic actively cooperates with
the NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of
Excellence.


he Slovak Republic as a respected state with good representation abroad through professionally
competent representatives at both technical and political levels.

### T

A healthy and strong partnership network established at national level between the state authorities, the
state and the private sector, as well as academia and the professional public.

A network of cybersecurity competence centres established at the European level, including the Slovak
Competence and Certifi cation Cyber Security Centre as a national representative in the Governing Board of
the European Competence Centres.

Increased involvement of the Slovak Republic in the activities of the European Cyber Security Organisation
(ECSO).

Defi ning the main foreign policy partners in the fi eld of cybersecurity.


-----

##### 4.5.3 How to achieve the goals

In order to achieve the goals of this strategic objective, it is necessary to focus on:

    - strengthening existing international partnerships and    - strengthening the exchange of information and
creating new ones, especially with countries whose experience with partners, creation of organisational
political and security system is based on freedom and technical platforms,
and democracy,

                                - establishment and maintenance of the national

    - development of political cooperation in the fi eld of CSIRT network, which will unite Slovak CSIRT units
cybersecurity, (state-run as well as private ones),

    - development of cyber diplomacy through position    - involvement of the Competence and Certifi cation
establishment of thecyber-attaché, as well as by Cyber Security Centre in the Governing Board of
using current capacities of representative offi ces of the European Competence Centres as a national
the Slovak Republic abroad, representative,

    - building strong partnerships at national level     - establishment and coordination of sectoral ISACs,
between the various state authorities involved,

                                - close cooperation with the Cyber Defence Center of

    - active involvement in the international environment the Slovak Republic, the authority for cyber defence
aimed at enforcing of norms of responsible of the state,
behaviour in cyberspace,

                                  - deepening cooperation of states in the fi eld of

    - development of the state cooperation with operators cybersecurity with a focus on creating binding
of essential services and digital service providers, security standards for manufacturers of information

technologies,

    - increasing awareness and communication with the
public in the area of cybersecurity priorities,      - building cooperation of the state with the private

sector, especially with companies specialized in

    - deepening the partnership of the state with cybersecurity solutions and innovative technologies.
academia,


-----

##### 4.6 Well-educated professionals and well-educated public


n the fi eld of cybersecurity, education is one of the
main areas allowing development and improvement

### I

of capabilities in comprehensive activities of the
cybersecurity system. Building situational and
security awareness, towards ordinary users, acts as a
precaution against cybersecurity incidents, because
educated users can better respond to security threats

##### 4.6.1 Initial conditions

ybersecurity education is not systematically
addressed, there are very few cybersecurity

### C

university programmes. It is also related to a lack of
teachers in the cybersecurity fi eld. There are several
specialized courses and trainings in the commercial
market, but they cannot replace systematic education.

Security awareness building and basic security
education in the area of responsible behaviour on the
Internet from primary schools up to secondary schools
is missing, despite the fact that a signifi cant number of
users is already emerging at these levels.

The education of public administration staff is not
systematic, there is no basic security education system

#### 4.6.2 Goals to be achieved


and risks in cyberspace and behave responsibly
enough to prevent successful attacks, which can
occur due to their low awareness. It is important to
understand security awareness raising as an entire
educational process, when a person being educated
not only understands the issue, but is also able to
identify it.

for public administration offi cials who work daily with
information systems of public administration and are
exposed to sensitive and personal data.

The private and third sectors are working in a
decentralized form to educate and raise security
awareness in the fi eld of cybersecurity at diff erent
levels of education and in diff erent sectors.

Situational and security awareness is built
unsystematically, often only in the form of a response
to current problems, with little impact.


sustainable vocational higher education system and specialized trainings as forms of further education in
the fi eld of cybersecurity and information security.

### A

The concept of basic security education at all levels of education, from primary schools to universities.

Systematic, broad-spectrum and planned situational and security awareness raising based on a reliable
system that responds fl exibly to changes in cyberspace.

Educated public administration staff who can safely provide services and use public administration systems
without emerging cybersecurity incidents due to their low security awareness.


-----

##### 4.6.3 How to achieve the goals

In order to achieve the goals of this strategic objective, it is necessary to focus on:

    - establishment of a vocational higher and secondary    - developing the concept of minimum security
education system, which will ensure the education awareness requirements for all levels of education,
of new professionals,

                                    - integration of roles in the fi eld of cybersecurity and

    - establishment of a system of specialized trainings information security into the National Qualifi cations
for professionals in the fi eld of cybersecurity and Framework,
information security,

                                  - implementation of joint educational activities and

    - establishment of a system for raising a security and activities supporting security awareness raising with
situational awareness of threats, vulnerabilities, public authorities, academia and the private sector,
incidents and protection procedures in cyberspace,

                                   - development of capabilities in the fi eld of exercises

    - establishment of a system of education for public and trainings in technical and process areas by
administration staff so that they meet minimum means of various forms, together with the creation of
knowledge standards in the fi eld of cybersecurity an appropriate technical and organisational platform
and information security, for organizing such exercises,

    - completing and maintaining the competencies in    - support of projects and programmes in the fi eld of
cybersecurity and information security through the education and security and situational awareness
Slovak Qualifi cations Framework and the National raising.
Qualifi cations System of the Slovak Republic,


-----

##### 4.7 Building research and development capabilities in the fi eld of  cybersecurity


hreats and vulnerabilities in cyberspace are
constantly evolving with the technological

### T

development and digitalization of society. Research
and development in the fi eld of cybersecurity is an
appropriate mechanism for responding to a change

##### 4.7.1 Initial conditions

esearch and development in the fi eld of
cybersecurity is decentralized and minimal, mainly

### R

addressed by private companies within their business
activities and academia.

#### 4.7.2 Goals to be achieved


in the security environment and implementing
appropriate measures in order to minimize
threats, mitigate vulnerabilities, detect and handle
cybersecurity incidents.

The state does not have a comprehensive concept
of the state support for research and development
in the fi eld of cybersecurity; it does not have uniform
objectives defi ned in this area.


### Well-functioning and state-supported research and development in the fi eld of cybersecurity.

A good communication between the public sector, the private sector and academia in the fi eld of research
and development with clear outcomes.

An eff ective system of cooperation between the public sector, the private sector and academia.

State support of cybersecurity projects and active state assistance in the use of European funds.


##### 4.7.3 How to achieve the goals

In order to achieve the goals of this strategic objective, it is necessary to focus on:

     - creation of a comprehensive concept of the state     - assistance and support to entities in their
support of research and development in the fi eld of participation in scientifi c and research programmes
cybersecurity for the Slovak Academy of Sciences, and grants at national and international level,
universities and commercial organisations,

                                   - participation in the promotion of national research

     - allocation of fi nancial resources for the state support programmes and their results,
of research and development for the next 5 years,

                                 - establishment of a closed research network

     - support of research centres in the fi eld of infrastructure across the whole Slovak Republic
cybersecurity at universities, oriented on cybersecurity research, development

and testing,

     - development of capabilities in the fi eld of national
cryptography,      - coordinating the support of science and research

through the Competence and Certifi cation Cyber

     - support of scientifi c and research projects of private Security Centre.
companies and research centres at national level,


-----

# 5. Main foreign political partners

###### s cyberspace goes beyond the national borders, the international cooperation is crucial for achieving desired objectives of cybersecurity.

## A


he Slovak Republic is a democratic country with the
rule of law based on the principles of respect for

### T

fundamental rights and freedoms. Therefore, within the
international cooperation in the fi eld of cybersecurity, it
focuses on political and technical cooperation with the
states and international organizations that respect and
promote the same values.

The Slovak Republic, as a member of the EU, fully
supports the common foreign and security policy,
respects and cooperates with individual Member
States, and develops common cybersecurity
capabilities at the all-European level. It includes mainly
its membership in the European network of CSIRT units
at the technical level, at the political-strategic level it
is a membership in the Horizontal Working Party on
Cyber Issues, or in working groups of the European
Commission.

The Slovak Republic‘s membership of NATO is a good
model in terms of security, ensuring the collective
defence of its members and partners, and maintaining
peace not only in Europe for several decades. NATO
focuses mainly on cyber defence issues, because an
increasing number of cyberattacks and also hybrid
threats have posed new challenges for the Alliance
that need to be addressed through deterrent defence
capabilities, as well as through continuous capability


development not only at the level of Member States
and partner states, but also through joint activities,
such as the NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre
of Excellence.

The Slovak Republic‘s membership of the UN and the
OSCE enables its active participation in activities and
projects in the fi eld of cybersecurity, organized and
created by mentioned organizations.

Positions of the Slovak Republic in international fora
dealing with cybersecurity issues are based on the
principles of global, open, free, stable and secure
cyberspace, while fully respecting the fundamental
principles of the rule of law, human rights and
fundamental freedoms, gender and digital equality
as well as sustainable development. The Slovak
Republic, together with partners within the EU,
emphasizes the importance of international standards
and rules for responsible behaviour in cyberspace,
the development and implementation of confi dencebuilding measures and capacity building in the fi eld of
cybersecurity. The Slovak Republic will use the tools of
cyber diplomacy towards perpetrators of cyberattacks
targeting the Slovak Republic and its interests, and in
compliance with its commitments to the EU, NATO
and its allies.


-----

# 6. Implementation and measurability

###### n order to successfully achieve the strategic objectives of the National Strategy, its corresponding Action Plan must be created, as well as a Steering Committee at the level

## I

###### of which the actions of stakeholders will be coordinated.

##### 6.1 Creation of the Action Plan

The Action Plan for the implementation of the National Cybersecurity Strategy 2021-2025 will determine:

 - specifi c tasks and activities divided according to - time period for the performance of tasks,
strategic objectives,

                               - impacts or costs incurred by individual tasks.

 - method of implementation of individual tasks and
activities,

 - responsible entities in the role of entities in charge
and stakeholders,

The National Security Authority will be responsible for drawing up the Action Plan, and will involve all stakeholders
in its preparation.

##### 6.2 Establishment of a Steering Committee for the implementation of the  National Strategy and the Action Plan


##### 6.1 Creation of the Action Plan

The Action Plan for the implementation of the National Cybersecurity Strategy 2021-2025 will determine:

     - specifi c tasks and activities divided according to      - time period for the performance of tasks,
strategic objectives,

                                    - impacts or costs incurred by individual tasks.

     - method of implementation of individual tasks and
activities,

     - responsible entities in the role of entities in charge
and stakeholders,

The National Security Authority will be responsible for drawing up the Action Plan, and will involve all stakeholders
in its preparation.


or better management of respective tasks and
activities, a Steering Committee will be established,

### F

which will be the coordination body for all stakeholders
who can appoint their representatives therein. The
platform of this working group will communicate
the process of implementation of individual tasks
and activities and will also address the problems

##### 6.3 Implementation

he National Strategy will be implemented through
the Action Plan and its tasks and activities. The

### T

implementation of respective tasks and activities will

##### 6.4 Measurement


ppointed entities will be responsible for the
fulfi lment of respective tasks and activities, and the

### A

National Security Authority will be responsible for the


arising during the implementation of the Action
Plan. The Steering Committee will also prepare a
regular report on the fulfi lment of the Action Plan.
The National Security Authority will be responsible
for the organisation and management of the Steering
Committee.

be the responsibility of the entities appointed in the
Action Plan, either as entities in charge or stakeholders.

evaluation of the implementation of the Action Plan.
The review and evaluation of the implementation of
the Action Plan will be carried out once a year.


-----

##### 6.5 Stakeholders

Key stakeholders in the cybersecurity system of the Slovak Republic include, in particular:

    - Government Offi ce of the Slovak Republic,

    - National Security Authority,

    - Ministry of Investments, Regional Development and Informatization of the Slovak Republic,

    - Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic,

    - Ministry of Foreign and European Aff airs of the Slovak Republic,

    - Ministry of Defence of the Slovak Republic,

    - Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Sport of the Slovak Republic,

    - Ministry of Interior of the Slovak Republic,

    - Ministry of Justice of the Slovak Republic,

    - Ministry of Health of the Slovak Republic,

    - General Prosecutor’s Offi ce of the Slovak Republic,

    - Offi ce for Personal Data Protection of the Slovak Republic,

    - Presidium of the Police Force of the Slovak Republic,

    - Military Intelligence,

    - Slovak Information Service,

    - universities and other educational institutions,

    - Cybersecurity Competence and Certifi cation Centre,

    - operators of essential services,

    - digital service providers.


-----

# 7. Financing

ach of the responsible entities within the cybersecurity system, also defi ned in the follow-up Action Plan, must
allocate suffi cient funds within their budget sections to fulfi l the tasks and activities based on their approved

### E

Action Plan, as well as on the principles of the cybersecurity system. In the search for fi nancial resources, it
is necessary to rely not only on resources from the state budget but also on resources from the operational
programmes of the European Community funds.

It must be in the interest of the state and its organisations and institutions to allocate suffi cient funds for
cybersecurity at all levels so that the strategic cybersecurity objectives as defi ned in the National Strategy can be
met.

# 8. Conclusion


yber threats are no longer just a matter of special systems and IT professionals. They concern each of us.
Cybersecurity must be a shared responsibility of the state and its citizens. Attacks by foreign powers as well

### C

as activities of cybercriminals have a signifi cant impact on our daily lives. The primary strategic interests of the
Slovak Republic must include maintaining and improving the cybersecurity system so that threats, vulnerabilities
and incidents have the least possible impact on the state and its citizens, as well as on the functioning of the social
system.

The National Cybersecurity Strategy for the years 2021-2025 is a medium-term document. It will be adopted for a
period of 5 years. In the event of a change in the security environment or in the event of other impacts that could
signifi cantly aff ect the functioning of the cybersecurity system in the Slovak Republic, the document may be
updated earlier.


-----

###### NATIONAL SECURITY AUTHORITY

 NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY CENTRE SK-CERT

 Budatínska 30, 851 06 Bratislava

 www.nbu.gov.sk

 www.sk-cert.sk


-----

-----

-----

