# ORIENTATION OF THE FOREIGN POLICY
 OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC IN 2010

## CONTENTS
**Introduction – Basic Premises and Key Objectives of the Foreign Policy of the Slovak**
**Republic in 2010 ............................................................................................................................ 2**
**A. Slovakia in a Safe and Democratic World ............................................................................. 4**
A.1. Enhancing Bilateral Cooperation with Slovakia’s Key Partners..........................................4
A.2. Strengthening the Security of the Euro-Atlantic Area .........................................................7
A.3. Facing Global Threats ........................................................................................................10
A.4. Enlarging the Zone of Freedom, Democracy, Respect for Human Rights, Rule of Law and
Good Governance.......................................................................................................................11
A.5. Strengthening effective multilateralism in the United Nations..........................................13
A.6. Contributing to the Elimination of Migration Risks in Line with Slovakia’s Interests .....16
**B. A Prosperous Slovakia and Sustainable Development........................................................ 17**
B.1. Contributing to the Mitigation of the Impact of the Economic Crisis on Slovakia............17
B.2 Promoting Economic Development and Prosperity and Enforcing Slovakia’s Economic
Interests ......................................................................................................................................18
B.3. Increasing the Volume and Effectiveness of Slovakia’s Development Aid and
Humanitarian Assistance............................................................................................................21
B.4. Increasing the Energy Security of Slovakia .......................................................................22
**C. Slovakia’s Interests in an Effective EU, Strengthening Neighbourly Relations and**
**Intensifying Regional Cooperation............................................................................................ 22**
C.1. Supporting the Attainment of Slovakia’s Interests in the EU and Strengthening Slovakia’s
Influence on the Development of Common EU Policies ...........................................................22
C.2. Supporting EU Enlargement and Contributing to a Successful European Neighbourhood
Policy..........................................................................................................................................24
C.3. Contribution to Strengthening the Effective Functioning of EU Institutions.....................24
C.4. Reinforcing Neighbourly Relations and Intensifying Regional Cooperation ....................25
**D. Assistance to the Citizens and a Slovakia Open to the World............................................ 28**
D.1. Defending the Interests of Slovak Citizens ........................................................................28
D.2. Improving the Communication of Foreign Policy Objectives and Outcomes Inside and
Outside Slovakia ........................................................................................................................29
D.3. Coordinating a Uniform Presentation of Slovakia Abroad ................................................29
D.4. Promoting Cooperation with the Third Sector ...................................................................30
**E. Modern Slovak Diplomacy .................................................................................................... 30**
E.1. Optimising the Internal Functioning of the MFA...............................................................30
E.2. Ensuring Technologically Advanced Communication.......................................................31
E.3. Optimising Financial Management and Structure of the Budget .......................................31
E.4. Strengthening the Expertise of Foreign Service Staff ........................................................31
E.5. Enhancing the Representation of the Slovak Republic in the EU and in International
Organisations..............................................................................................................................32


-----

### Introduction – Basic Premises and Key Objectives of the Foreign Policy of the Slovak Republic in 2010

Orientation of Foreign Policy of the Slovak Republic, a basic political planning document

on the foreign policy of Slovakia, is based on the Manifesto of the Slovak government. It presents
foreign policy objectives pursued by Slovakia within the European Union, the North Atlantic
Alliance, the United Nations and in other international organisations, as well as in bilateral
relations and in connection with asserting Slovakia’s economic interests. Its structure and content
correspond to the long-term strategy of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic
(“the MFA” hereinafter) outlined in “A Successful Slovakia in a Safe World.” Its five priorities
represent key chapters of Slovakia’s foreign policy orientation in 2010.
The global economic and financial crisis is the main factor that will continue to
significantly influence the development of international relations in 2010. The pace of global
economic downturn has diminished, but the social consequences of the crisis will continue to be
felt throughout 2010. There will be continued pressure to reform the global system of relations
and international organisations and to consolidate and restructure the global economic and
financial system. To ensure effective mitigation of the negative impact of the crisis on its
economy and population, Slovakia will closely cooperate in coordinating anti-crisis activities
within the EU and other international organisations and forums. An exceptionally important role
in the implementation of Slovakia’s foreign policy objectives will be played by the coordinated
and synergic activities of its top constitutional officers – the President, the Speaker of the
National Council of the Slovak Republic, the Prime Minister, and other cabinet ministers. The
adoption of the Lisbon Treaty will increase the importance of parliamentary diplomacy.
International relations will be influenced in 2010 by the activities of the Administration of
US President Obama, which will face important challenges at home and on the global political
scene. In the spirit of the principles of effective multilateralism, the United States will expect its
European allies to take a more pro-active stance, and show unity and commitment in addressing
global policy issues. At the bilateral level, Slovakia will continue its intensive dialogue with the
United States and with all its EU and NATO allies and partners.
In 2010, Slovakia will pay priority attention to neighbourly relations, regional cooperation

and activities within the Visegrad Group with the objective of strengthening stability, security
and sustainable development of the central European space. The development of privileged
relations with the Czech Republic and traditionally good relations with Poland remain among
Slovakia’s priority interests. In the year marking the 15th anniversary of the signing of the Basic
Treaty with the Republic of Hungary, Slovakia remains open to a bilateral dialogue free of
historical burdens at all levels and in all the areas, based on its alliance, shared values, and
common future with Hungary. Deepening its cooperation with Austria will be of special interest
to Slovakia. Slovakia will place emphasis on intensifying its relations with Ukraine.
The Russian Federation (RF) is the key European partner of the EU and, at the same time,
a strategic supplier of energy commodities to a large part of Europe. The RF and NATO are
facing similar security challenges of a global character. The Slovak Republic does not see any
alternative to an open political dialogue between the EU, NATO and Russia. Slovakia also wants
to contribute to such a dialogue bilaterally through productive Slovak-Russian cooperation, and
will continue taking part in a broader discussion about the possibilities of improving the security
architecture in Europe.


-----

The year 2010 will be particularly important for the European Union and its members in
connection with the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty, which introduces significant changes to
the legal basis and actual functioning of the EU. Slovakia will devote increased attention to
drawing up the post-Lisbon strategy up to the year 2020 and to drafting the EU budget for the
next programming period of 2014–2020. Slovakia will take active part in the creation of the
European External Service. It will continue supporting the process of the Union’s enlargement,
subject to the fulfilment of accession criteria, and the convergence of the countries of the Western
Balkans with the EU, while actively sharing its experience with the process of accession.
Slovakia will make an effort to take practical steps toward preserving the momentum of the
Eastern Partnership project’s implementation.
The North Atlantic Alliance represents the basic pillar of our security. Slovakia will focus
on supporting the Alliance’s transformation, including the formulation of its new Strategic
Concept. The Concept should make the Alliance better prepared to effectively fulfil its tasks
through internal consolidation and effective partnerships. Slovakia will continue giving its full
support to NATO’s “open-door policy.” It will remain committed to strengthening the
transatlantic link within the Alliance and to enhancing cooperation between NATO and other
relevant international organisations (in particular the EU, the UN and the OSCE). Slovakia will
give concrete expression to its allied obligations through adequate participation of members of its
armed forces in crisis management operations and missions outside Slovak territory, in particular
within the NATO framework.
The global economic crisis, shifting wealth distribution in the world, and the growing
ambitions and assertiveness of certain emerging countries in various regions of the world make it
necessary to step up efforts at effective global and regional multilateralism and to consistently
apply the principles of international law. Slovakia will focus on promoting the internal and
external strengthening of the UN, including the reform of its system.
Slovakia will continue to engage in efforts to strengthen democracy and the rule of law

and uphold human rights and freedoms, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities. It
will denounce expressions of extremism, racism, intolerance, xenophobia, aggressive nationalism
and anti-Semitism.
Through its EU and NATO membership and activities within the UN, the Slovak
Republic will actively participate in international activities aimed at combating terrorism.
Slovakia will be an integral part of the international community’s struggle against other global
security threats, such as the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and stockpiling of
conventional weapons.
Climate change and accumulation of adverse economic and political factors in “third
world” countries increase the probability of a rise in illegal migration, which has already started
to have a negative impact on certain EU member states. Slovakia will take part in the
development and implementation of EU policies in the area of migration management.
In keeping with the most pressing socio-economic tasks of the Slovak government, the
Slovak foreign service will emphasise strengthening the economic dimension of diplomacy in
2010. In cooperation with the Ministry of Economy, other sectors and business entities, the MFA
will step up the deployment of its capabilities to mitigate the consequences of the economic
crisis, promote employment and help restore the growth dynamics of the Slovak economy.
Development assistance, as a component of foreign policy, responds to international
commitments and to the entire range of global challenges facing Slovakia as part of the donor
community.


-----

In 2010, energy security will remain an important political, security and economic theme
of global and European policy. Through its activities within the EU, in specialised international
organisations and under bilateral formats, Slovakia will create the pre-conditions for meeting the
diversification and innovation objectives set out in the Energy Security Strategy of the Slovak
Republic. It will do this in order to significantly boost its preparedness to face crisis situations in
energy supplies.
The permanently growing number of Slovak citizens travelling abroad places increased
demands on the performance of the Slovak consular service. Consular assistance to citizens will
be one of the priorities of the MFA.
Slovakia attaches importance to active presentation of its foreign policy, values,
objectives and interests. The foreign affairs sector will develop tools and methods of public
diplomacy that draw the attention of important segments of the world and the domestic public. It
will also devote attention to cooperation with the third sector. Continuous modernisation of the
MFA will improve the effectiveness of the foreign service.

### A. Slovakia in a Safe and Democratic World

**A.1. Enhancing Bilateral Cooperation with Slovakia’s Key Partners**

Bilateral relations and bilateral cooperation will continue to be among the core elements
of Slovak foreign policy in 2010. Besides strengthening its integration links, Slovakia will
develop bilateral cooperation with its key partners – NATO and EU allies, neighbouring
countries, Russia, other countries of eastern Europe, countries of the Western Balkans, Japan, the
People’s Republic of China, South Korea, India, and other countries of the world.
Slovakia will place emphasis on intensifying its economic relations with the aim of
fostering domestic employment and export, strengthening the existing basis for long-term
economic, investment, security, cultural, scientific and educational cooperation.

**Relations with the United States**
The United States of America is a key partner and ally of the Slovak Republic. In 2010,
Slovakia’s bilateral relations with the U.S. will reflect the impact of the on-going transatlantic
dialogue and, within this framework, of further development of EU-US relations, transformation
of the Alliance, and development of relations within the EU-RF-US triangle. Slovakia has given
its long-term support to the idea of the transatlantic alliance and will take an active part in the
dialogue conducted in the EU-US format also within the framework of the Alliance.
Slovakia will focus attention on deepening a comprehensive dialogue with President
Obama’s Administration. In this context and in conformity with its ally’s obligations, it will
endeavour to exert a positive influence on the developments in crisis areas of the world. It will
make an adequate and genuine contribution, both directly and as a member of the EU and NATO,
to stabilising and ensuring positive developments in problem regions, especially in the Western
Balkans, Afghanistan and in the countries targeted by the European project of Eastern
Partnership.
It is in Slovakia’s interest that the world economy’s recovery from recession and the
preparation for the post-crisis period in the world provide a positive stimulus for expanding
economic cooperation between Slovakia and the United States. This would contribute to


-----

revitalising investment initiatives of US companies in Slovakia. Slovakia will endeavour to
attract investment in those areas that would help its economy to be closer to and keep up with
new trends in modern technologies and the knowledge economy in general.
A good foundation has been created for the continuation of such bilateral cooperation with
the inclusion of Slovakia in the US visa waiver programme. Slovakia, along with its EU partners,
will strive to maintain the current standard of registration in the ESTA system in order to
preserve the positive political capital of the existing regime.

**Relations with Germany**
Relations with the Federal Republic of Germany will continue to be determined by the
fact that Germany is Slovakia’s biggest trade partner, the largest investor in Slovakia in terms of
the origin of foreign direct investment, and an important member of the international community.
The continuity of the new coalition government CDU/CSU and FDP as regards
fundamental foreign policy, economic and security issues creates a good basis for maintaining
and intensifying mutual dialogue at a high political level.
Slovakia will steer its economic cooperation with the FRG mainly toward modern
technologies, innovation and renewable energies, and support for small and medium-sized
enterprises.
Economic, cultural, scientific and educational cooperation will predominate in relations
between the Slovak Republic and the key federal states of Bavaria, North Rhine - Westphalia,
Saxony and Lower Saxony.

**Relations with the French Republic**
The level and significance of French-Slovak cooperation will be in line with the important
position of France in the EU and in the wider international arena. In the European context,
Slovakia will draw on the potential of France, shared with Germany, for deepening European
integration. Slovakia’s priorities in its strategic partnership with France will include the
development of economic cooperation with emphasis on nuclear engineering, military and
political cooperation, cultural and educational relations, and construction of international
transport infrastructure.
The key tasks in this area will continue to include the search for investment partners,
expansion of existing French investments in Slovakia and their orientation toward scientific and
research activities. This mainly applies to future activities of PSA Peugeot Citroën, which will
step up its investment in the development of electric and hybrid automobiles with the help of the
Slovak government’s investment promotion programmes.

**Relations with Italy**
Italy remains one of Slovakia’s key trade partners and foreign investors. The first investor
is ENEL, majority owner of Slovenské elektrárne a.s. Its project to complete the construction of
units 3 and 4 of the Mochovce nuclear power plant represents the largest investment by a private
investor in the history of Slovakia (EUR 2.7 billion). The importance of Slovak-Italian
cooperation in the economic field is underscored by the memorandum of understanding on
economic and energy cooperation between economic sectors, expected to be signed at the
beginning of 2010. It will bring more advanced forms of cooperation in the fields of: innovation;
high technology and infrastructure; support for industrial cooperation and access of entities from
both countries to European structural funds allocated to Italy and Slovakia in the period of 2007–
2013; coordination of positions on energy security issues at the EU level; support for the


-----

development of renewable sources of energy; and further expansion of cooperation in the nuclear
power sector.

**Relations with Other EU and NATO Countries**
Slovakia will also continue to develop close allied and bilateral relations in all fields with
other members of these two most important integration structures – the United Kingdom, the
Netherlands, Spain, Belgium, Canada, the Scandinavian countries, Greece, Turkey and other
countries of the Euro-Atlantic community.
Of particular importance are Slovakia’s relations with its neighbours. They are discussed
in the chapter on the EU, neighbourly relations and regional cooperation.

**Relations with Russia**
In its relations with the Russian Federation, Slovakia will place emphasis on the
development of positive partnership relations and on a pragmatic dialogue. Its core theme will be
the expansion of economic cooperation and the strengthening of natural ties between the EU and
Russia.
Russia is a key partner of Slovakia and, at the same time, a strategic partner of the EU in
the area of supply of energy commodities. Slovakia will make every effort to achieve the
maximum level of guarantees for security of supply and transit of energy commodities. Slovakia
will continue to participate in the energy dialogue between Russia and the European Union also
in the framework of negotiations on a new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the
EU and the Russian Federation. Slovakia will participate in efforts to resolve the liberalisation of
the visa regime with the RF.
The NATO-Russia partnership constitutes a strategic element in the strengthening of
security in the Euro-Atlantic space. Slovakia supports consultations aimed at improving the
functioning of the existing structures of European security architecture.
The top-level bilateral meeting will be the official visit of Russian President Dmitri
Medvedev to Slovakia in April 2010.

**Relations with the Countries of the Western Balkans**
Slovakia will support the countries of the Western Balkans in their EU and NATO

integration ambitions. In this context, it will focus on providing its experience with the process of
integration. Slovakia will continue to support visa liberalisation for the countries that have not
been granted a visa waiver since 19 December 2009. Slovakia has highly positive political
relations with the countries of the region and will make further efforts for this to be reflected in
an increased volume of economic cooperation in the form of trade and investment. The Western
Balkans will remain a priority for Slovakia’s development assistance, which will be provided
with due regard for integration priorities, local needs, and activities of other bilateral and
multilateral donors.

**Relations with Asian and Latin American Countries**
In spite of the global economic crisis, Asia maintains its economic growth and is gaining
an ever more important position in international relations. Asian countries are making visible
efforts at achieving closer cooperation and convergence in the political and economic spheres
through supranational cooperation, following the model of the EU. The foreign policy activities
of Slovakia in Asia will be oriented toward strengthening economic and political dialogue with
the most important countries of the region – China, Japan, India and the Republic of Korea. To


-----

strengthen bilateral cooperation and advance its economic interests, Slovakia is preparing several
high-level visits to Asia and Latin America (the President, the Speaker of Parliament, the Prime
Minister).
The Latin American countries that will continue to be Slovakia’s key partners for
improving the quality of mutual dialogue and for deepening pragmatic, bilateral cooperation are
Brazil, Mexico, Argentina and Chile, with the latter being a priority partner in the area of trade
and economy.
To create favourable conditions for bilateral relations with the countries of these two
regions, Slovakia will make use of EU instruments, especially its interregional formats.

**Relations with the Countries of the Middle East and Africa**
Slovakia’s foreign policy objective in this region is to contribute, both bilaterally and
through involvement in the development of EU policies, to adopting a balanced and uniform EU
policy on: the Israeli-Palestinian and/or Israeli-Arab conflict; Iraq; Yemen; Western Sahara; and
on other political conflicts and crises in the Middle East. At the bilateral level, Slovakia will
continue expanding its political, economic and trade contacts with Arab countries in the region
and with the State of Israel. In relation to Iran, it will focus on political issues, human rights and
in particular on Iran’s nuclear programme, which calls for priority attention because of its
relevance for the security of the transatlantic area.
In its relations with the countries of Sub-Saharan Africa, Slovakia will emphasise mainly
the development of cooperation with the South African Republic, Nigeria and Kenya, focusing on
trade promotion. Other important partners in trade and economic relations will be Ethiopia,
Uganda and Tanzania. The priority agenda will continue to include the monitoring of regional
conflicts and active participation in the formulation of EU positions. Participation of Slovakia in
EU and UN activities aimed at resolving conflicts in Africa is effected through its diplomatic
representation in Addis Ababa, seat of the African Union.

**Slovaks Abroad**
A special segment of Slovakia’s bilateral agenda will continue to be related to Slovak

compatriots abroad. Slovakia will continue practical implementation of the Policy Concept of
Slovakia’s Care for Slovaks Living Abroad till 2015, coordinated by the Office for Slovaks
Living Abroad. Meetings with Slovak compatriots will continue to be an inseparable part of the
programme of official visits of representatives of Slovakia to countries with a large Slovak
community. Active work of Slovak diplomatic missions vis-à-vis Slovak compatriots abroad will
be an important criterion for evaluating their performance in general. Slovakia will continue to
issue certificates of Slovaks living abroad.

**A.2. Strengthening the Security of the Euro-Atlantic Area**

NATO constitutes the basic pillar of our security. Factors influencing Slovakia’s activities
in the Alliance in 2010 will be: the process of drawing up a new NATO Strategic Concept;
continued engagement of the Alliance in security stabilisation and all-around development of
Afghanistan; and implementation of NATO’s open-door policy, in particular in the Western
Balkans.
By making active use of the opportunities offered by NATO membership, Slovakia will
strive to prevent international crises and conflicts and address security challenges and threats that
could present a danger for the Euro-Atlantic area. If a crisis or conflict erupts, Slovakia will


-----

actively contribute to its resolution through joint actions based on political consultations between
the Allies, and through practical participation in operations and missions of the North Atlantic
Alliance. Through NATO as its intermediary, Slovakia will strive to safeguard and further
strengthen the transatlantic link as the expression of a strategic partnership between North
America and Europe. Furthermore, it will encourage the development of functional cooperation
between the EU and NATO at the practical level, especially through joint operations of both
organisations in Kosovo and Afghanistan, as well as at the political and strategic level and in the
area of capabilities, through complementary capacity building. At the same time, Slovakia’s
activities within NATO will reflect the fact that Slovakia’s foreign policy priorities continue to be
Ukraine and the Western Balkans.
In the new Strategic Concept of the Alliance to be drawn up in 2010, Slovakia will
maintain its security priorities in line with the latest NATO Summit Declaration on Alliance
Security (2009). This is the first time that Slovakia, as a member state, has the opportunity to
influence the preparation of such an important document, which will have a bearing on the
strategic thinking of the North Atlantic Alliance during the next 10 to 15 years. We will strive for
this document to decisively confirm that NATO is an internally consolidated organisation with
clearly defined objectives and obligations of its members.
The Slovak Republic will continue to firmly support NATO’s open-door policy, including
as it regards the integration ambitions of Ukraine and Georgia. Depending on the priorities that
will be set out by the political leadership of Ukraine with regard to NATO, Slovakia will support
further deepening of relations between NATO and Ukraine, maintaining the prospect of
Ukraine’s joining the Membership Action Plan at the time when all Allies, including Ukraine
itself, give their consensus. Slovakia will make use of the status of its diplomatic mission in Kiev
as the NATO-Ukraine Contact Point Embassy to continue raising awareness in Ukrainian society
on NATO’s activities and share Slovak expertise in reform processes gained in the process of
integration into Euro-Atlantic institutions.
In 2010, Slovakia will also help to strengthen the security and stability of the EuroAtlantic area and prevent potential conflicts and crises, while fulfilling its allied obligations
through participation in NATO-led operations. In this respect, Slovakia will continuously review
and update the extent and the forms of its military and non-military participation. This means that
an important role in implementing the NATO-related tasks of Slovak foreign policy will continue
to be played by the Ministry of Defence, including engagement of members of the Slovak Armed
Forces in crisis management operations outside the territory of Slovakia.
The ISAF Operation in Afghanistan will continue to constitute the operational priority of

NATO from a political and the security perspective. In connection with addressing the situation
in Afghanistan and the surrounding region, Slovakia will actively participate in NATO actions to
foster regional security and stability. It will also focus on providing assistance to build Afghan
capacities in the field of security by, _inter alia, helping to train and build Afghan national_
security forces. Slovakia supports and actively applies a comprehensive and coordinated
approach of civilian and military components and of all international actors to the construction
and development of Afghanistan, including the political resolution of the conflict by Afghanis
themselves.
In spite of the worsened economic situation, Slovakia will maintain an adequate
representation of its armed forces in ISAF. In 2010, Slovakia is expected to further increase its
contribution to ISAF operations and to contribute to the EU mission (EUPOL) with the
deployment of police experts. At the same time, it will continue taking steps to support the
civilian dimension of stabilisation and development of the country. Besides fostering a


-----

comprehensive approach at the international level and in NATO activities, the MFA will strive to
create the necessary legislative and organisational framework for the deployment of Slovak
civilian experts in international organisations engaged in the stabilisation and development of
crises-ridden regions of the world.
Slovakia will continue to participate actively in the formulation of NATO policy on the
Western Balkans. As regards security, in particular, it will monitor the development of the
situation in Kosovo where the process of cutting down the number of NATO troops deployed in
the KFOR operation and transition to the status of “deterrent presence” has already started. With
regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro, Slovakia will support the overall deepening
of cooperation, including in the context of Montenegro’s joining the NATO Membership Action
Plan (MAP). Slovakia will continue to support the development of relations between NATO and
Serbia under the Partnership for Peace (PF) programme, taking into account the level of the
latter’s own ambitions.
Slovakia will support the development of cooperation between NATO and Russia by
working to: increase the effectiveness of the NATO-Russia Council, foster political dialogue; and
activate military contacts. In so doing, it aims to developing overall mutually beneficial practical
cooperation between the two actors.
In connection with its participation in operations and missions carried out under the
common security and defence policy (CSDP), the Slovak Republic will pay primary attention to
its foreign policy priorities. The specific contributions of Slovakia on a national level will be
directed mainly to the Western Balkans (the ALTHEA and EUPM missions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the EULEX mission in Kosovo), the Eastern dimension (the EUMM
mission in Georgia and the EUBAM mission on the Moldova-Ukraine border) and Afghanistan
(not only the security but also the development aspect). Slovakia will devote the necessary
attention to transforming the ALTHEA mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina to a training and
support mission so as to ensure its adequate national representation also within the new mission.
Slovakia will support the new mandate of the EUPM mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
has been refocused, effective from January 2010, on the fight against organised crime. Slovakia
will continue to actively participate in EU discussions on improving EU-NATO cooperation at all
levels, and will support the conceptual development of EU civilian and military crisis
management capabilities in the context of the completion of Civilian Headline Goal 2010 and of
Headline (Military) Goal 2010.
Slovakia will actively participate in the discussion concerning the future of European
security within the framework of the Corfu Process launched by the OSCE. The aim of this
participation is to strengthen European security architecture, support the development of
a pragmatic, structured dialogue within the OSCE and identify areas of common interest between
the West and the RF in all three OSCE dimensions. Within the Corfu Process, Slovakia will
pursue its priorities, including energy security.
In the context of the suspension by Russia of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in

Europe (CFE), Slovakia will support the NATO/USA-RF dialogue and participate in the effort to
resolve key differences of opinions so that the Agreement on Adaptation of the CFE may enter
into force.
Slovakia will support initiatives aimed at improving the implementation of the existing
confidence and security building measures (such as the 1999 Vienna Document, the OSCE
Document on Small Arms and Light Weapons and the Code of Conduct) and the discussions
concerning their modernisation. It will support OSCE initiatives and activities in Kosovo and the


-----

effort at resolving frozen conflicts in line with basic principles of the UN Charter and
international law.
Slovakia will support coordinated positions of the Alliance and the EU in UN bodies
during discussions on crisis management operations outside the territory of Slovakia. Members of
Slovak Armed Forces and Slovak military observers will continue to actively participate in UN
peacekeeping missions. The largest military contingent of the Slovak Republic - in Cyprus coupled with Slovak diplomatic mediation activities, play an important military-political role in
the region. Using its diplomatic mission in Nicosia as an intermediary, Slovakia is ready to
continue providing “good offices” in 2010. These will consist of bi-community meetings that
enable closer relations between Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities and thus help to
resolve the Cyprus issue.
As regards crisis management activities outside Slovak territory, Slovakia will emphasise
the achievement of adequate representation in UN missions. In interactive discussions between
NATO, the EU, the UN and the OSCE, it will highlight the role of regional organisations for
securing peace and comprehensive security.

**A.3. Facing Global Threats**

The key factor in tackling global security issues is the effort at strengthening effective

multilateralism, which Slovakia supports in all respects.
The fight against terrorism continues to be a key priority for the government of Slovakia
and for all segments of the country’s security system. Through its EU and NATO membership
and activities within the UN system, Slovakia will continue to actively participate in international
activities in this area. Slovakia will co-sponsor international events organised along the lines of
the Global UN Strategy to Combat International Terrorism, thus helping to create conditions for
coordinated actions by the states and for improving the development of internal capacities for
fighting this phenomenon.
The MFA will also foster a more active approach and closer coordination of activities of
individual sectors in the fight against terrorism at the international level in 2010. Slovakia will
actively strive to meet the objectives of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism. It will
also work for the adoption of the Comprehensive UN Convention on International Terrorism in
its current wording. Slovakia will also focus on the summer 2010 session of the special ad hoc
committee for the elaboration of the convention in New York.
The effort at enhancing effective multilateralism has led to a renaissance of the agenda of
arms control, disarmament, and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. This agenda,
following a long stagnation of the disarmament machinery, re-establishes realistic prerequisites
for creating an environment based on international norms and institutions capable of effectively
coping with the continued threat of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
Slovakia will actively participate in building the international institutional and treaty
infrastructure, including the strengthening of resources and authority of the existing international
organisations and independent multilateral forums in the area of arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation, which represents fundamental elements for enhancing global security.
The Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) will continue to play a
special role in this process. It is the cornerstone of the global regime of nuclear non-proliferation.
Slovakia will continue to engage in all three NPT pillars (disarmament, non-proliferation,
peaceful use of nuclear energy) and to strive for their balanced implementation with a view to


-----

ensuring the effective function of this regime through fulfilment of commitments under the NPT.
Slovakia stands ready to contribute to a successful outcome of the 2010 NPT review conference.
Efforts to develop new tools capable of ensuring an effective response to today’s security
challenges will play an important role in strengthening the international security architecture.
Slovakia is an integral part of these initiatives and processes by virtue of its EU and
NATO membership and/or as a member of international organisations or a participating state of
international groupings engaged in the struggle against proliferation of WMD. Slovakia wants to
take part in the consolidation of the existing system of global standards, strive to make them
universal and work for a consistent implementation of the provisions of the existing standards in
this area. Slovakia will endeavour to uphold the current positive trend in relation to the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) which it considers to be an important part of the nonproliferation regime. Slovakia will focus on facilitating the early entry into force of the CTBT
and preparedness of CTBTO for meeting objectives arising from the Treaty. Slovakia is ready to
take full part in the process of developing a new institutional framework, in particular through the
Disarmament Conference, the United Nations, and through other relevant international initiatives.
Slovakia will pay special attention to the opening of negotiations on the draft fissile material cutoff treaty (FMCT) and of substantive talks on the prevention of an arms race in outer space,
nuclear disarmament, and on effective international measures for the prevention of use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states.
In the conventional arms area, Slovakia will continue its efforts to combat illicit transfers
with an emphasis on small arms and light weapons and continue to prevent the acquisition of
arms by organised crime entities. Slovakia will uphold the consistent implementation of measures
arising from relevant international treaties and support the development of new mechanisms in
the relevant part of the security and humanitarian agenda.
Slovakia will continue to draw the attention of the United Nations to Security Sector

Reform (SSR) – a prerequisite for successful completion of UN peacekeeping operations and for
subsequent peace-building endeavours. For this reason as well, the Permanent Mission of the
Slovak Republic to the United Nations in New York will continue to coordinate the activities of
an informal grouping of Member States – the “Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform.”
In order to promote the UN regional approaches to SSR, the Slovak Republic plans to coorganise an expert-level workshop with Indonesia for the countries of Southeast Asia in the first
semester of 2010. In addition to a discussion about UN peacekeeping operations seen from the
perspective of ASEAN countries, the workshop will also provide a forum for discussing SSRrelated issues, based on the principle of respect for the national ownership of these processes by
UN Member States concerned.

**A.4. Enlarging the Zone of Freedom, Democracy, Respect for Human Rights, Rule of Law**
**and Good Governance**

The primary objective pursued by Slovakia at all relevant international organisations (the
UN, the Council of Europe, the OSCE), as well as in the context of bilateral relations, will be to
strengthen and increase the effectiveness of the protection of human rights, democracy and the
principles of the rule of law as key dimensions of foreign policy and international relations.
Through its efforts as a member state and a member of important bodies of the above
organisations (mainly the UN), it will also emphasise a consistent implementation of its existing
human rights commitments.


-----

Activities connected with its membership in the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva
will be a priority for the Slovak Republic at the United Nations in 2010. Particular attention will
have to be paid to the activities of the working group set up to explore the possibility of
elaborating another optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child that will be
chaired by Slovakia. Furthermore, Slovakia as a full member of the Council will take part in the
drafting of and action on all thematic and country resolutions to be adopted by the Council and in
the activities of the Council in all formats. The main session of the Council, including the highlevel segment (participation of foreign ministers), will take place in March 2010. For Slovakia,
membership in the Council also means active work in the “troikas” of rapporteurs in the system
of the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of the human rights records of individual countries of
the world. At this stage, it is known that in 2010 Slovakia will be a member of the reporting
troika for Italy and Armenia. Slovakia will also be actively engaged in the activities of the newly
created Council body – the Forum on Minority Issues – and in the activities of other mechanisms
for the protection of national minorities.
As regards the allocation of tasks to EU members at the UN Human Rights Council,
Slovakia will take up new activities in line with current developments and needs of the EU
Presidency.
A special part of Slovak foreign policy in the field of human rights lies in fulfilling the
obligation of Slovakia to regularly submit reports on compliance with the UN human rights
treaties, to which Slovakia is a party. This is a continuous process. The Slovak Republic will not
submit any implementation report in 2010, but, since it submitted two such reports in 2009 (on
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International
Covenant on Civic and Political Rights), relevant UN bodies will initiate the procedure of their
evaluation, followed by the preparation of a dialogue between Slovakia and experts from these
bodies.
Slovakia also provided a financial contribution for the 2010 programmes of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, thus following on the practice of the
previous years.
At the UN bodies in New York, Slovakia will focus on issues reflecting its national
interests and the EU priorities, namely: effective protection of human rights of the most
vulnerable groups; abolition of the death penalty; freedom of expression; freedom of religion and
free media; and the rights of the child. Similarly to previous years, Slovakia will emphasise
universal ratification of human rights conventions, promote further development of international
mechanisms for human rights protection and foster gender mainstreaming in all aspects of the
UN’s work. Slovakia will uphold the efforts of the international community to combat impunity,
especially through international criminal tribunals and, in particular, the International Criminal
Court. In the UN framework, Slovakia will actively work towards the implementation of UNSC
Resolution No. 1325 (2000) emphasising protection of women and children in armed conflicts.
The Slovak Republic will also participate in the 54th session of the Commission on the Status of
Women.

The Council of Europe has initiated the process of evaluating the Slovak Republic’s
commitments arising from the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
(third monitoring round). The decision of the Committee of Ministers regarding the level of their
implementation can be expected in 2010. Another procedure in progress is the assessment
initiated by the Slovak Republic by the Venice Commission of the conformity of the amended


-----

State Language Act with the Slovakia’s commitments concerning the protection of minority
languages.
A substantive discussion is also expected in 2010 among the Council of Europe Member
States on increasing the effectiveness of the European Court of Human Rights. Slovakia will take
part in the search for ways to speed up and improve the quality of the Court’s work, which is
currently unable to cope with the backlog of applications.
Slovakia will continue drawing on and conveying its experience from the chairmanship of
the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe. It will, in particular, strive to assist Belarus
in fulfilling the criteria of membership in the organisation. Moreover, it will promote expansion
of bilateral contacts with civil society in Belarus.

Slovakia will foster a balanced approach by the OSCE to all three dimensions of the
organisation, in particular in relation to the Corfu Process. Regarding the human rights
dimension, it will concentrate on maintaining a strong and autonomous status of the OSCE Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) and on strengthening the activities of
OSCE missions. Slovakia will endeavour to increase the participation of civil society
representatives in the OSCE implementation meeting on the human dimension and in election
monitoring missions organised by the European Union. It will also make an effort to increase the
number of short-term and long-term observers in the OSCE election monitoring missions and
achieve a wider representation of Slovakia in secondment and contract positions within OSCE
structures.

Slovakia will continue to actively participate in the work of the Task Force for
International Cooperation on Holocaust Education, Remembrance and Research (ITF), which
will be chaired by Israel in 2010.

Slovakia will pay special attention to international cooperation with regard to improving
the situation of the Roma minority in Europe. Slovakia fully supports concerted efforts by states
and international organisations at addressing the problems faced by the Roma and will support
every effort aimed at improving their situation. Slovakia will hold the presidency of the
international programme of the Decade of Roma Inclusion 2005-2015 until June 2010. After
assuming the presidency of the Visegrad Group in July 2010, Slovakia will follow up on the
initiative of Hungary to develop a Central European Roma Strategy aimed at strengthening
cooperation among Visegrad Group countries in the area of integration of the Roma in society
and using experience obtained during the Decade.

**A.5. Strengthening effective multilateralism in the United Nations**

Today’s international relations are characterised by a shift towards multilateralism that
calls for the commitment of a growing number of states to address the global problems of
mankind. In light of the global economic crisis and the growing ambitions of leading countries in
the various regions, Slovakia also considers it necessary to step up efforts at effective global and
regional multilateralism and consistent respect for international law.
The Slovak Republic’s membership in the United Nations (UN), in the specialized
agencies of the UN system, and in other international organisations must be used to address
global threats and problems that jeopardise socio-economic stability, sustainable development
and ultimately also peace and security.


-----

At the UN, Slovakia will continue striving to strengthen its positions (following up on its
initiatives in previous years) and pursue new activities. Its priorities will include:

  - using Slovakia’s membership in international organisations to promote peace and security
in the world, including in the area of crisis management operations and missions outside
the territory of Slovakia, and in the field of Security System Reform with emphasis on
further strengthening the EU-UN cooperation in this area

  - using Slovakia’s membership in the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) in
2010-2012 to contribute to the development and elimination of poverty, in particular
against the backdrop of the current global economic and financial crisis

  - using Slovakia’s membership in the Executive Board of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) in 2009-2013 to revitalise reform
processes at UNESCO

  - using Slovakia’s membership in the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organisation
(FAO) in 2009-2012 to promote agriculture as the fundamental instrument for combating
hunger and malnutrition.

In conformity with its long-term priority, Slovakia will concentrate its efforts on fostering
the internal and external strengthening of the United Nations, including UN system reform.
Slovakia will make sustained efforts to help advance the reform of key UN bodies and improve
their interaction with each other, in particular between the UN General Assembly (UNGA) and
the UN Security Council (UNSC). On the basis of its experience as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council (2006-2007), Slovakia will support the reform of the Council to make it
more legitimate, effective, representative and transparent. If the Council’s membership is to be
increased, Slovakia will demand that at least one non-permanent seat is allocated to the Eastern
European Group (EEG).
The ECOSOC oversees the activities of 14 specialized agencies of the UN system and
five regional commissions, and also controls the use of a significant portion of UN funds in the
areas of economic and social development and environmental protection. These are the areas
where it will be necessary to use the existing potential to promote the economic and social
interests of Slovakia.
Slovakia’s membership in the Executive Board of the UN Development Programme

(UNDP)/UN Population Fund (UNFPA) gives Slovakia the opportunity to participate directly in
decision-making on the activities of these important UN development funds.
In the UNESCO Executive Board, Slovakia will support the programmes of cooperation
between nations through education, training, science, culture and communication with the
objective of strengthening justice, fundamental human rights and freedoms in the world.
Slovakia, alongside its EU partners, will help reform the scale of assessments of the

Member States’ contributions to the UN budget in order to eliminate existing imbalances. There
will be a need to pay attention to effective and transparent use of the budget so as to prevent
excessive increases. Regarding the budget for UN peacekeeping operations, Slovakia will mainly
concentrate on those operations where it participates – UNFICYP (Cyprus), UNMIK (Kosovo)
and UNTSO (Middle East).
One of the main objectives in the coming period will be to maintain close cooperation

with like-minded partners, especially EU and NATO members. However, it will also be
important to communicate with other partners, pursuing the aim of strengthening effective
multilateralism with the United Nations playing a central role (strategic partnership between the
UN and the EU, the African Union and NATO). Slovakia will continue to support cooperation of


-----

the United Nations with other international and regional organisations and entities, especially on
peace and security issues.
Slovakia will take steps to promote, in a general manner, justice and the rule of
international law in international relations. In particular, it will promote the enforcement of the
decisions of the International Court of Justice, and will follow the Court’s decision-making and
advisory activities. Slovakia, as a contracting party to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, will emphasise its application and full implementation, and will support the
Court’s work to combat impunity in war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. It will
continue to pay attention to the implementation of the Agreement between the Government of the
Slovak Republic and the United Nations on the Execution of Sentences Imposed by the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, which entered into force on 3
November 2008.
Slovakia will continue to pay increased attention to international cooperation in the area

of the fight against drugs, trafficking in persons and organised forms of crime (including
terrorism). In the coming period, Slovakia intends to participate in the projects of the UN Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) designed under the UN Convention against Transnational
Organised Crime, and in other related projects. At the International Organisation for Migration
(IOM) Slovakia intends, on the one hand, to support steps towards minimising the negative
impact of the global migration phenomenon and, on the other hand, to make maximum use of the
positive contribution of migration. As regards the Office of the UN High Commissioner for
Refugees, Slovakia will support its activities aimed at the protection of refugees. Slovakia will
create the necessary pre-conditions enabling the continuation, in cooperation with international
organisations, of humanitarian transfer on Slovak territory of persons under international
protection. Slovakia will endeavour to obtain membership in the UNHCR Executive Committee
in 2011.
In 2010, attention needs to be given to the adoption of measures addressing the food,

energy, economic and financial crisis and mitigating its impact on Slovakia.
At the International Labour Organisation (ILO), Slovakia will monitor the implementation
of ILO conventions in the fields of labour law and human rights, and support initiatives and
activities aimed at ensuring decent work, job creation and poverty alleviation.
Slovakia will pay the necessary attention to agriculture, which has the potential to
mitigate both the consequences of the food crisis and the global economic crisis. In this context,
it will meet its obligations under the declaration of the November 2009 World Food Safety
Summit held in Rome. According to the summit’s conclusions, supporting measures should be
adopted at the national, regional and global level, and increased investment should be made in
agriculture, rural development and food safety.
At the World Health Organisation (WHO), Slovakia will support initiatives to address
global health issues, the influenza pandemic, HIV/AIDS, the health of women and of African
population.
Priority in the environmental field will be given to mitigating the impact of climate

change in line with the conclusions of the Copenhagen Conference of parties to the UN
Framework Convention on Climate Change (December 2009). Considerable further efforts will
be required for adaptation to and reduction of climate change, for cutting the high consumption of
energy in transport, and for reversing the current loss of diversity and natural resources. More
attention will have to be paid in the future to the transition to a safe and sustainable low-carbon
economy with low energy inputs. In relation to the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), special
attention will be given to addressing current environmental problems at a global scale in


-----

connection with international environmental management and sustainable development, green
economy, and biodiversity.
At the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN), Slovakia will participate in
the upgrade of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) and in technology transfers.
Slovakia will endeavour to use the possibilities of cooperation offered by the International

Organisation of Francophonie (IOF) to countries with observer status.

**A.6. Contributing to the Elimination of Migration Risks in Line with Slovakia’s Interests**

The MFA will take part, in cooperation with other government ministries, in the
development and implementation of EU policies in the area of migration, in particular the
Stockholm Programme (a multiannual programme of cooperation in the field of justice and home
affairs in 2010-2014) and the EU’s Global Approach to Migration (geographically focused on
Africa, the Mediterranean and South-eastern and Eastern Europe). The EU’s global approach
reflects a fundamental change in the perception of migration, i. e. a shift from the approach
narrowly oriented toward security and reduction of migration flows to an approach that attempts
to strike a good balance between all migration aspects and perceives migration as a phenomenon
with a positive potential. Slovakia’s contribution will take the form of its continued participation
in EU activities directed eastward and south-eastward of the EU.
Although migration from Africa does not present an immediate security risk for Slovakia,
the failure to address the issue of migrants from Africa at the EU level could have negative
consequences for all EU Member States in the future. The issue that has recently resonated
among EU Member States is the sharing of the burden imposed by migration pressures that are
faced especially by Mediterranean members. One possible solution, which is expected to
contribute to enhancing solidarity between Member States, is “resettlement” within the limits of
the EU, or through the internal relocation mechanism within the EU on a voluntary basis for
persons under international protection. Slovakia is ready to share the burden of migration, but
only if migrants show willingness to stay on its territory and if the receiving country has the right
to select these persons. The MFA is of the opinion that the crucial issue is to maintain the
voluntary participation of Member States in internal relocations and to secure a balanced
approach to migration. The EU pilot project covers the relocation of persons from Malta.
Slovakia has already signalled its preliminary interest to join the project, and is planning to
relocate 10 refugees from Malta in 2010.
At the national level, the MFA will participate in drawing up the Slovak government’s
policy documents on migration. This covers mainly the update of the Migration Policy Concept
of the Slovak Republic (2010-2015). The 2005 Migration Policy Concept of the Slovak Republic
needs to be modified so as to reflect the rise of interest in Slovakia following its EU accession,
not only as a transit country for migrants but also as a country of destination. Primary
responsibility for the development and implementation of migration policy is currently shared by
three state administration authorities – the Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry of Labour, Social
Affairs and Family, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Consequently, the MFA has the
obligation to actively participate in the work of the Steering Committee on Migration and
Integration of Foreigners set up in 2009. The Committee is the main coordination and initiativetaking body of the Slovak Republic with the task of ensuring policy coherence among the sectors
concerned. The MFA is responsible for linking migration policies with development policies. In
2010, the MFA aims to systematically incorporate these interlinked policies in policy documents,
such as the National Programme of Official Development Assistance (ODA). More specifically,


-----

it aims to do this within the development of strategies for ODA programme countries in line with
the Medium-Term ODA Strategy for 2009-2013, and with the list of identified project countries.

### B. A Prosperous Slovakia and Sustainable Development

The urgency for Slovakia’s economy and population of mitigating the consequences of
the global economic crisis and the predominance of economic discourse in today’s international
relations necessitate a special place for the economic dimension of diplomacy in Slovakia’s
foreign policy. Economic diplomacy will be an integral part of processes aimed at ensuring the
prosperity and sustainable development of Slovakia. During close cooperation between all actors
– the Ministry of Economy, the MFA and other specialised sectors and institutions – it will be
more effective to: reflect structural changes in the Slovak economy; account for the activities of
strong foreign investors in Slovakia; consider the limited ability of small and medium-sized
businesses to gain access to export promotion policies; promote the development of a knowledge
economy and innovation environment; and better use the potential of official development
assistance for private sector involvement and job creation.
The MFA aims for all economic diplomacy actors, in synergy with key constitutional

officers of the country and business associations, to use their human and material resources and
capabilities in a coordinated way in order to meet the challenging objectives of the economic and
social development of Slovakia. Ongoing priorities of economic diplomacy will be: attracting
foreign direct investment that is specifically targeted to promoting structural changes;
strengthening the knowledge economy (Slovakia 21); presenting Slovakia’s innovation
environment abroad to increase investment in science and technology and promote transfer of
technologies; and to introduce sophisticated production processes that enhance labour
productivity and exports in conformity with the objectives of the document “Export Promotion
Policy of the Slovak Republic in 2007-2013.” The added value of economic diplomacy in this
process will mainly consist in its ability to obtain and analyse information, establish and maintain
relevant contacts, identify the projects corresponding to the foreign policy, trade and economic
interests of Slovakia, gain access to structures and projects relevant for the economic interests of
Slovakia, analyse global political and economic trends and risks based on the knowledge of the
local environment and ensure the presentation of selected topics and entities abroad.

**B.1. Contributing to the Mitigation of the Impact of the Economic Crisis on Slovakia**

The effort to overcome the consequences of the economic crisis, using specifically

diplomatic means, will represent a priority agenda for all government sectors of the Slovak
Republic. To this end, they will use new procedures in the work of the head office and of Slovak
diplomatic missions abroad.
In 2010, the most intensive consequences of the crisis will be felt in the social area. The
MFA will, in close cooperation with other economic diplomacy actors, focus attention mainly on
practical procedures for contributing to a reduction in Slovakia’s unemployment rate. These
include stimulating aggregate job demand, identifying and applying measures under active labour
market policy, and closely cooperating with the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) in Paris to analyse the instruments for overcoming the impact of the
financial crisis in the context of the Slovak Republic (a small open economy).


-----

The MFA and the Ministry of Economy will ensure the participation of their experts in
financial training offered by a special financial training institution in Slovakia – the outcome of a
key OECD project in the financial field. In close coordination with the Ministry of Economy and
SARIO, the MFA will enter into active communication with the already established and potential
investors aimed at preserving and/or increasing employment in their Slovak operations. Systemic
pre-requisites will be created to enable Slovak companies to use the existing possibilities of
participation in tenders for the supply of goods and services to international organisations. All
relevant and well-tested procedures of working with foreign investors and the experience of the
countries with Slovak diplomatic representations will be used in the home environment as well.
Slovak government ministries will take steps and measures based on a thorough
knowledge of the causes and manifestations of the crisis and of global economy development
trends and their influence not only on the world’s geopolitical and strategic situation, but also on
the Slovak economy and its development prospects. They will closely monitor and evaluate the
situation in the global economy and in the economies of Slovakia’s key partners. They will
supply the top constitutional officers with up-to-date information about measures taken to
overcome the consequences of the crisis and about the current thinking on ways of coping with
serious imbalances in the world economy. They will present their positions at major international
events held with the participation of the Slovak Republic. Slovakia will take an active approach
to assessing the activities carried out in response to the economic crisis by EU bodies, the G-20
group of countries, and by specialised international organisations.
Through its membership in the International Monetary Fund and in the World Bank

Group, Slovakia will take an active part in the international financial policy aimed at ensuring
stable economic development and will foster the fulfilment of the millennium development goals.
At the World Trade Organisation (WTO), the emphasis will be placed on: continuing the
world trade liberalisation negotiations under the Doha Development Agenda (DDA); on pursuing
their conclusion in 2010; and on monitoring the trade consequences of the global economic crisis
with the continued objective of preventing protectionism and trade protection measures.
Moreover, attention will be devoted to improving the functioning of WTO bodies.

**B.2 Promoting Economic Development and Prosperity and Enforcing Slovakia’s Economic**
**Interests**

The basic constituents of economic diplomacy that will be effectively pursued by the
MFA in cooperation with the Ministry of Economy and other actors are: eliminating the negative
economic and social impacts of the financial and economic crisis; attracting foreign investors,
thus creating an inflow of foreign direct investment with an added scientific value; research,
innovation and transfer of modern technologies; promoting the implementation of public-private
projects in the country’s infrastructure; promoting small and medium-sized businesses and their
expansion to international markets; and promoting and diversifying exports to non-European
territories. Special emphasis will be placed on investment promotion. The inflow of investment to
Slovakia would contribute to diversifying the sectoral structure of the Slovak economy,
especially in sectors with high value added, and would help introduce advanced technologies.
Emphasis needs to be placed on investment in information and communication technologies,
biotechnologies, renewable energy and investment inputs in applied research, and on specialised
and high quality services for the private sector. Applying the economic dimension of diplomacy,


-----

the MFA pursues these objectives also through the project of technology transfers and innovation
cooperation with the United States.
Regarding EU’s innovation policies, increased attention will be devoted to up-to-date
financial and economic themes that influence the situation and the development of the Slovak
economy and to pursuing Slovakia’s interests in the decision-making process of the Union.
Detailed knowledge of the positions of Slovakia’s partners will be put to use in building
partnerships aimed at attaining the objectives and priorities of Slovakia’s foreign policy in
bilateral and multilateral economic relations. The key task of economic diplomacy is to
constantly monitor relevant economic movements and trends and to trigger adequate responses.
Effective cooperation with Slovak industry representatives in trade activities and in
investment abroad is significantly fostered by the conclusion of investment promotion and
protection treaties and double taxation treaties, drawn up in close cooperation between Slovak
diplomatic missions, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Economy. These treaties help
expand investment activities by Slovak entrepreneurs, especially in developing countries. Based
on the initiative of the Ministry of Economy, a Memorandum on Promoting Investment Activities
of Slovak Business Entities was signed on 22 June 2009 between the Ministry of Finance, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Economy. The primary focus of investment
promotion in 2010 will be on developing the system of treaties and on mapping business
opportunities in the developing countries.

**Economic Diplomacy from the Regional Perspective**

_Foreign Trade_
Slovakia’s key trading partners are the Member States of the EU. Slovakia, as a part of the
single European Economic Area and a member of the European Monetary Union (EMU), will
continue expanding its relations and cooperation with individual Member States of the Union.
This will be done with the aim of fostering its economic growth and economic stability,
notwithstanding certain drawbacks related to the Slovak economy’s dependency on economic
developments in the Union. Slovakia will, therefore, continue supporting trade expansion and
investment flows from EU countries. Traditionally, the strongest EU partners for Slovakia are
Germany, the Czech Republic, the United Kingdom, Austria, France, Poland, Italy, the
Netherlands, Spain, Romania and Hungary.
An essential requirement in relation to new markets is to improve the knowledge of these
markets; and this is where economic diplomacy plays an irreplaceable role. In spite of the size of
and opportunities presented by non-EU markets, the volume of Slovak exports that can
potentially flow to these markets is less than 17%. Exports to countries outside Europe are
disproportionately low also in comparison with similar countries, even in spite of the growing
absorption potential of most non-European markets.
A prominent place among the countries outside the single market of the EU will be held
by the U.S. Special attention will be devoted to Russia, especially because of Slovakia’s
continued energy dependency. The greatest challenge for redressing Slovakia’s negative trade
balance is presented, besides Russia, by South Korea, China, Taiwan and Japan. Slovakia’s
priority partners on African territory are South Africa, Nigeria, Kenya, Ethiopia, Angola,
Uganda, and Tanzania. Priority countries in Latin America are Brazil, Argentina and Mexico.
Other markets that hold potential for the diversification of Slovak exports are those of Southeast
Asia and the region of Central Asia.


-----

_Foreign Direct Investment_
The key source for economic growth and for improving Slovakia’s innovation
performance is foreign direct investment (FDI). In recent years, Slovakia has seen a significant
increase in FDI inflows and still belongs among the attractive countries for foreign investors, in
spite of the global financial and economic crisis. Slovakia displays a high potential for return on
and security of investment and its economic environment is steadily improving. The importance
attached to attracting FDI is demonstrated also by the government’s incentives for foreign
investment inflows. In this context, Slovakia will promote FDI inflows from any region/country
of the world without any restriction, especially as regards high value-added investment in
modern, innovative and environmentally friendly technologies and science and research,
provided they are not subject to a political embargo.

_Acquiring Sources of Funding_
To date, Slovakia has made only limited use of the economic cooperation possibilities
offered through the financial facilities of sovereign funds, which are based mostly outside the
Euro-Atlantic space, especially in energy-exporting countries and countries with high trade
surpluses. The countries of priority interest in this regard will include the United Arab Emirates,
Singapore, Norway, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, China, Hong Kong, Australia, Qatar, Russia and
Libya. The MFA will continue to play its part in gaining access to these financial resources with
the objective of funding PPP projects for the construction of the country’s infrastructure.
Double taxation treaties (DTTs) and investment promotion and protection treaties (BITs)
are expected to be signed and/or prepared for signature by the end of 2010 with most Arab states,
including the Persian Gulf countries that are considered a priority for Slovakia’s economic policy
in the region. Treaties with Algeria, Bahrain, Qatar (BITs) and Kuwait (DTT) are prepared for
signature. An advanced stage has been reached in the drawing up of treaties with Oman (BIT
and DTT), Qatar (DTT) and the United Arab Emirates (BIT).

_Development of Science, Research and Innovation_
Any country that wants to succeed in the increasingly competitive global environment
must invest in the future – education, scientific and technological development, green and
progressive technologies, and high value-added products. Slovakia has yet to make progress in
creating a favourable pro-innovation business environment. The country lacks the technologyoriented business segment that could become the basis for a dynamic innovation environment.
Although the objective of attracting as many foreign investors as possible to address the problem
of high unemployment and growing imbalances in the economic strength of individual regions
remains a priority for the Slovak government, support for new technologies in Slovakia is still
insufficient. In the coming period, attention in this area will be given to fostering mutually
beneficial economic relations, especially with the United States. Economic diplomacy
endeavours will be channelled to providing incentives for investment in higher value-added
production, growth branches such as high-tech, biotechnologies, nanotechnologies, electronic
commerce and the building of technology centres. The countries that are considered innovation
leaders and are of priority interest in this area are the U.S., Finland, France, Iceland, Ireland,
Australia, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Korea, Canada, Germany,
Taiwan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Denmark, Sweden and Spain.


-----

**B.3. Increasing the Volume and Effectiveness of Slovakia’s Development Aid and**
**Humanitarian Assistance**

Key priorities of Slovakia in the development cooperation field in 2010 continue to be the
strengthening of stability and good governance, sustainable development and alleviation of
poverty and hunger in the world through a more effective and targeted provision of development
aid and humanitarian assistance. Slovakia will provide official development assistance in
accordance with basic rules and principles that are in line with the foreign policy and economic
priorities of the country and comply with the principles of international development policy and
of the EU.
According to the Medium-Term Strategy of Official Development Assistance of the
Slovak Republic, the programme countries of Slovak Aid in 2009-2013 will continue to be
Afghanistan, Kenya and Serbia. It appears to be necessary to continuously review sectoral
priorities in light of the development of integration efforts in the Western Balkans so as to
effectively support this effort. The foreign policy priority that stands out in the foreground in
Eastern Europe is the support for the European project of Eastern Partnership. The MFA will
continue to work in synergy and maintain a partnership dialogue with Slovak non-governmental
entities.
To achieve wider involvement of Slovak Aid in the development cooperation with donor
countries through trilateral projects, the Slovak Agency for International Development
Cooperation (SAMRS) will implement a joint project in Serbia and Ethiopia in cooperation with
the Austrian Development Agency (ADA). In the area of multilateral and bilateral cooperation,
an important partner for the Slovak government is the Bratislava Regional Centre of the UN
Development Programme (UNDP BRC). Cooperation activities planned for 2010 will be aimed at
involving Slovak experts in regional and national programme activities of UNDP offices, sharing
Slovakia’s experience from the transition period, involving Slovak volunteers in Slovak
development assistance projects and drawing up the national programme for the deployment of
volunteers.
Slovakia will also continue providing multilateral official development assistance by
means of contributions through the Ministry of Finance to the common EU budget, the World
Bank Group and the Western Balkans Fund administered by the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development.
In the area of humanitarian assistance, the MFA will continue cooperating with the
Ministry of the Interior – chief national coordinator of humanitarian assistance in Slovakia.
Within the limits of its budgetary possibilities, it will respond to emergency humanitarian
challenges and the needs that may arise over the course of 2010.
In 2010, the MFA will continue to further strengthen the systemic character, transparency,
quality and effectiveness of development assistance provided by the Slovak Republic. At the
same time, it will be important to continue strengthening personnel and technical capabilities for
the provision of development assistance and for building the system of monitoring and evaluating
Slovak Aid projects and programmes, and to improve reporting on Slovakia’s development
assistance.
Cooperation on the part of the MFA in the area of development aid and humanitarian
assistance in 2010 will be aimed at building stronger partnership links with relevant actors and
entities participating in the development assistance of Slovakia at the state level and nongovernmental level, and with the business sector.


-----

**B.4. Increasing the Energy Security of Slovakia**

While fully respecting the competencies of the Ministry of Economy, the MFA is intent
on continuing and contributing its share by means of real diplomacy, (such as analytical and
information activities, contact platforms, knowledge of the environment and activities in
international organisations), to the creation of prerequisites and the implementation of the
objectives set out in the Energy Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic approved by the Slovak
government in 2008. Cooperation between the foreign affairs and economic sectors within the
context of external energy security in a specific time horizon will be dealt with at the meetings of
the Inter-Ministerial Analytical and Coordination Commission for Energy Security of the Slovak
_Republic._
The MFA will contribute to the attainment of the Slovak Republic’s national energy
priorities. With respect to the traditional strategic energy partnerships, the MFA will contribute to
achieving their balance and expansion, and enable the establishment and expansion of new longterm partnerships.
In international organisations, the MFA will focus particularly on activities carried out
within the third platform of Eastern Partnership of the EU and by the OSCE. In the bilateral
context, it will give priority attention to the above issues in contacts with non-EU countries. As
regards the building of contacts, it will focus mainly on the activities of partner foreign affairs
ministries and non-governmental organisations in the energy security field.
The MFA will use all the relevant forums to continue placing an emphasis on priority
issues for Slovakia in the area of energy security. The latter include: security of energy supplies
(mainly of natural gas) as part of national and international security; energy effectiveness; lowcarbon energy resources (nuclear energy); and use of renewable energies while supporting
energy-related initiatives aimed at sustainable development on a European and worldwide scale.

### C. Slovakia’s Interests in an Effective EU, Strengthening Neighbourly Relations and Intensifying Regional Cooperation

**C.1. Supporting the Attainment of Slovakia’s Interests in the EU and Strengthening**
**Slovakia’s Influence on the Development of Common EU Policies**

The global financial and economic crisis has revealed the vulnerability not only of the
world economy, but also of the European Union and its Member States. Joint actions and the
search for appropriate solutions within the EU framework appear to be a good basis for
mitigating the impact of the crisis on the population of Slovakia/EU. In this regard, the Economic
and Financial Affairs Council (ECOFIN) is the key forum that has adopted fundamental legal
acts of the EU aimed at addressing the crisis. The new system of financial supervision at macroand micro-level that is to be implemented over the course of 2010 should prevent similar
financial and economic crises in the future. Next year, Slovakia will also participate in the
development of a new financial perspective for 2014-2020. Clear formulation of priority areas
will constitute the basis for creating a suitable environment for the prevention of crises and for
the creation/maintenance of a sound economic environment in Slovakia and in the EU as a whole.


-----

In the field of energy, Slovakia will take steps to allocate sufficient funding for building
connections between energy infrastructures of the Member States and for diversifying natural gas
sources and transport routes. It will also pursue the implementation of the initiative on
connections between North and South.. Slovakia will also work towards ensuring the security of
oil supplies by incorporating inter-connection projects into the TEN-E mechanism.
In the area of common trade policy, Slovakia will continue to actively influence the
development of common EU positions vis-à-vis the WTO (DDA negotiations, accession
processes, compliance with rules, etc.), to carry out regional and bilateral cooperation, to use all
trade instruments in the EU framework, and to improve access to non-EU markets.
Should a global agreement be reached in Copenhagen in December 2009, climate

protection and the fight against climate change will progress to the implementation phase. For the
EU and its Member States, this will mainly mean working toward objectives set out in the
climate/energy package. Europe will concentrate on the transposition of the agreement, on the
implementation of the various ambitious measures, and on a gradual transition to a low-carbon
economy with implications for all areas of life – from energy, industry and transport to other
areas affecting the environment and the climate. Complementary steps will be gradually taken
with a view to building a global carbon market. In addition, EU commitments under the
climate/energy package will comprise several unilateral commitments, including some in the
energy sector. The latter will be aimed at reducing emissions, expanding energy generation from
renewable sources, and improving energy effectiveness, thus strengthening the three
characteristic features of European energy policy – security, sustainability and competitiveness.
The EU will focus on the implementation of new legal acts on renewable energies and on a single
market for electricity and gas.
With the second phase of the Lisbon Strategy drawing to an end, the EU will have to take
a decision on how to further develop this strategy after 2010. Its objective should be to strengthen
the EU’s competitiveness with emphasis on environmentally, socially and economically
sustainable growth and employment. Consultations should lead to simplifying the process of
administration of the Lisbon Agenda or, possibly, to setting out a smaller number of more
concrete, measurable objectives. In light of the economic crisis, it will be necessary to evaluate
the fulfilment of the Growth and Employment Recovery Plan adopted, inter alia, in order to
strengthen and accelerate reforms introduced on the basis of the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and
Employment.
As regards small and medium-sized enterprises, Slovakia will endorse the implementation
of reforms initiated on the basis of the single market review. Its objective is to improve
opportunities in the business environment and increase consumer confidence and demand. In
connection with the economic recovery, Slovakia aims to fully implement the “Small Business
Act” initiative.
Mitigating the impact of the crisis on employment and the social sphere is a key priority
for Member States and the EU as a whole. Mobilisation of funding resources, e. g. through the
European Social Fund or the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund, will contribute to the
development and adaptation of strategies for the fight against unemployment, especially in the
area of active labour market policy (labour market re-entry of the unemployed). The year 2010
will reflect the spirit of the European year for combating poverty and social exclusion.
In the common agricultural policy, 2010 will see full implementation of the health check.
The EU will also focus on adjustments to the current political framework for information and
communication technologies (i2010) and will strive to reduce the fragmentation of research in
Europe.


-----

**C.2. Supporting EU Enlargement and Contributing to a Successful European**
**Neighbourhood Policy**

Slovakia will continue to be an advocate of the process of EU enlargement, subject to the
fulfilment of principles of the Treaty, the Copenhagen criteria of 1993, and renewed consensus
based on the 2006 Council conclusions that set out strict and fair conditions based on the merit
principle. Slovakia will strive to meet the vision of visa liberalisation for the countries of the
Western Balkans and of Eastern Europe that did not achieve this objective in 2009, based on their
individual evaluation. Slovakia supports the European Commission’s “enlargement package” and
will promote the implementation of proposed conclusions and recommendations including those
on enlargement and the Western Balkans adopted by the EU’s General Affairs Council at its
December meeting. In the longer-term, Slovakia will continue expressing support for the process
of EU integration of the countries of the Western Balkans, which it considers to be the main
instrument for strengthening stability, security and overall development of the region.
The key objective in connection with Slovakia’s foreign policy interests in 2010 will be to
preserve the dynamics of Eastern Partnership implementation. It will thus be necessary to
continue being pragmatic, to develop those themes of the Eastern Partnership project that have
constructive potential, and to continue the discussion. Priority partner countries for Slovakia
under the project are Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine. Slovakia will also support the projects that
bring all six partner countries closer to the Union, as well as the projects supporting regional
cooperation between countries at the bilateral and multilateral level in selected sectors such as
energy, economy, justice and home affairs. The year 2010 is also expected to bring the final stage
in the negotiations on the Association Agreement with Ukraine that will contain key provisions
on free trade. Slovakia will endeavour to meet the above objectives also through its upcoming
presidency of the Visegrad Group (V4).

**C.3. Contribution to Strengthening the Effective Functioning of EU Institutions**

In terms of promoting the effective functioning of EU institutions, the key factor that will
influence Slovak foreign policy in 2010 will be the process of implementation of the Lisbon
Treaty, which has introduced several important changes to the treaty basis and to the way the
European Union functions. One positive aspect is that the tendencies towards creating a multispeed Europe were not supported in the process of institutional reform, and that a unified
approach eventually prevailed.
Implementation of the Lisbon Treaty will mean the creation and designation of new
political positions in the EU: President of the European Council and High Representative of the
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy; gradual building of the European External
Service; reform of the rules of procedure of the European Council and of the Council of the EU;
clarification of chairmanship of the Council’s preparatory bodies in the area of external relations;
and possibly also other issues that were not definitively resolved in 2009. The entire process of
applying new procedures will be carried out in the context of a newly created European
Commission.
From the MFA perspective, the most important element of the implementation of the
Treaty is the creation of the European External Service. During the process of gradual
establishment of the Service, it will be necessary to ensure the adequate representation and
influence of Slovakia while adhering to other priorities of Slovakia in this area, such as equal


-----

status of all staff members and links between and cooperation of the European External Service
with national foreign services. The objective pursued in this regard will be to deploy members of
the Slovak diplomatic service at the European level, preferentially in positions where they can
use their experience and expertise.
Slovakia will take an active part in the process of building and implementing a new
institutional framework of the EU in accordance with the Lisbon Treaty. New positions of the
President of the European Council and of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy are expected to make EU institutions more effective by improving the
coherence and continuity of EU policies, especially in the area of foreign relations. The
implementation of the Lisbon Treaty will increase the effectiveness of institutions’ work through
a clearer delimitation of competencies between the EU and the Member States. The change in the
voting procedure of the EU Council to a double-majority system will become effective only in
2014.
Slovakia supports the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty. Its practical implementation
should lead to achieving a proper balance of interests of large and small Member States and
contribute to strengthening the EU in terms of its internal cohesion. It should also help increase
the EU’s influence in the international arena.
Representatives of Slovakia will actively participate in the work of Council formations in
accordance with Slovakia’s priorities and in the interest of common objectives of the European
Union.
At a time when the EU’s function is undergoing reforms, intensive cooperation will be
required with members of the European Parliament whose status will be further strengthened
under the Lisbon Treaty.
The objective will be to create an effective and balanced EU system that takes into
account the interests of all Member States and, at the same time, strengthens the European Union
as a whole.

**C.4. Reinforcing Neighbourly Relations and Intensifying Regional Cooperation**

Stability, security and continuous development of the region of Central Europe will

depend on the level of good neighbourly relations and cooperation between the countries
concerned. Close ties, mutually beneficial and active cooperation and dialogue conducted in a
positive spirit represent permanent priorities for Slovakia’s relations with its neighbours.
In 2010, developments in the Central European space will be influenced, _inter alia, by_
parliamentary elections in the Czech Republic, Hungary, Austria and Slovakia. Presidential
elections will be held in 2010 in Hungary, Poland and Ukraine.
An important common denominator of cooperation between Slovakia and its neighbours
is the effort to continuously draw on financial resources of the European Regional Development
Fund through cross-border cooperation programmes. These are used for projects involving
Slovakia’s borders with its various neighbours, and in the creation of new partnerships between
self-governing bodies in accordance with the principles of the European Territorial SelfGovernment Association, a new element of European regionalism.

**Visegrad Cooperation**
Deepening the cohesion and affiliation of the countries of the Visegrad Group – V4, will
continue to be a priority in the area of regional and cross-border cooperation of Central European
countries. Slovakia will focus on the coordination of inter-sectoral cooperation and the


-----

development and implementation of a comprehensive work programme for the Visegrad Group
during Slovakia’s V4 presidency between 1 July 2010 and 30 June 2011. It will follow up on the
positive experience of the previous presidencies, and will continue to carry out key sectoral and
foreign policy activities that are beneficial for our countries and their inhabitants.
In the diplomatic activities involving Visegrad Group countries, including the planned
summit of the Prime Ministers of the Visegrad Group, Slovakia will focus on the following:
strengthening of the consultation mechanism; concerted action and formulation of common
positions of Visegrad Group countries concerning important issues of the EU agenda, such as
budget, regional development, external energy security and allocation of posts in EU bodies to
candidates and representatives from V4 countries; concerted action aimed at reducing the impact
of the global economic and financial crisis; and in the planning and implementation of, for
example, the EU Strategy for the Danube Region.
Slovakia will support the strengthening of internal Visegrad cooperation and a new vector
of V4 operation – the V4 + format – with a view to sharing the integration experience of
Visegrad Group countries with the Western Balkans and Eastern Partnership countries. An
extraordinary extended meeting of foreign ministers with their partners from the above countries
will be held in Bratislava. This will reaffirm the continuity of the Visegrad Group and represent
Slovakia’s contribution to the strengthening of relations between the V4 and the EU on the one
hand, and the immediate neighbours and partners of Slovakia on the other hand. Slovakia will
make active use of an important V4 instrument – the International Visegrad Fund – and will draw
more intensively on the capacities and expertise of non-governmental organisations and civil
society in the academic and scientific spheres.

**The Czech Republic**
The strengthening of bilateral cooperation and the overall development of outstanding

relations with the Czech Republic continue to represent a priority interest for Slovakia. The core
activity in this area will be the continuation of dialogue at the level of top constitutional officers,
ministers and experts from the various sectors. Intensive cooperation between the Slovak and
Czech Parliaments will also play an essential role.
In the expectation of gradual economic recovery, special attention will have to be given to
the economic dimension of bilateral relations with the goal of restoring the growth trajectory of
mutual trade and investment of the previous years. In view of the similarity of structural
problems in the two countries’ energy sectors, close cooperation in the field of energy with an
emphasis on inter-connection of energy networks will remain an important part of the bilateral
dialogue (common Nuclear Forum).
Slovakia will continue to carry out activities aimed at safeguarding cultural and linguistic
proximity between the Slovak and the Czech nations. In the modern history of Europe, this is a
unique and very inspiring phenomenon. An important vehicle to preserve this proximity will be
cultural activities and media, as well as highly developed cooperation between schools at all
levels.
In addition to the strengthening of bilateral relations, attention will have to be given to
deepening cooperation on a regional and European scale. The main focus will be the expansion of
activities under the Eastern Partnership project and the coordination of actions by both countries
vis-à-vis the countries of the Western Balkans. In the security field, Slovakia will continue to
concentrate on cooperation related to the strengthening of security in the Euro-Atlantic space, and
on joint operation of armed forces of the two countries in crisis management missions.


-----

**The Republic of Hungary**
The symbolism of cooperation based on the framework provided by the Treaty on Good
Neighbourliness and Friendly Cooperation between the Slovak Republic and the Republic of
Hungary will be further reinforced by the 15th anniversary of the Treaty’s signing. Slovakia’s
focus in the development of Slovak-Hungarian relations will be on shedding the burden of the
past and creating conditions for a regular and standard dialogue on present and future relations
between the two countries as partners in the EU and Allies in NATO. Slovakia wants to address
all divergent opinions and potential disputes in a substantive and cultivated manner, to avoid their
internalisation and to prevent the rise of nervousness among foreign partners and allies. Slovakia
will continue to be open to a dialogue with the newly elected representation of the Republic of
Hungary at all levels and in all areas of common interest. It will be important to continue
implementing the 11-point joint declaration of the Slovak and Hungarian Prime Ministers signed
during their meeting at Sečany (Szécsény) in the summer of 2009. This includes the resumption
of activities by all inter-governmental commissions as a mechanism supporting the
implementation of the basic Treaty. An important task in 2010 will be to give a balanced
presentation of the real picture of the entire spectrum of Slovak-Hungarian relations.
Slovakia will continue in its efforts to depoliticise minority and historical issues, and
address them in a substantive and professional discussion. Slovakia will approach the conceptual
divergence of opinions concerning the legislation on persons belonging to the Hungarian national
minority mainly by means of an internal dialogue with the representatives of the Hungarian
national minority. Attention will be given to communication with representatives of the Slovak
minority living in Hungary and to effective assistance by Slovakia for the safeguarding and
revitalising of the minority’s linguistic and cultural identity.
Slovakia attaches special significance to a regular dialogue with Hungarian partners on
issues related to the EU agenda – Hungary holds the presidency of the Visegrad Group, will be a
member of the next presidency trio in the EU, and will assume EU presidency in the first half of
2011.

**The Republic of Poland**
Slovakia is intent on maintaining the excellent momentum of overall development of

bilateral relations, including the frequency of meetings of chief constitutional officers of the two
countries. The second meeting of parliamentary presidiums will also represent an effective
instrument.
The economic cooperation between the two countries has suffered under the impact of the
crisis and the relatively favourable forecasts for economic development in Poland, as well as the
still untapped possibilities of expanding trade and mutual investment will have to be utilised to
restore it. Key priorities continue to include improvements in the quality of road and railway
infrastructure in border areas.
Preparations for Poland’s EU presidency in 2011 open up new possibilities for
cooperation and achievement of mutual interests in priority areas. Slovakia will carry on regular
consultations concerning the positions of Slovakia and Poland within the EU context, and define
the areas of possible closer cooperation (the Eastern Partnership).
Following the creation of independent consultant forums consisting of leading
personalities of the two countries, a joint meeting of the forum is to be convened. Its aim will be
to identify new priorities and possibilities for deepening Slovak-Polish cooperation.

**Austria**


-----

The Slovak Republic will continue its pragmatic partnership dialogue with Austria.
Slovakia will use its membership in the Euro-zone and in the Schengen area to advance
cooperation in all fields, especially economic.
There is still space for coordinating positions at the European level. In its cooperation
with Austria, Slovakia will pay special attention to the future EU Strategy for the Danube Region
developed with the assistance of Austria.
Slovakia would like to avoid the politicisation of the nuclear energy issue in its relations
with Austria. With regard to the construction of units 3 and 4 of the Mochovce nuclear power
plant, Slovakia will continue to take a pro-active, transparent and forthcoming attitude vis-à-vis
the Austrian partners and Austrian media.

**Ukraine**
Relations with Ukraine is one of Slovakia’s foreign policy priorities, not only because of
its neighbourhood location, but also because of the importance of stability and positive
development in Ukraine for regional and European security and stability. The core interest of
Slovakia lies in a democratic, politically stable and economically prosperous and predictable
Ukraine.
Slovakia has a natural interest in the success of Ukraine’s European and Euro-Atlantic
integration ambitions. It is in this spirit that the Slovak embassy in Kiev will continue to function
as a NATO Contact Point Embassy for Ukraine in 2010. Slovakia will continue to support the
convergence of Ukraine, the EU and NATO to the extent and at the pace chosen by Ukraine
itself, in correspondence with its transformation possibilities and results. Slovakia will take part
in the implementation of the European programme of Eastern Partnership. After presidential
elections, Ukraine is expected to fully concentrate on addressing its domestic problems, thus
helping to calm down its situation at home and ensure progression towards increased
compatibility with the European economic and social environment.
Ukraine remains the key country for the transit of energy commodities to Slovakia, and is
an important factor in external energy security not only for Slovakia, but for the entire EU. By
ensuring problem-free and uninterrupted supplies of energy commodities to the EU, Ukraine will
best demonstrate its ability to cope with its obligations and to speed up pro-European integration
processes.

### D. Assistance to the Citizens and a Slovakia Open to the World

**D.1. Defending the Interests of Slovak Citizens**

The trend of increasing numbers of Slovak citizens travelling abroad for employment,
study or tourism is expected to continue in the coming period. In this respect, a continued priority
and imperative for the Slovak foreign service is the provision of quality services and assistance to
Slovak nationals abroad. This includes helping those who are in an emergency abroad, protecting
nationals’ interests and rights, and performing standard consular duties in matters of registry,
citizenship, travel documents or legalisation. The key task will continue to be the comprehensive
provision of consular assistance to Slovak citizens and EU citizens in countries where their home
country has no diplomatic or consular representation.
The practical implementation of the Visa Code adopted by the European Parliament and
the EU Council on 13 July 2009 with effect from 5 April 2010 constitutes an important task for


-----

Slovakia in the visa area for 2010 and 2011. According to the Visa Code’s provisions, Schengen
Member States that do not have their own consular office in a third country will endeavour to
enter into representation agreements with Member States that do have consular offices in that
country. In compliance with these rules, Slovakia will endeavour to sign representation
agreements with the appropriate Member States. Its first and historical representation agreement
was signed on 23 October 2009 with Austria. In 2010, Slovakia wants to sign an agreement with
the Federal Republic of Germany concerning representation in Azerbaijan and Cambodia. The
MFA is also holding talks with Lithuania concerning representation in Georgia. Slovakia will
conclude the talks with the Republic of Hungary concerning representation for the issuance of
visas in Saudi Arabia, Albania and Moldova so that both sides can initiate their internal
legislative procedures. Since representation for the issuance of visas is a reciprocal process, the
MFA is ready to offer other Schengen Member States a reciprocal representation at selected
consular offices of Slovakia’s diplomatic missions. Slovak diplomatic missions offered for this
purpose will be those in Ankara, New Delhi, Beijing, Tehran, Nairobi, Astan, Abuja, Tashkent,
Bangkok and Kuala Lumpur.
In connection with the entry into force of the new Visa Code, the MFA will prepare for
the performance of new tasks related to applicants’ rights to lodge an appeal in case of rejection
of their visa applications. Because of increased demand, it will be necessary to improve the skill
level of consular officers being trained for the performance of consular service abroad, and to
improve citizens’ access to the foreign consular service.

**D.2. Improving the Communication of Foreign Policy Objectives and Outcomes Inside and**
**Outside Slovakia**

Public opinion plays an important role in the successful implementation of foreign policy.
Dialogue between the MFA, the public at large and other stakeholders helps shape public opinion
and build the basic pillars of public diplomacy. It is necessary to communicate with the general
public and with the professional community in order to present the priorities and justify the
geopolitical, trade and economic interests of Slovakia. The MFA will use this premise for
formulating the basic ideas underlying the concept of sectoral public diplomacy.
The MFA website will continue to represent one of the most adequate tools for informing
the public about activities in the diplomatic sector. At the end of 2009 and beginning of 2010, the
website underwent a complete transformation. As a result, it is more attractive, interactive and,
above all, more user-friendly for the general public. The MFA will continue identifying
appropriate opportunities for its staff to present the objectives of Slovak foreign policy with a
view to enhancing public awareness and obtaining support for them.

**D.3. Coordinating a Uniform Presentation of Slovakia Abroad**

The MFA, acting as the government’s coordinator for a uniform presentation of Slovakia
abroad, has initiated the development of a mechanism for carrying out a uniform presentation of
Slovakia abroad. The proposal to be submitted for approval by the government’s council on a
uniform presentation of Slovakia abroad focuses on three dimensions: Slovakia’s competitive
identity and the “Slovakia brand” based on real value platforms representing Slovakia; creation of
a functional mechanism for coordination of joint presentation projects or activities; and a
territorial strategy including specific programmes for priority interest countries. In preparing the
proposal, the MFA will draw inspiration from countries that have successfully implemented


-----

country-branding projects, and will present several versions of their successful implementation in
the home environment.
To ensure credibility and continuity, it is important to base the approach to country
branding on a wide consensus in the home country and to obtain its acceptance by the largest
possible share of society. The MFA will, therefore, continue conducting a society-wide
discussion with the general public and the non-governmental, academic and business sectors,
with the objective of reaching consensus and acceptance of the process in the home country.
The MFA will urge the members of the government council on a uniform presentation of
Slovakia abroad to make adequate use of opportunities for international presentation of Slovakia
such as the Winter Olympic Games in Vancouver (February 2010), the World Cup in South
Africa (June – July 2010), EXPO Shanghai (May – October 2010), and other opportunities that
have the potential to attract the attention of the international community.

**D.4. Promoting Cooperation with the Third Sector**

Slovak diplomacy will continue to pay special attention to cooperation with the non
governmental sector in 2010. It will concentrate mainly on specific projects and common crosscutting themes, with special emphasis on Slovakia’s foreign policy priorities. In this spirit, it will
support NGO activities in general and through the MFA’s grant programme. The maintenance of
regular contacts with non-governmental organisations, exchange of information about activities
and participation in one another’s events will not only foster expansion of the MFA’s range of
activities, but will also generate a high degree of social consensus on Slovakia’s foreign policy.
The MFA will make an effort at reaching a consensus on the implementation of Slovakia’s
foreign policy objectives.
In 2010, the MFA will organise specialised conferences with non-governmental
organisations both as participants and as co-organisers. The MFA considers the dialogue with the
third sector to be an avenue for increasing the degree of understanding and legitimacy of foreign
policy decisions and initiatives.
The MFA will continue its active communication with universities and its professional
and educational cooperation, based on agreements and arrangements on mutually advantageous
partnership cooperation. The MFA will continue providing opportunities for short-term
internships and study stays for students in selected specialised units of the sector to enable them
to become acquainted with current and practical foreign policy.

### E. Modern Slovak Diplomacy

**E.1. Optimising the Internal Functioning of the MFA**

In 2010, the MFA will continue enhancing the effectiveness of its internal functioning. It
will draw on its experience in the area of strategic planning in order to simplify it as an
instrument and make it more suited to the needs of the sector.
The MFA will continue to carry out project management, which will be used as an
instrument for implementing those tasks which, due to their character, require the coordination of
several units of the MFA and/or cooperation with external entities. The project management
system will be adapted, based on lessons learned from the pilot phase of this type of management
in 2009.


-----

The sector will continue to practically apply process management at all levels of the
MFA. As regards the optimisation of internal management acts, it is scheduled for completion,
after which full use of the software instrument will be made for their development, update and
administration.

**E.2. Ensuring Technologically Advanced Communication**

In keeping with the approved Policy Document on the Development of Public
Administration Information Systems and with applicable legislation, the MFA will place
emphasis on activities connected with building public administration information systems.
It will continue to upgrade information systems and increase “customer comfort.” To this
end, the sector will try to obtain funds from the EU Operational Programme OPIS.

**E.3. Optimising Financial Management and Structure of the Budget**

The MFA is working on a new concept of financial management at the level of diplomatic

representations, according to which accounting records of small diplomatic missions are to be
transferred to the head office. In locations where there are several diplomatic missions of the
Slovak Republic, accounting records will be centralised and placed under the responsibility of a
single head of administration. The setup of new processes is conditional on the amendment of
relevant laws. The envisaged implementation date is the year 2011.

**E.4. Strengthening the Expertise of Foreign Service Staff**

In the area of human resources, the MFA will continue in 2010 to carry out activities
aimed at improving the quality of human potential of the Slovak foreign service. This includes
human resource stabilisation, higher motivation and development, and the introduction of
innovative elements in personnel and career planning tailored to the conditions of the sector.
Its activities will be centred mainly on: a consistent, practical application of Career Rules;
the introduction of new elements in the training process; and building personnel capacities
needed to expand the network of diplomatic missions of the Slovak Republic while also
increasing the motivation of staff members and the transparency of employment relations.
The need to ensure a high professional level of the Slovak foreign service on a permanent
basis will necessarily entail a continuous and systematic upgrading of specialised knowledge and
language skills of MFA staff, using the services of the internal diplomatic academy. Attention
will also be given to attestation training, pre-assignment orientation and post-assignment
adjustment, to the process of adaptation of new staff members, and to other forms of specialised
training, taking into account new requirements for training certain categories of staff, and of the
prospect of building the European external service.
To support successful development of the country’s diplomatic corps, it is also necessary
to continue developing the legislative, labour law, financial and social foundation for its work,
comparable to the European standard of EU Member States. In this respect, the sector will
continue to work towards the adoption of the foreign service act.
The MFA will continue implementing its contractual cooperation arrangements with
selected higher education institutions and universities, whose graduates are potential candidates
for foreign service positions. The foreign affairs sector will provide these students the


-----

opportunity for short-term internships at individual units of the ministry and at selected
diplomatic missions abroad.

**E.5. Enhancing the Representation of the Slovak Republic in the EU and in International**
**Organisations**

Enforcing the representation of Slovak citizens at all levels of the European Commission
and in other EU institutions and bodies is one of the objectives set out in the Slovak
Government’s Manifesto and represents a long-term priority of the government. The MFA will
continue creating conditions for achieving adequate personnel representation of the Slovak
Republic in EU structures in terms of quantity (the preferential quota on positions in the
European Commission for the Slovak Republic during the transitional period 2004-2010 has
already been met) and quality (assignment to vacant higher and middle management positions).
Slovakia will endeavour to make the best possible use of available opportunities and to
strengthen to the maximum extent its representation in the European External Service (EES). In
the area of personnel policy related to EU institutions, this is a new field for the deployment of
Slovakia’s representatives in EU structures. The Service will consist of officials from relevant
units of the General Secretariat of the Council, from the Commission services, and personnel
seconded by diplomatic services of the Member States. The latter should represent at least onethird of the total number of diplomatic staff of the Service. The participation of Slovakia in the
work of the EES is expected to expand the possibilities for external actions by the Slovak
Republic through EU instruments, and will help the country to gain knowledge of and experience
with the formulation and implementation of foreign policy on a European-wide scale.
Slovakia will continue striving for a wider personnel representation in the United Nations

and specialised agencies of the UN system, in particular at a higher and middle expert level. To
this end, it will endeavour to make appropriate use of its previous membership in the UN Security
Council and, in particular, its active membership in ECOSOC. Slovakia will continue supporting
Slovak diplomats working in the UN structures and in other international institutions.


-----

