## Military Doctrine

###### Doctrine, Development, Education and Training Command

2006


-----

Authors
_Brigadier Branimir Furlan, Major Davorin Rečnik, Colonel (retired) Rudi Vrabič, Colonel Vasilije Maraš, Lieutenant_
_Colonel Janez Cerkovnik, Lieutenant Colonel Branko Špur, Colonel Miloš Šonc, Major Marjan Tušak, Major Marijan_
_Ivanuša, Lieutenant Colonel Boris Gorjup, Major Martin Kojadin, Captain Kamil Lasič, Major Marko Unger_

Reviewers
_Lieutenant General Albin Gutman, Brigadier Alojz Šteiner, Brigadier Viktor Kranjc, Commodore (Navy) Renato Petrič,_
_Brigadier Jožef Žunkovič, Colonel Alojz Ternar, Lieutenant Colonel Robert Puš, Miran Bogataj_

Historic examples collected by
_Gregor Kastelic and Branimir Furlan_

Photos
_Bruno Toič, archives of the magazine Obramba, archives of the newspaper Delo_

Editor
_Darko Petelin_

Issued by
_Doctrine, Development, Education and Training Command_

Publisher
_Defensor, d.o.o.; Darko Petelin_

Graphics
_GALdesign_

Printed by
_Tiskarna Schwarz, Ljubljana_

The Military Doctrine was adopted by the Government of the Republic of Slovenia
during its 76[th] session on 1 June 2006.

CIP - Kataložni zapis o publikaciji
Narodna in univerzitetna knjižnica, Ljubljana

355.02(497.4)

MILITARY doctrine / [authors Branimir Furlan ... [et al.] ;
editor Darko Petelin ; historic examples collected by Gregor
Kastelic and Branimir Furlan ; photos Bruno Toič, archives of the
magazine Obramba, archives of the newspaper Delo]. - Ljubljana :
Defensor, 2006

Prevod dela: Vojaška doktrina

ISBN 961-6177-10-9
1. Furlan, Branimir 2. Petelin, Darko
227494656


-----

#### Acknowledgments

_The Military Doctrine is the highest-ranking military document_
_that serves as a basis for the organisation and operations of the Slovenian_
_Armed Forces. Moreover, it is a fundamental document for the formulation_
_of area-specific doctrines, instructions, education and training materials and_
_other military professional documents. The basic version of the doctrine was_
_prepared by the staff of the Doctrine and Development Centre, who eagerly_
_volunteered their expertise and contributions to this document. In the final_
_phase, we tried to embrace the expertise existing beyond the Slovenian_
_Armed Forces and the Ministry of Defence. To this end, we organised a public_
_debate and invited subject-matter experts from other ministries, the Faculty_
_of Social Sciences and other military institutionalised associations to present_
_their views. Many of them understood the importance of the doctrine for the_
_future development of the Slovenian Armed Forces and presented their views,_
_knowledge and experiences. Without them, this doctrine would not have been_
_as complete as it is now._
_I would like to thank to the following servicemembers of the Slovenian_
_Armed Forces and the Ministry of Defence employees who were involved in_
_the creation of the document. Brigadier Alojz Završnik, Brigadier Marjan_
_Grabnar, Brigadier Janez Kavar, Captain (N) Ljubomir Kranjc, Colonel Anton_
_Vereš, Colonel Bogdan Mali, Colonel David Humar, Colonel Gorazd Jurkovič,_
_Colonel Mitja Teropšič, Lieutenant Colonel Marjan Mahnič, Lieutenant Colo-_
_nel Franc Kunovar, VVU XIII Denis Čaleta, Lieutenant Colonel Branko Keber,_
_Lieutenant Colonel Dobran Božič, Lieutenant Colonel Dušan Toš, Lieutenant_
_Colonel Miha Škerbinc Barbo, Lieutenant Colonel Vojko Obrulj, Major Iztok_
_Kočevar, Dr. Igor Kotnik, Uroš Krek, M.A., Marjan Fekonja, M.A, Jože Lacko,_
_Stane Praprotnik and Tomaž Luštrek._
_Many thanks to the following staff of the Faculty of Social Sciences_
_and the Department for Defence Studies who participated in the public de-_
_bate and presented their critical opinions and proposals for the improvements_
_of the text: Prof. Dr. Ljubica Jelušič, Prof. Dr. Anton Žabkar, Assistant Prof._
_Dr. Maja Garb, Assistant Prof. Dr. Vladimir Prebilič, Assistant Prof. Dr. Iztok_
_Prezelj, Assistant Prof. Dr. Vinko Vegič and Assistant Erik Kopač, M.A. I would_
_also like to thank the retired Major General Lado Kocjan._
_My special thanks go to the retired Colonel Ivan Herbert Kukec and_
_Captain Alenka Petek for numerous pointed opinions, recommendations and_
_extensive written materials which significantly influenced both the structure_
_and the material of the doctrine._

_Brigadier Branimir Furlan_


-----

-----

_Like other nations around the world, Slovenia is facing a changing_
_international environment in which Slovenia must enhance its own national_
_security system. These changes called for Slovenia to transition from a mass_
_armed forces, designed for defence within national borders, to a smaller, yet_
_better equipped and trained professional armed forces, ready to participate_
_in the collective defence beyond Slovenia’s borders._
_The geostrategic and security situation of Slovenia was rather complex_
_in its first years of existence, as Slovenia is a newly established state which_
_won its independence through its own armed forces. The former doctrine was_
_characterised by a defensive nature at the strategic and operational levels_
_and an offensive character at the tactical level._
_Through the Military Doctrine, the Slovenian Armed Forces won a_
_fundamental doctrinal basis for accomplishing its mission. This document_
_defines new directions of thinking to support national interests and goals._
_It is designed to inform members of the national security system, allies, and_
_the Slovenian and international public on the principles of the employing_
_and operations of the Slovenian Armed Forces. The Military Doctrine defines_
_and governs the significance of change in understanding the role of an ac-_
_tive component and professional soldier, which is a result of an essentially_
_changed role of the Slovenian Armed Forces within the defence system and_
_within the entire Slovenian society. The doctrine implements the Slovenian_
_defence strategy and integrates the Alliance’s Strategic Concept. Thus, it inte-_
_grates the Slovenian Armed Forces into the Alliance military structure._
_With accession into NATO and the EU, Slovenia was included into a_
_focused and definitive system of international collective security. By joining_
_these international organisations, the Slovenian Armed Forces are expected to_
_provide an adequate and reliable military contribution. Its current organisa-_
_tion allows for the development, improvement and maintenance of all crucial_
_operational capabilities that support the implementation of the main tasks of_
_national defence and ensure reputable cooperation with the Alliance._

_Major General_ Ladislav Lipič


-----

-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

### Introduction

# 1.


The Military Doctrine (hereinafter: the doctrine) defines principles on the organisation, employment and operation of the Slovenian Armed Forces (SAF) in providing military defence of the state
and carrying out other missions, through which the defence strategy of the Republic of Slovenia (RS)
is implemented. The doctrine lays down fundamental principles by which the Slovenian Armed Forces
or its components guide their action in the defence and security area to support national interests and
objectives. The doctrine supports the transition of the Slovenian Armed Forces through a period of
transformation, which dictates new ways of thinking and the reformation of the armed forces to face
new challenges and threats.
The doctrine is based on the RS Resolution on the National Security Strategy (RS Official
Gazette, no. 56/01) and the RS Defence Strategy (RS Government, no. 820-00/2001-1, 20 December
2001). It also considers solutions given in the Civil Defence Doctrine (RS Government, no. 810-02/
2002-1, 25 April 2002) and the Protection, Rescue and Disaster Relief Doctrine (RS Government, no.
912-7/2002-1, 30 May 2002). The Military Doctrine takes into consideration developmental objectives
of the Slovenian Armed Forces set out in the General Long-Term Programme for the Development and
Equipping of the Slovenian Armed Forces (RS Official Gazette, no. 97/01).
The doctrine enforces the Alliance’s Strategic Concept (Washington D.C., 1999) and principles
concerning organisation and operation of the armed forces that arise from the Allied Joint Doctrine
(AJP-1).
The doctrine also takes into consideration that the Republic of Slovenia has joined NATO and
the European Union, which calls for new solutions in terms of organisation and operation of the Slovenian Armed Forces. It also takes into account changes in the SAF, including the transformation from
conscript-based armed forces into professional armed forces supplemented by both compulsory and
contract reservists.
The doctrine is the primary military document and has its foundation in historic lessons learned
and theoretical analysis of warfighting. It is authoritative, but requires judgement in practical application. It is designed for commanders, those responsible for planning the development and employment
of the SAF and organizations carrying out education and training. Its objective is to provide, in practice,
a basis for implementing its mission in peacetimes and war, today and in the future. The doctrine also
serves to inform other national security structures, allies, and international bodies in the context of
security and political integration activities and the Slovenian public of the principles of employment
and operation of the Slovenian Armed Forces.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


_Foundations for developing the military doctrine_


RS Resolution on the
National Security Strategy

RS Defence Strategy

Military Doctrine

Allied Joint Doctrine

Civil Defence

(AJP-01) and Other

Doctrine

Doctrines

Protection, Rescue and The Alliance’s Strategic
Disaster Relief Doctrine Concept

General Long-term Pro-
gramme for the Development
and Equipping of the SAF


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

### Operational Environment

# 2.


Understanding the complex and confusing operational environment provides the basis for understanding the purpose and content of the doctrine. Commanders must be aware of and understand
the fundamental conditions and reasons for the employment of the Slovenian Armed Forces in current
and future conflicts. They should comprehend the nature of the environment in which the SAF will operate and what necessitates the employment of military forces to protect national interests. They must
be able to anticipate what the situation may evolve to and how to respond to it. The comprehension
of contemporary warfighting requires a common understanding of the nature of conflicts, theatre of
operations, crises, security environment, security threats and risks, and the bases for implementing the
Alliance’s Strategic Concept.

##### 2.1 Conflicts

A conflict is a situation that often involves violence or the threat of violence. It is the consequence of opposing or overlapping interests concerning national values, materiel resources and rearranging political and other powers. With regard to the degree and frequency of violence, the spectrum
of conflict ranges from low-intensity, to medium-intensity and high-intensity conflicts.
Concerning the type of hostility, non-violent conflicts, non-conventional and conventional as
well as nuclear hostilities are distinguished.
Low-intensity and medium-intensity conflicts are limited political and military interventions
to achieve political, economic, social and psychological objectives, always in a geographically limited
area and with limited employment of armed forces. Warfighting is not the main instrument to pursue
strategic goals.
War is a high-intensity conflict. In the traditional sense, war is an aggravated social conflict in
which social groups, movements, organisations, state or coalitions of states wage wars in an organised
manner to accomplish their fundamental objectives through a prevailing employment of armed forces.
It is a complex situation in which, political, economic, psychological and other forms and contents of
confrontation take place simultaneously to warfighting, of which some confrontations cannot be kept
under control.
War is the continuation of politics with other, more violent means and is the most violent form of
promoting political interests. With regard to the area, world, regional and local wars are distinguished.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


In terms of utilised methods and means, wars can be identified as unconventional, conventional and
general, while in terms of participating sides as civil, interstate, and coalition wars. With regard to the
objectives of warring factions, wars with radical and limited aims can be distinguished.
The general characteristic of contemporary wars is the integration of the majority of military
and non-military resources of warring factions. War is often asymmetric. States can enter conflicts, as
can non-institutional organisations and individuals. On one hand, there are states and formal armed
forces, and on the other hand, there are various other organisations, such as terrorist organisations. In
some situations, civilians attack civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Contemporary wars are characterised by high casualty rates of one party or both parties
involved in a conflict, as well as by collateral damage. The initial stage of war is shorter, due to the
employment of rapid response forces that can be rapidly deployed to distant areas, and due to the possibility of air raids from a large distance against military forces, communication, traffic infrastructure,
information centres and other targets.

##### 2.1 Crises

A crisis is a situation, event or process, within or outside a state, which poses a serious threat to
fundamental national interests, social values and norms, and cannot be controlled through the ordinary means and actions of national security sub-systems, but requires the utilisation of crisis management. A crisis is characterised by uncertainty of a situation and a relatively short time of response.
Crises can be multi-dimensional threats posed to regional and international security. Preventing crises, preparing for crisis operations, facing the consequences of a crisis and mitigating effects are
common measures to be taken by all structures enhancing national security and security in the broader


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

regions. Solving a crisis usually involves the international community that takes political, diplomatic,
economic, military, humanitarian and other measures of crisis management to alleviate the situation.
Crisis management is a process in the national security system that establishes common principles, procedures, mechanisms and measures for a coordinated and effective response to crises. The Alliance’s Strategic Concept defines crisis management as the fundamental security task and obliges the
Alliance to effective crisis prevention and active engagement in crisis management. Managing crisis
situations requires flexibility, proficiency and sensitivity, and the response should progress gradually
yet timely and in a harmonised manner.
The Alliance defines the crisis management system, envisaging the engagement of forces in
the following way: deterrence and collective defence, crisis response operations, maritime sanctions,
embargo implementation, counter-terrorist actions, non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
as well as rescue and disaster relief.

##### 2.3 The International Security Environment

The beginning of the 21st century saw considerable changes in the international security environment. The possibility of global armed conflicts was decreased, yet the vulnerability of modern
states increased as a result of new threats, challenges and risks to security. Global threats to security
are gradually growing into direct national threats. As the majority of security threats are trans-nationally oriented, the defence against them requires a high degree of international cooperation and a
concerted response to various forms of crises.
The United Nations (UN), the European Union (EU), NATO, the Organisation for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and other regional organisations and institutions that contribute to
the solving of global conflicts and enhance integration activities of countries will remain significant
international factors. They will provide a framework for multilateral cooperation and will continue to
play a significant role in stabilizing the international security environment in the future.
The Euro-Atlantic area is characterised by political, economic and security integration activities
that reinforce security and stability in the region. The European Union and NATO are growing into
global factors assuring and safeguarding international peace, promoting security and stability and
enhancing democracy and common values.
The security environment of the Republic of Slovenia is dynamic, changing and inseparably
linked to the uncertainty and instability in countries within and outside the Euro-Atlantic area. Some
countries are facing serious economic, social and political difficulties. Ethnic and religious differences,
territorial disputes, humanitarian catastrophes, inadequate and unsuccessful economic and political
reforms, unsettled relations between new states, violation of human rights and the dissolution of national political systems all impair regional stability.
The existence of nuclear forces outside the Alliance poses a threat to Alliance security. The
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and technologies allowing for their production and use
remain a matter of serious concern. Another threat is posed by the proliferation of technologies for the
production of advanced weapon systems, which allows potential enemies to achieve greater military
capabilities. In the future, challenges and risks will continue to be linked to international terrorism,
mass migrations, organised crime, drug trafficking, corruption, ethnic and religious differences, unstable regimes, territorial disputes and disputes concerning natural resources, growth and decrease of
populations, epidemics and trans-national cybernetic criminality within information infrastructures.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


##### 2.4 Sources of Threat to National Security

Large-scale armed conflicts or wars that can pose a threat to the security of the Republic of Slovenia are very unlikely in the near future. There are, however, a range of crisis areas, regional security
threats and risks and low-intensity conflicts that pose a threat to the security and stability of the broader international community and the region. The Republic of Slovenia, as a member of the European
Union, NATO and other international organisations, is faced with both regional and geographically
distant crisis areas that threaten the security and interests of the aforementioned establishments.
Modern terrorism is characterised by a flexible organisational structure, self-funding and
international cooperation. Due to the access to and utilisation of technical, technological and other
knowledge, in particular in combination with the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, terrorism represents a major threat that might have a significant indirect impact on the Republic of Slovenia
in the future.
There are various forms of organised crime that are a negative side-effect of globalisation. The
Republic of Slovenia is a transitory and a target country on the Balkan route of illegal migrations, drug
trafficking, human trafficking and illegal trade and purchase of conventional weapons.
The general security level of the Republic of Slovenia is influenced by all forms of crime, economic crime in particular, migration, racial, ethnic and religiously motivated acts, anti-globalist and
other extremists’ movements and organisations and also by intelligence operations against Slovenia.
The Republic of Slovenia, as a developed information society, is growing more and more vulnerable in the communication and information sphere. It is faced with various risks that threaten the
security of critical infrastructure in this domain and of databases, including personal databases, as the
basis for the decision taking and the operation of state, financial, economic, social, health and other
bodies.
Natural and other disasters remain a permanent source of threat. The intensity and frequency of
some types of natural disasters are increased as an effect of probable climate changes. Environmental
sources of threat are also increasing, which results in a greater possibility and a higher frequency of
environmental and other disasters caused by human activities. In the context of growing globalisation
and global integration processes, the possibility and frequency of infectious diseases are growing, in
particular phythopathology and animal diseases that can reach large extensions. The appearance and
spread of human diseases that might have characteristics of pandemic diseases are also increasing in
the modern world.

##### 2.5 Participation in Implementing the Alliance’s Strategic Concept

The Alliance’s essential purpose is to safeguard peace and provide territorial integrity, political independence and the security of its member states in compliance with the principles set out in
the Charter of the United Nations. To achieve this purpose, the Alliance utilises political and military
means, depending on the nature of security risks and threats.
The guiding principle by which the Alliance works is that of common commitment among the
sovereign states in support of the security for all of its members. The threat to one sovereign state has
an impact on the other states. By signing the Washington Treaty, each member state committed itself
to respect this principle and to share risks and obligations as well as the advantages brought about by
collective defence.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

The Alliance’s Strategic Concept provides guidelines for the employment of political and military means in pursuing security objectives. Among others, its fundamental tasks, deriving from this
concept are deterrence and defence against any forms of aggression against any NATO member state,
contribution to conflict prevention, an active role in crisis management and the promotion of partnership, cooperation, and dialogue with other countries within the Euro-Atlantic area.
By joining NATO, Slovenia has implemented one of its goals – the provision of the fundamental
security interest in the context of collective defence, which is set out in Article 5 of the Washington
Treaty. Due to advantages of its membership in the Alliance, Slovenia abandoned its development of
certain defence capabilities. Consequently, Slovenia’s military defence is based on the employment of
joint allied forces that will integrate the Slovenian Armed Forces.
Membership in the Alliance brings about the assumption of obligations regarding common
security. This requires, among other things, common defence planning, participation of the Slovenian
Armed Forces in setting up joint response forces and their operation in crisis areas, and other forms
of integrating Slovenia into Alliance activities to consolidate stability in the Euro-Atlantic area and to
combat international terrorism and other asymmetric threats.

##### 2.6 Participation in Implementing the European Security and Defence Policy

As member of the European Union, the Republic of Slovenia is actively contributing to the common European security and defence policy that, along with other objectives, aims at developing joint
European military capabilities defined in the military goals of the European Union[1]. The forces will be
employed in crisis management operations in compliance with the Petersberg Declaration.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


In the context of integrating into the European Security and Defence Policy and arising activities
thereof, the Republic of Slovenia adopts the viewpoint that there should be no major division between
NATO and the European Union, as this would result in diminishing the effectiveness and availability
of military capabilities or in doubling capabilities. This signifies that Slovenia will develop one set of
forces[2], which can be employed in the context of NATO-led crisis response operations or for EU-led
crisis management operations.
The Slovenian Armed Forces will provide capabilities within the European Union in accordance
to the Battle Group Concept, the Rapid Reaction Concept and other concepts for creating common
capabilities. Membership in the European Union requires SAF participation in joint defence planning,
establishing and training joint forces and their operation in crisis areas as EU-led operations, and other
forms of implementing common security and defence policies.

##### 2.7 Multinational Operations

The Slovenian Armed Forces will always accomplish their mission in support of Slovenia’s
national interests through cooperation with allied and coalition forces, if not involved in other short
operations. Units will therefore operate as part of multinational forces. Multinational operations are
characterised by an emphasised political dimension of employing forces. Relations between commanders, a common doctrine and language, efficient logistics and interoperability in terms of equipment
and operational procedures are paramount for achieving the required effectiveness of multinational
forces.
Advantages of multinational operations lie in the international legitimacy of forces, the complementarity of operational and logistic capabilities, as well as in a comprehensive intelligence provision.
Disadvantages are a result of differences in national interests, equipment and capabilities, national
doctrines and operational procedures, as well as communication difficulties due to language barriers
and reluctance to exchange intelligence data. Another disadvantage is also represented by national
constraints in the employment of forces deriving from national rules of engagement.
Particular challenges in developing efficient multinational forces are the establishment of an effective command, exchange of intelligence data based on common and national sources, and a logistic
system, which is based on national responsibility, as well as on common requirements and mutual
assistance. The basis for effective cooperation between allied or coalition forces are well-established
relations between commanders-in-chief, professionalism, mutual respect of culture, history, customs
and values, knowledge and understanding of doctrines, capabilities and intents of others and patient
communication.

1 Helsinki Headline Goals 2010
2 Single Set of Forces


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

### Fighting Power

# 3.

The fighting power of the Slovenian Armed Forces defines their capability to fight. It is an
instrument to defeat the enemy. Fighting power consists of three correlated components: conceptual
component, moral component and physical component.

_Fighting Power of the SAF_

CONCEPTUAL COMPONENT

- War principles

- Military doctrine

- Development of military theory
and practice

MORAL COMPONENT PHYSICAL COMPONENT

- Motivation - Manpower

- Values - Weapons and equipment

- Leadership - Operational readiness

- Management - Sustainability

- Collective performance


WE KNOW, WE WILL, WE CAN


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


##### 3.1 Conceptual Component

The conceptual component is the result of a thought process. It includes lessons learned and
theoretical knowledge of how the Slovenian Armed Forces can effectively operate today and in the
future. It is defined by war principles, the military doctrine and the development of military theory
and practice. The principles and the doctrine in combination with the initiative and creativity of commanders, provide the intellectual force of the SAF, which directs their fighting power in carrying out
their operations. This requires an understanding of conflicts of current and future warfighting in a
complex, chaotic and confusing environment and the understanding of how to impose one’s will on
the enemy.
The war principles guide commanders in taking decisions and in conducting combat operations. They are generated by lessons learned in the history of wars and of the development of military
sciences. Principles are not rules ensuring success, but serve as guidelines that increase the probability
of successful operations. In taking decisions, commanders consider the mutual impact of principles


Military Doctrine as a Framework of Understanding

FORCE

EMPLOYMENT BASIS

PREPARATION COMMAND

OF THE SAF FOR SUCCESS

AND GENERATION

-  Operational envi- -  Fighting power (con- -  Provision of condi- -  Concept, approach
ronment (conflicts, ceptual component, tions (resources, -  Organisation
threats, NATO Strate- physical component, development, plan- -  Integration into
gic Concept, multi- moral component) ning, mobilisation, Alliance command
national context) -  War principles training, readiness structure

-  Mission, tasks -  Synchronisation of etc.) -  Military terminology

-  Rules of engagement combat functions -  Organisation of -  Civil-military
and caveats -  Sustainability forces relations

SAF
TRAINING
OPERATIONS

-  Forms and types of -  Combat focused
SAF operations training

-  Levels of operations -  Implementation of

-  NATO and EU-led doctrine
operations -  Warfighting today

-  Crisis response and in the future
operations -  Development of com-

petent commanders

-  Learning from
experience


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

and actual situations and are, thus, taking advantage of various factors that determine concrete operations. Principles serve also as criteria for evaluating courses of action.
The doctrine establishes foundations and impacts the thought processes of commanders. It
provides commanders with a framework of understanding the environment, in which military force is
employed in support of national interests, and guidelines concerning organisation and operations. The
doctrine is a binding document, as it provides a unitary understanding of the forms of operations and
serves as a basis for the harmonisation of efforts in implementing the mission of the Slovenian Armed
Forces. Yet, it requires a considered and sensible utilisation with regard to the actual situation.
The development of the armed forces assures that the military doctrine, the formation and
equipping of the Slovenian Armed Forces and military education and training are continuously adjusting to the changes in the security environment, in the theatre of operation and the implementation of new theoretical knowledge on warfighting and acquired lessons learned. This development
requires an innovative approach in dealing with all components of fighting power. It is, hence, not
only a domain of organisations that specialise in military development and research, but also includes
commanders at all levels, as they contribute their own lessons learned gained during the processes of
achieving the fighting capabilities of their units.

##### 3.2 Moral Component

The moral component is the willingness of SAF servicemembers to face the greatest efforts in
combat. It reflects their endeavours, perseverance and willingness to renounce, sacrifice and take risk
in carrying out the missions of their units. The moral component is based on training, confidence with
weapons and equipment, discipline, self-respect, an understanding of what the operational goal is
and what needs to be done to achieve it, and understanding the cause at stake. The understanding of
the latter is directly rooted in good leadership and esprit de corps. The moral component is built up
and maintained through motivation, values, leadership and management.

3.2.1 Motivation

Motivation is the willingness of each individual to direct his or her efforts into achieving the
goals of an organisation. It is, therefore, paramount that all SAF servicemembers identify themselves
with the goals of the Slovenian Armed Forces and their units. Through motivation, the servicemembers
become aware of the reason behind their operations. Hence, it is crucial that they understand and
believe that they fight or carry out other assignments for the right cause, in particular when they are
not supported by public opinion.
The training of SAF servicemembers, so that they are capable of fighting and achieving success
as an interconnected and disciplined unit, has a strong motivational effect. Knowledge and experience
diminish fear and boost self-confidence. Self-confidence is a strong motivational force that builds-up
morale, courage and combat readiness. Motivation is achieved through personal example, conviction
in the legitimacy of employing military force, the establishment of cohesion and a system of rewarding
and punishing. Motivated servicemembers trust in themselves and each other, in the unit and their
commander and support common goals.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


3.4.2 Values

The values of the Slovenian Armed Forces are the driving force behind the fulfilment of its mission. They derive from general civil values, the values of the Slovenian society and the nature of the
military operations. The values of the Slovenian Armed Forces provide the framework for the performance and conduct of servicemembers as individuals or as part of a group.
In the Slovenian Armed Forces, values are implemented through codes of conduct, which are
strived for, respected and studied at all levels of military education and training by all servicemembers.
Values are not only a set of qualities achieved by individuals, but a common obligation of the Slovenian
Armed Forces and each unit. They are realised and enhanced through leadership and training. All servicemembers live up to these values through personal example and conduct; superiors are in charge
of ensuring that their subordinates respect these values in their work.

HONOUR

SELFLESS SERVICE PATRIOTISM LOYALITY

COURAGE ESPRIT DE CORPS


Patriotism is the common fundamental value of SAF servicemembers. It signifies the awareness
of allegiance to Slovenia and the unselfish performance of duties in accomplishing common goals.
The Slovenian Armed Forces strive to develop the following military goals: honour, courage,
loyalty, esprit de corps and the spirit of selfless service.
HONOUR – SAF servicemembers are proud and honoured to be trusted to support national interests and for contributing to the security and welfare of citizens of the Republic of Slovenia. They are
proud to contribute to the alleviation of suffering and to global stability. They conduct their assignments
honourably and conscientiously and foster the enhancement of values of the military and society. They
are aware that they are members of an efficient military organisation esteemed by Slovenian society.
They are members of the armed forces that continue the tradition of combat of the Slovenians against
aggressors and that decisively contributed to the establishment of Slovenia as an independent state.
COURAGE – SAF servicemembers are prepared to use weapons when carrying out their assignments even with the extreme purpose to take lives. They are aware that, while carrying out the mission
of their unit, their life and the lives of their combatants and subordinates are at stake. They proceed
on with conducting their assignments, even though their combatants are wounded or might have lost
their lives. They display initiative and sustain high standards regardless the duration of the assignment,
the intensity of efforts or a possible negative reception of their endeavours by the public.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

LOYALTY – Loyalty to the Republic of Slovenia, the Slovenian Armed Forces and their units
unites all SAF servicemembers. Loyalty to the Slovenian state obliges them to care for the protection
of its interests and the consolidation of its reputation in the world. The loyalty of subordinates to their
superiors is a significant component of the allegiance to the military organisation. Subordinates show
their loyalty to their superiors by carrying out commands that fulfil the mission of the Slovenian Armed
Forces and support the interest of the Republic of Slovenia. Loyalty is expressed through mutual trust
and respect and a disciplined and responsible performance of duties.
ESPRIT DE CORPS – Esprit de corps is the core of a unit’s cohesion. It is displayed through
mutual respect, help and friendship. Esprit de corps unites SAF servicemembers in an uncertain and
dangerous environment and reinforces combat morale. It is a factor of content in carrying out the
military service.
SELFLESS SERVICE – By entering the Slovenian Armed Forces, citizens of the Republic of Slovenia oblige themselves to serve and carry out their assignments wherever and whenever it is required,
irrespective of difficulties and dangers. Selfless service requires SAF servicemembers to make sacrifices
and to subordinate personal interests to the general interests of the armed forces.

_At a meeting, called by the commander_
_of the city of Maribor, Colonel Anton_
_Holik, on 1 November 1918, Major_
_Rudolf Maister displayed great decisive-_
_ness, patriotism and courage when he,_
_without prior agreement of the Styrian_
_National Council, announced that Mar-_
_ibor was part of Yugoslav territory and_
_that he assumed the command over the_
_Maribor and Lower Styria. The meeting_
_was attended by numerous high-rank-_
_ing officers, who could have disarmed_
_or even killed him. However, this did not_
_happen. The highest-ranking officers –_
_colonels – subdued to him. At that time,_
_Maister did not have any political nor_
_military power. He was later promoted_
_to the rank of General and accepted the_
_command of Lower Styria._


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


3.2.3 Leadership

Leadership is a process of influencing and inspiring people to achieve the objectives of an organisation. Inspirational leadership results in people doing what is required of them. A commander
leads by providing the meaning of the cause, and by directing and motivating his subordinates, with
the objective to accomplish the mission and tasks of the Slovenian Armed Forces.
Members of a unit require their commander to be professionally proficient and responsible,
to be able to listen to his staff and to treat them with dignity and respect, to be trained in the basic
military skills, to serve as an example and to teach and share his experience. Commanders are expected
to give logical explanations of why something involving risk needs to be done. He is required to give
clearly defined assignments, priorities and guidelines for their completion, and must be able to motivate his troops.

_On 28 July 1991 nine members of the sabotage squad of the 6th Regional Territorial Defence (TD) Head-_
_quarters of the Severnoprimorska region attacked the Rožna Dolina border crossing near Nova Gorica un-_
_der the command of Major Srečko Lisjak. The border crossing was defended by 117 members of the Yugoslav_
_People’s Army (YPA). The attack of the territorials was covered by 8 members of the special police unit from_
_Nova Gorica. During the attack, three soldiers of the enemy died and 16 were wounded. The rest of the YPA_
_members were captured. The sabotage squad destroyed two tanks, an armoured vehicle-launched bridge,_
_25 motorised vehicles and all of the weapons and equipment. However the squad did not suffer any losses._
_The effective attack was a result of a timely attack, decisive command, mutual trust among the soldiers and_
_their commander and effective fire system that forced the YPA unit to surrender. The morale of the soldiers_
_was considerably boosted by the commander, who commanded his unit in a considerate and courageous_
_manner, based on his knowledge and personal example._


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

Important aspects of command are efficient communication, the ability to learn, self-development, the capability to build up a team, planning abilities, and timely decision-making.
With leadership based on values, commanders foster mutual trust, respect and understanding.
They are personally engaged in maintaining combat morale. They know their staff and subordinate
commanders. They task their units in accordance with their mission and capabilities and thus preserve
the capability to achieve results. Members of the unit clearly know what their role in accomplishing
the mission of the unit is.
Leadership begins with self-discipline and is achieved through training and every day life. It is
realised by decisiveness, personal example, counselling, motivation, information, personal courage,
discipline, confidence, care for unit members and by creating possibilities to prove oneself in achieving
the objectives of the unit. A good commander, and a good leader, is distinguished through professional proficiency, intellect, energy, creativity and initiative, sound judgement, courage, decisiveness,
self-confidence, selflessness and humanity, with a keen ability to communicate and a sensibility toward
taking risks.

3.2.4 Management

Management is a systematic, analytic thought process of commanders that encompasses coordination of human, materiel and financial resources for organisational purposes, interoperability of the
armed forces with the external environment, response to the requirements of the society, development
of organisational culture, identification of objectives, planning, provision of resources, organisation,
implementation, monitoring and control. It is a significant factor in providing combat morale, yet cannot replace leadership.
Management provides the basis for achieving the efficiency of a unit and the fulfilment of two
war principles: economy and the maintenance of combat morale. Good combat morale is not possible
without good management or quality resource management. A criterion for good management is the
ability to achieve a concerted use of resources. Both can be impaired by focusing efforts on the units’
operations.

##### 3.3 Physical Component

The physical component comprises all forces and resources for warfighting and is the quantitative and qualitative indicator of physical strength and a unit’s effectiveness. It is the total means
of destructive power which a unit or formation can launch against an opponent at a given time. The
physical component incorporates manpower, military weapons and equipment, operational readiness, sustainability and collective performance.

3.5.1 Manpower

Manpower impacts the physical component through quality, morale and personnel strength
whereby morale plays a decisive role. In a narrower sense, manpower includes members of the active
and reserve components of the SAF; in a broader sense, it comprises citizens of the Republic of Slovenia
who are obliged to participate in the defence of the state to a certain degree and as defined by law.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


The Slovenian Armed Forces are manned with SAF active component members and with members of
the contract and compulsory reserve component. An important source for manning is the military strategic reserve of the Republic of Slovenia that is activated through a decision taken by the RS National
Assembly.
The quality of personnel manifests itself in combat morale, training, physical and mental fitness; in understanding and willpower of each member of a unit for the achievement of objectives of
the Slovenian Armed Forces; in the knowledge and understanding of doctrine; in an adequate distribution of duties within headquarters and units of the Slovenian Armed Forces. Lessons learned by numerous SAF servicemembers who participated in the War for Slovenia and in crisis response operations
make a significant contribution to the quality of personnel.

3.3.2 Weapons and Equipment

Weapons and military equipment are the materiel elements of the physical component and
have a significant impact on the force strength in combat.
They provide the necessary capability of the SAF in autonomous operations or as part of allied
forces. The capability and interoperability of weapons and military equipment with those of the allied
forces is of crucial importance.
Considerable significance in providing operational capabilities is attached to the selection and
purchase of weapons and equipment that allow for the best possible output in all terrain and weather
conditions within the theatre of operation in Slovenia and abroad. Weapons and equipment have to
allow trained SAF servicemembers survivability in the theatre and effective operations in the most arduous circumstances. If possible, they have to surpass the enemy’s weapons and equipment in terms
of technology, thus allowing advantage over the enemy in combat.

3.3.3 Operational Readiness

Operational readiness is the capability of a unit required to perform mission essential tasks. It
is the capability of a unit to achieve the effect for which it was designed and organised, in a certain
period of time. In a narrower sense, operational readiness is given by the time within which a unit is
ready to accomplish its mission.
With regard to the projected use of force and obligations deriving from the Alliance and other
international treaties, units are classed in terms of various levels or degrees of operational readiness.
The readiness prescribed for a certain unit or headquarters is the period from the activation order for
engaging a unit to the commencement of the deployment or operations set out in employment plans
when the unit is fully manned, equipped and trained. The time for maintaining operational readiness
is determined through the unit operational cycle.

3.3.4 Sustainability

Sustainability is the ability of the Slovenian Armed Forces to maintain the necessary level of
combat power for the duration required to achieve its objectives or to accomplish its mission. It has to
be provided before operations have started. Furthermore, it is necessary to provide for replacement
and augmentation in terms of personnel and materiel and continuous logistic support.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

In the operational planning phase, a commander has to assess the possibility of preserving the
capabilities of forces or the provision of their sustainability as this has a direct impact on the freedom
of operations. He estimates whether his unit is adequately manned, equipped with appropriate weapons, equipment and supplies, and whether the required level of supply and reinforcement is provided
for. The sustainability of a unit is directly linked to the efficiency of the logistic system and the interoperability and compatibility of equipment, weapons and ammunition.

3.3.5 Collective Performance

Collective performance is achieved through understanding and considering the military doctrine, collective training and military exercises where forces are trained.
Commanders of units employ various methods by which they assure that their units are ready
to operate at the highest level possible in the most arduous conditions of warfighting. Collective training is, along with combat morale, the basis for collective operations and an important component of
fighting power. Through collective training, conditions for a concerted and directed collective performance are implemented that allow for achieving a unity of efforts and the highest effects in a certain area
and within a certain period of time.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


### Mission and Tasks of the Slovenian Armed Forces


# 4.


MISSON

In co-operation with the alliance

-  Deter military aggression against the Republic of Slovenia (RS)

-  Contribute to international peace and stability

-  Conduct military defence of the RS

-  Re-establish national sovereignty on the entire territory

MISSON ESSENTIAL TASKS OTHER TASKS

-  Maintain operational readiness -  Contribute to international peace, security and

-  Activate and mobilise forces stability

-  Deploy forces to the area of operation -  Support in ensuring the safety and welfare of

-  Conduct defensive operations RS citizens

-  Conduct offensive operations

-  Sustain forces


The mission and tasks of the Slovenian Armed Forces are regulated by the Defence Act. The
mission of the SAF is to deter military aggression against the Republic of Slovenia in cooperation with
the Alliance and to contribute to international peace and stability within and outside the borders of
the Alliance. In the event of military aggression, the SAF carries out, independently or in cooperation
with its allies, the military defence of the Republic of Slovenia with the objective to resist and deter the
enemy and to re-establish the national sovereignty on the entire territory of Slovenia.
The mission essential tasks of the SAF that derive from its mission are the maintenance of readiness, activation and mobilisation of forces, deployment of forces to the area of operation, conduct of
defensive and offensive operations and the sustainment of the forces. Pursuant to the mission and
main tasks of the SAF and operational plans, commanders at all levels of command determine the missions of subordinate units and approve mission essential tasks deriving thereof.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

Through other tasks, the SAF contributes to international peace, security and stability and supports the government and public institutions in ensuring the safety and welfare of Slovenian citizens.
The SAF’s contribution to international peace, security and stability comprises support to diplomacy,
participation in promoting security and trust, conduct of particular assignments concerning arms control and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, participation in crisis response operations
and in operations against terrorism and other threats to peace.
Support for the government and other institutions and the enhancement of security and welfare of Slovenian citizens involve the participation in protection, rescue and disaster relief in the event
of natural and other disasters, in carrying out certain law enforcement tasks, in operations against
terrorism, search and rescue operations, support to diplomatic activities and cooperation with civilian
organisations.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

# 5.

##### 5.1 Types of Forces


### Types of Forces and Organsiation of the SAF


5.1.1 Division in Terms of Combat Role

In terms of their combat role, the SAF are divided in combat forces, combat support forces,
combat service support forces and command support forces.
The basic purpose of combat forces is to defeat the enemy in direct combat with firepower and
manoeuvres. Combat forces are composed of armoured units, infantry units and special forces.
Combat support forces are designed to provide firepower and operational support to combat
forces. Combat support forces are comprised of an engineer units, artillery units, intelligence and
reconnaissance units, nuclear, biological and chemical defence units, air defence units, electronic warfare units, naval units, military police units and aviation units.
Combat service support forces are designed to provide operational capabilities and to sustain
the forces. Combat service support forces consist of logistic units, air transport units, the air base and
naval base and medical units.
The purpose of command support forces is to ensure uninterrupted operation of commandand-control functions. These forces consist of HQ units, signal units and air space surveillance units.

5.1.2 Division in Terms of Deployment Capability

In terms of capability of deployment, the SAF are divided in deployable forces, and non-deployable forces. Deployable forces are organised, equipped and trained to carry out their mission
independently or as part of allied forces in the Slovenian theatre of operation and in crisis areas within
and outside the borders of the Alliance. Non-deployable forces are organised, equipped and trained to
carry out their mission on national territory and its direct vicinity.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

5.1.3 Division in Terms of Levels of Operational Readiness

In terms of levels of readiness the SAF are divided in three groups: high-readiness forces, lowreadiness forces and long-term build-up forces.
High-readiness forces, which achieve full operational readiness within the period of 2 to 90
days, are designed to be employed in the event of military and non-military threats to the security of
the Republic of Slovenia, to support the security system and the system of protection against natural
and other disasters and participate in crisis response operations. They are equipped and trained for
operations throughout the national territory and beyond. They consist of all deployable forces and air
space surveillance forces.
Low-readiness forces, which have 91 to 180 days to achieve full operational readiness, are
designed to support and supplement high-readiness forces in performing military defence of the
Republic of Slovenia.

_Types of forces of the SAF_

In Terms of Combat Role

COMBAT COMBAT SUPPORT COMBAT SERVICE COMMAND
FORCES FORCES SUPPORT FORCES SUPPORT FORCES

- Infantry units - Engineer units - Logisitc units - HQ units

- Armoured units - Artillery units - Medical units - Signal units

- Special forces - Intelligence – - Air transport units - Air space

reconnaissance units - Air base and naval surveillance units

- NBC units base

- Air defence units

- EW units

- Air force units

- MP units

- Naval units

In Terms of Deployment Capability


DEPLOYABLE NON-DEPLOYABLE
FORCES FORCES


DEPLOYABLE
FORCES


NON-DEPLOYABLE
FORCES


In Terms of Operatonal Readiness


HIGH-READINESS
FORCES
2 – 90 DAYS


LOW-READINESS
FORCES
91 – 180 DAYS


LONG-TERM
BUILD-UP FORCES
365 > DAYS


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


Long-term build-up forces, which need more than a year to reach full operational readiness, are
designed for national defence and for supplementing other forces. Long-term build-up forces are the
core of the military strategic reserve of the Republic of Slovenia.

##### 5.2 Task Organisation

Task organisation is the fundamental principle of organising forces for all forms and types of
SAF operations. Forces are organised in terms of their mission, territory and the Combined Joint Task
Forces concept.

5.2.1 Battle Groups

Organising combined-arms for specific purposes into company, battalion and brigade battle
groups is a fundamental approach to organising for combat operations. This grouping results in effects
that complement and enhance each other. The essence of implementing this method of organising
forces is an efficient harmonisation of combat functions. Each element serves a different purpose, yet
the intent is to form an orchestrated effect against the enemy.
To allow for efficient command and coordinated combat operations, battle groups are set up,
taking into account prevailing forms and types of operations in the area of operations. For this purpose, battle groups of SAF air force and land components are organised at the operational level.

5.2.2 Territorial Forces

Based on the territorial approach to organising forces, part of the SAF is, at the tactical level,
made up of structures that are commanded by military territorial commands. They are designed for
operations in the rear area and on occupied territory. Territorial forces carry out control and secure
the rear and critical infrastructures, manage military infrastructure, perform assignments of territorial
logistics, provide limited engineer support, conduct defensive operations and provide partial logistic
support to allied forces in the context of Host Nation Support. Territorial Forces are responsible for the
development of the military strategic reserve of the Republic of Slovenia.

5.2.3 Response Forces

Task-organised combining of high-readiness forces into response forces is designed to provide
conditions for an efficient command and timely and efficient response to various forms of threats to
the security of the Republic of Slovenia or the Alliance. Response Forces are formed with regard to
their missions and are designed for the defence of key areas and critical infrastructure, provision of
conditions for mobilisation and deployment of forces, combat against terrorism and other forms of
non-military threats and participation in protection, search and rescue tasks. Response Forces consist
also of units that are part of allied response forces.
Response Forces are under direct command of the SAF operational command or under a taskorganised command at the brigade level. Units that are part of allied response forces are under operational control of the commander of these forces.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

_Organsiation of the SAF_

In Terms of Mission


BATTLE GROUPS RESPONSE FORCES

BATTLE GROUPS

RESPONSE FORCES

In Terms of the Combined Joint Task Forces Concept (CJTF)

SPECIAL

LAND MARITIME AIR

OPERATIONS

COMPONENT COMPONENT COMPONENT

FORCES

In Terms of Territory

FORCES OF MILITARY
TERRITORIAL COMMANDS


5.2.4 Combined Joint Task Forces (CJTFs)

The CJTF concept is the basic form of SAF operations within the structure of allied forces in
carrying out military defence of the Republic of Slovenia or in crisis response operations. The concept
allows for flexible and efficient means to achieve greater response, rapid formation and deployment
as well as efficient command of multinational forces consisting of various types, branches and services
of the allied armed forces.
CJTFs are task-organised and tailored to their mission, the Joint Area of Operation (JAO) and the
prevailing form of operation. An operational-level commander of a Combined Joint Task Force is generically termed as a Joint Forces Commander. At lower levels, CJTFs are commanded by air, maritime
and land component commands and a special operations forces’ command. In compliance with principles of organising CJTFs, SAF units are integrated into the structure of individual force components
and are under operational control of the commander of these forces. To implement national command
responsibilities, these units are commanded by the SAF operational force commander in the Slovenian
theatre of operation and in crisis areas by the commander of the Slovenian contingent.

3 Component Command - CC


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

### Provision of Operational Conditions

# 6.


Provision of operational conditions involves activities that are required for the timely, planned
and organised preparation of the SAF to implement its mission. It includes the provision of human, materiel and financial recourses, military intelligence, development and equipping, operational planning,
mobilisation preparations and deployment for operations, military education and training, preparedness of the SAF, consolidation, Host Nation Support, real estate management and sustainability.


Human resource Materiel & financial

Mob. prep.

management resources

& deployment Military intelligence
for operations

Development &

Consolidation

equipping

PROVISION OF OPERATIONAL
CONDITIONS

Operational

Host Nation Support

planning

Education & training Sustainability

Preparedness Real estate and air
of the SAF space management


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

##### 6.1 Human Resource Management

Managing personnel as a resource for SAF operations is based on four fundamental starting
points. Human resources represent the most valuable assets of the Slovenian Armed Forces and efficient human resource management is the key to SAF success. Armed forces are ensured success if the
goals of individuals and common objectives of the armed forces are brought into line, or if changes
and activities are carried out in such a fashion as to allow for the accomplishment of both goals. Outstanding achievements depend mainly on organisational culture and values, atmosphere in the armed
forces and the position, role and practices of the leadership.
The human resources of the Slovenian Armed Forces consist of active component members, and
members of the compulsory and contract reserve. In the event of unfavourable circumstances for providing security and defending the Republic of Slovenia, the Ministry of Defence (MoD) is in progress
of developing a concept of a RS strategic reserve. The concept of a military strategic reserve allows for
augmenting and supplementing SAF capabilities and for takeovers of certain tasks in the conduct of
military defence.
Manning the SAF encompasses the system of planning, measures, activities and conditions that
provide human resources for the active component supplemented with the reserve component. This
system also includes advertising the military profession and recruitment, the personnel selection and
various employment procedures.
The fundamental principles for human resource development in the armed forces are career development and promotion. Along with fulfilling certain basic conditions, particularly attitude towards
work and achieved results, an individual can influence his own career development and promotion.
Career development is enhanced through performance evaluation, work experience and inclusion into
the military education and training system.
Effective human resource management requires the centralisation of personnel policy, legislation governing personnel affairs and human resource development planning as well as the decentralisation of human resource management at the operational and tactical levels. The social and financial
security of SAF servicemembers is to be provided through implementing personnel policy at the
strategic level. At the same time, manning the SAF requires the development and implementation of
various incentive initiatives that promote employment in the armed forces and retention in the active
and reserve components of the SAF.
The care for the welfare of SAF servicemembers and their dependants is implemented through
the welfare concept and provides the basis for developing performance efficiency, professionalisation
and leadership. Measures of the welfare concept are provided for through adequate living conditions,
good, secure and healthy working conditions, quality training, motivation, health care and psychological and spiritual care.

##### 6.2 Materiel and Financial Resources

Materiel resources of the SAF encompass weapons, equipment, military infrastructure and
other materiel and technical assets that ensure the readiness of units and maintain their sustainability
in carrying out operations in peacetime and war. They are based on national materiel and financial
capabilities and are provided through the SAF logistic support system, the individual components of
which, when involved in operations on the territory of the Republic of Slovenia, are complemented by


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


civilian capabilities, and during crisis response operations outside the state by Host Nation Support,
multinational logistics or a state which Slovenia concluded a contract with.
Basic tasks of the logistic support system in peacetime aim at optimizing conditions for the
work and training of SAF units, enhancing operational capability of units in crisis response operations,
supporting response forces, providing mobilisation readiness, assisting forces in compliance with
employment plans and supporting allied forces in the context of HNS tasks. In peacetime, bodies that
provide logistic support to the SAF plan, organise and carry out logistic and other preparations of the
SAF, independently or in cooperation with competent MoD organisational units.
The combat efficiency of units is a direct result of the ratio between logistic self-sufficiency and
dependence on Alliance capabilities and civil resources. Logistic self-sufficiency is planned up to battalion-level battle groups, taking into account national and the Alliance’s criteria.
Providing and echeloning of materiel resources and reserves are carried out according to common principles and criteria. Strategic materiel reserves of the Republic of Slovenia comprise national
materiel reserves and reserves of the MoD. The strategic reserves for SAF operations are determined
and distributed by the SAF General Staff. Strategic materiel reserves reflect also the increase of strength
in special circumstances or the development of the military strategic reserve of the Republic of Slovenia. The scope and structure of operational and tactical reserves of the SAF and their distribution are
determined by the SAF operational command.
Military infrastructure comprises training and firing ranges, military posts, storage facilities, airports, sea ports, telecommunication facilities, radar systems, locations for combat systems, command
posts, accommodation facilities, workshops and other facilities and surroundings that are managed by
the MoD or are, in compliance with legislation, defined as key facilities for defence purposes. Maintenance and development of the military infrastructure are, as a priority, directed towards meeting the
requirements of the SAF professionalisation, adapting to changes in the structure and scope of the SAF
and fulfilling the requirements of military defence, which also considers the Alliance’s requirement.
The defence budget provides funds for the operation and development of the Slovenian Armed
Forces. A balanced ratio between salaries, operational expenses and purchases ensures an efficient and
motivated performance of SAF servicemembers and the possibilities for implementing the mission of
the SAF in peacetime and war and the achievement of developmental goals.

##### 6.3 Military Intelligence

SAF military intelligence, along with the MoD Intelligence and Security Service meet the
national defence requirements and operation of the SAF and of the Alliance. Intelligence tasks are
carried out by employing all available assets, in particular through the National Intelligence and Security Agency, the MoD Intelligence and Security Service, military intelligence activities and through
exchanging information with other competent national ministerial bodies and foreign partner intelligence and security services. In cooperation with Alliance member states, it prevents strategic surprise
and enables timely increase of preparedness and planning of the employment of the SAF. In cooperation with the Alliance, it also prevents operational and tactical surprises and enhances preparedness
and provides an efficient response of the SAF.
Military intelligence at the strategic level is carried out by the MoD Intelligence and Security
Service and other intelligence bodies of the SAF General Staff. At the operational level military intel

-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

ligence is conducted by intelligence bodies and units of the operational command and by intelligence
bodies of brigade and battalion HQs and reconnaissance units at the tactical level. Levels of intelligence operations are interconnected and supplement each other.
The SAF military intelligence operations are a collection of functions, processes, procedures
and measures through which individuals, units and commands uninterruptedly and comprehensively
survey, collect, process, analyse and turn data into intelligence in order to anticipate the evolution of
the military, military-political and security situations and operations of actual and potential enemies
as well as other military and security threats, with the aim to enable commanders and other decisionmakers, who decide on the employment of the SAF, to take adequate and timely decisions at all levels
of command. A component of military intelligence operations is the electronic warfare, which is carried out in a centralised manner in Slovenia.
The SAF military intelligence operations comprise the following fundamental functions: provision of indicators and warnings, intelligence preparation of the battlefield, support to situational understanding, support to planning and operation according to goals, evaluation of combat operations,
support to force protection and preparation of forces for operations.
Individual bodies conducting intelligence operations for the SAF can carry these out for several
or all levels. They abide by the principle of cooperation and supplementation. The flow of intelligence
information and products between all levels has to be transparent and simple and has to allow for
direct links between intelligence provider and user with simultaneous possibility of control. All commands and units of the SAF monitor the situation, cooperate in mutual exchange of information, carry
out self-protection measures and enhance security culture.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


##### 6.4 Development and Equipping

Planning the development and equipping of the Slovenian Armed Forces is carried out to identify goals, tasks and activities that are necessary to achieve the required force capabilities for military
defence and other tasks. It is implemented through long-term, medium-term and annual plans. The
Slovenian Armed Forces are integrated into NATO’s defence planning system, and as such they plan
their capabilities and operations in compliance with their national interests and the requirements of
the Alliance.
The development of the Slovenian Armed Forces complies with the priorities set for the establishment of forces designed for carrying out obligations that derive from the membership in the Alliance. The selection of these forces is based on the priorities of national defence. In line with force goals,
organisation, weapons, equipment and resources are provided that allow for the accomplishment of
the SAF’s mission in the Republic of Slovenia and in crisis areas abroad.
Equipping is directed towards capabilities that allow for the mobility and deployability of units,
enhancement of the survivability on the battlefield and operations in various circumstances, provision
of sustainability of forces and the build-up of combat effectiveness. Weapons and equipment are, as a
rule, easy to use and maintain, reliable and interoperable with the weapon systems and equipment of
the Alliance. They comply with the form of operation of SAF units deriving from doctrine and tactics. To
reduce costs of development and research, modern military technology is used that has already been
developed and tested during combat and is available on the market.

##### 6.5 Operational Planning

Operational planning is carried out for the envisaged employment of the SAF for military defence purposes and other tasks that implement the defence strategy of the Republic of Slovenia. The
Republic of Slovenia is involved in the planning process of allied forces in drawing up operations plans
for future security threats and crisis response plans.
SAF operational plans are documents within the national defence plan. The defence plan comprises organisational, personnel, materiel and other solutions that allow for a gradual and organised
transition to wartime operations. The plan also determines the organisation and working methods to
ensure an uninterrupted performance of activities. Operational plans regulate the implementation of
readiness measures, preparations and conduct of mobilisation and operations of the SAF in various
forms of military and other threats. SAF employment plans for carrying out military defence of the
Republic of Slovenia are brought into line with Alliance defence plans.
Plans for SAF operations in crisis response operations are developed in compliance with the
peacetime mission of the SAF. Planning is based on the principles and methods of operational planning in the SAF and the Alliance. Basic documents that are used are operations plans for Combined
Joint Task Forces.
For a concerted and planned employment of the SAF to support the system of protection
against natural and other disasters, the SAF are drawing up operational plans for various situations,
and hence, defining the method of cooperation of SAF units in protection, rescue and disaster relief.
Basic documents used for planning are guidelines and plans of the Civil Protection.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

##### 6.6 Mobilisation Preparations and Deployment for Operations

Mobilisation preparations are carried out for the planned and efficient mobilisation of the SAF
to conduct military defence and perform other tasks. They are based on the projected deployment for
operations as well as on the SAF organisation and formation structure. Mobilisation plans determine
the bodies responsible for planning, locations, peacetime induction stations, readiness categories
as well as measures and activities for mobilising SAF commands and units. Based on mobilisation
development, all forces or individual commands and units carry out activities and use procedures of
assembling and organising personnel, preparing materiel resources and providing supplies as well as
other procedures for the transition to full readiness for conducting military defence and other tasks.
Mobilisation plans ensure a uniform preparation and conduct of the mobilisation of the SAF.
The distribution of SAF induction stations complies with the deployment for operation of the SAF and
manning resources.
Units which are fully manned with active component members, are not mobilised but become
fully operational based on employment or operations plans in accordance with orders for preparing
operations or activation orders in the context of readiness measures. Activation of the units that are
part of Alliance response forces is carried out based on orders for activating such forces, issued by
competent commanders of allied forces.
Deployment for operation is carried out for a planned deployment and staging of the SAF or
their components to areas of operation for the conduct of military defence and other tasks on the
territory of the Republic of Slovenia and abroad. This is done based on plans for the deployment and
staging of allied forces that derive from operations plans of combined joint task forces for the conduct
of collective defence and crisis response operations.

##### 6.7 Military Education and Training

Military education and training are processes of acquiring and developing special and functional military knowledge, abilities, skills and procedures required to perform tasks of military defence
and other tasks of the SAF. The SAF are developing a modern, comprehensive and unitary military
education and training system that is able, through quality management, to carry out military education and training tasks and is comparable to systems of the Alliance and interoperable with the public
education system. SAF education and training is not self-sufficient, but supplemented by programmes
of the public education system and foreign educational institutions. If it is not rational to provide certain types of education and training or if they are not provided for in Slovenia, individuals are sent to
foreign military education institutions.
Research and development in the sphere of education and training in the SAF include the
following areas: military sciences, military education and training programmes, efficient methods,
development of specialised military literature, selection of weapons and equipment, technical and
other resources that support the implementation of programmes and allow for and foster an efficient
development of skills of the individual and the unit.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


6.7.1 Military Education and Training of Individuals

Individual education and training is provided in military education and training institutions in
Slovenia and abroad as well as in foreign public and other education institutions. It allows for the acquisition of military education, military and other professional knowledge and training, acquisition of
professional military qualifications, continuous upgrading of knowledge and shaping of individuals in
terms of developing their skills, initiatives, independence and professional relations towards carrying
out the military profession.
The programmes of the public education system and the military education system are linked
so as to allow for the possibility to attend public and military education programmes simultaneously
and, thus, to acquire a publicly recognised degree of education. Thus, the military education and training system is an upgrade of the public education system.
Military education and training allows for the transformation of civilians into tactically and
technically competent military personnel who will implement military values, understand the significance of collective operation and be prepared to take over their position in the military structure. It also
provides them with the knowledge, skills, procedures and capabilities to aid implementing the mission
of the SAF and to survive and operate in a stressed and non-secure environment. It develops the desire
of officers and NCOs to achieve the highest standards, to foster a focused respect for military duties, to
show professional pride, dignity, and patriotism, and to enhance the tradition of the SAF.
The education and training processes generate general social and military values, foster an
awareness for the environment, and develop and enforce respect for the code of conduct of SAF servicemembers.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

Military education and training allows for the development of competent commanders who
will be capable of leading their units. They provide for the knowledge and enforcement of the doctrines of the SAF and the Alliance and standards of international law on armed conflicts, SAF standards
and standards of the Alliance on the practical conduct of soldiers, officers, commands and units.

6.7.2 Unit and Command Training

Military training is the process of acquiring and developing particular capabilities for applying
military professional knowledge to accomplish the missions of commands or units. Military training
of individuals in commands and units and collective training of commands and units ensure direct
support for the development of operational capabilities of SAF commands and units. Unit and command training is planned according to principles of responsibility, standardisation, direction, gradual
improvement and learning from experience.
Training in commands and units is mainly carried out according to the drill method and unitarily improves the practical skills of individuals, groups, commands and units in order to perform mission
essential tasks. The scope and content of tasks are closely linked to phases of the operational cycle
of commands and units. Support for training is provided by various institutions for combat training,
simulations etc.
All training forms aim at achieving standards of the armed forces, and are thus providing, developing, and maintaining operational readiness. A condition for such circumstances is that the training is
carried out in compliance with such standards and in lifelike situations, hence challenging, stimulating
and motivating soldiers and commanders. Hands-on training builds up the capability of and trust in
developing genuine skills and enhances excellence in fostering initiative, readiness and enthusiasm for
learning.
Training is battle-focused. The principle of combat orientation assures that all forms of peacetime training are directed towards training for the conduct of assigned and expected combat tasks.
A decisive factor in considering this principle is also understanding the interdependence between
essential collective tasks, deriving from missions, and tasks assigned to individuals in support of collective tasks.
Training is gradual and, at the same time, continuous. Gradual training requires the transition
from easier to more complex contents and from lower to higher levels of intensity. Training standards
are consistent and abiding. Only the circumstances surrounding task performance change, and in the
final phase, these circumstances approach those of actual combat tasks. Irrespective of the fact that
certain skills are positively assessed, certain key military skills of individuals, teams, groups and small
units have to be permanently maintained and developed.
Learning from experience is the process of overcoming deficiencies in performing procedures,
improvements in military education and training, improvement of operational capabilities and other
improvements of the SAF operations based on information that derives from analysing and evaluating
the conduct of individual activities in training or operations. The process of learning from experience
summarises, evaluates and attaches a practical value to lessons learned. The implementation and importance of learning from experience is the duty of each commander at every level. All activities that
are carried out by the SAF are possible sources of lessons learned that have to be studied in terms of
continuously focusing on optimisation and efficiency.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


Through the training system, the SAF provides for the possibilities of a volunteer military service
and other forms of military training of RS citizens, - who, in this way, familiarise themselves and acquire
knowledge of the military and defence spheres.

##### 6.8 Preparedness of the Slovenain Armed Forces

The most significant activity of the SAF in peacetime, deriving from their mission, is the preparation for wartime operations. Hence, all peacetime activities are directed towards achieving and maintaining the envisaged level of preparedness. This includes a high level of education and training, the
organisation and equipping of forces, quality commanding and the implementation of the military
doctrine.
The preparedness of the SAF in the broader sense is the situation that reflects their capability for
implementing their mission in wartime. Preparedness is the capability of engaging in warfighting and
gaining victory in war or implementing the defence strategy of the Republic of Slovenia in other ways.
The preparedness of the SAF is defined through their activation and mobilisation capabilities, performance of readiness measures, operational readiness and military infrastructure. The Slovenian Armed
Forces carry out organisational, personnel, logistic and other preparations that allow for a planned,
timely and organised conduct of operations in compliance with employment plans.
Operational readiness is the level of capability of a unit to perform mission essential tasks.
Operational readiness is determined through capability, ability, deployability, mobility, sustainability
of a unit, and a command and control system. By maintaining operational readiness, the SAF ensure
capabilities for combat operations meant to provide military defence, support operations within the
Republic of Slovenia or for the stability operations in crisis response operations.
The capability of a unit involves the personnel structure, weapons and equipment, training and
the quality of operations plans. The ability of a unit implies its capability of carrying out mission essential tasks and the possibilities of protection and survivability. The sustainability of a unit is determined
by the organisational structure and the capability of personnel and logistic support.
Mobility is the capability of a unit which permits them to move into the planned area of operation and to conduct tasks in all weather and terrain conditions. Deployability is the capability of a unit
to be deployed within or outside the Alliance’s area in a certain period of time by own forces, allied
forces or other land, sea, and air means.
The performance of the command process and the efficiency of the command support allow
the SAF for network centric operations, interoperability with allied forces, the establishment of cooperation with civilian capabilities and the establishment of links between the system of protection against
natural and other disasters and the security system of the Republic of Slovenia.
Operational readiness can be standing, heightened or full. Standing operational readiness is
represented by the daily preparedness of the SAF that implies their capability for carrying out measures
of readiness and peacetime assignments. Heightened readiness is the situation that allows for a greater
availability and capability of a part or of the entire SAF for implementing employment plans. Full readiness ensures their immediate employment for military defence or for other assignments.
Units provide for operational readiness with regard to their operational cycle. An operational
cycle is the process of a unit’s transition to different stages and consists of three phases: consolidation,
training and employment. Consolidation is designed for providing the possibility of collective training
and includes manning and equipping, training of individuals, maintenance of equipment and weap

-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

ons and rest or vacation. Training is designed for achieving the qualification for carrying out the unit’s
mission essential tasks and includes various forms of collective training and exercises. The employment
phase is designed for maintaining operational readiness and performance of operations in Slovenia or
within an area of crisis response operations.
In peacetime, certain units and systems are, on a daily basis, in an increased state of operational
readiness compared to others. These are units that are part of the SAF response forces or part of allied
response forces as well as components of the intelligence system, command and control system and
the air defence system. Through these forces, the SAF ensures the preparedness for facing military and
non-military threats posed to the Republic of Slovenia or the Alliance. Possible requirements of operational readiness can be determined for units that are designed to support the protection, rescue and
relief in the event of natural and other disasters.
Part of the air defence system uninterruptedly monitors and protects the sovereignty of the air
space and the integrity of the Alliance’s air space in peacetime against military and terrorist threats.
Allied aircraft can also operate in the Slovenian air space.

_From 22 to 24 March 1991 a Territorial_
_Defence (TD) exercise was held, referred_
_to as the Premik ’91 exercise. Units of_
_the 2[nd] Dolenjsko Regional TD HQ, the_
_6[th] Severnoprimorska Regional TD HQ_
_and the MORiS Brigade participated in_
_the exercise. The exercise began with_
_the mobilisation in Vogrsko near Nova_
_Gorica. Movement was then carried out_
_in the direction of Postojna – Sodražica_
_– Kočevje – Trebnje. It was concluded in_
_Šmarjeta in Dolenjska. The purpose of_
_the exercise was to test a part of Slov-_
_enia’s defence capabilities with focus on_
_the mobility of forces. Several combat_
_activities were carried out that included_
_anti-aircraft combat, attack and am-_
_bush. The Premik ’91 exercise showed_
_that the RS TD was ready to take over_
_the defence of the Republic of Slovenia_
_in the event of an attack. The exercise_
_was carried out at a key moment, three_
_months before the War for Slovenia and_
_had a major impact on the confidence_
_and motivation of TD members._


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


##### 6.9 Real Estate and Air Space Management

The real estate management of the national territory for the requirements of military defence is
planned and conducted in peacetime and continues in war. It allows for better conditions for SAF operations and an effective accomplishment of its mission. Its purpose is to provide for proper stationing,
work and training conditions for units, the conduct of mobilisation, the deployment of forces, combat
operations and maintenance of sustainability.
Real estate management is based on the utilisation of military and non-military infrastructure
and natural terrain features. It comprises the indication of the geographical area of responsibility, the
indication of infrastructure for the work of commands and units and the adaptation of natural and
man-made facilities and the construction of special facilities for the support of operations. Real estate
is mainly managed for command, communication, air force operations, air defence, air space surveillance, in support of survivability and movement, as well as to provide counter-mobility and logistic
support for the SAF and Alliance forces.
Air space management is the military part of managing the air space and allows for its concerted
employment as well as prevention and reduction of the possibility of combat operations affecting own
or allied aircraft. Planning and implementing measures of air space management is, in the collective
defence system, under the responsibility of an authorised body allocated to a certain area. Whereas, on
the territory of the Republic of Slovenia, it is within the responsibility of the highest operational commander. The air space preparation plan is brought into line with activities of the civilian air traffic.
Real estate management is based on employment plans of the Slovenian Armed Forces and of
the Alliance in carrying out collective defence and military education and training programmes. At individual command levels and within their competences, headquarters are responsible for planning terrain preparation to meet SAF requirements. They bring their tasks of area of operation preparation into
line with competent MoD organisational units and the latter with other bodies and organisations.

##### 6.10 Host Nation Support (HNS)

During Alliance operations on the territory of the Republic of Slovenia, the Slovenian Armed
Forces will ensure part of the HNS tasks. The SAF will prepare conditions for the deployment and staging of forces and participate in logistic support of Alliance forces and organisations that are stationed
on, operate within or pass through the territory of the Republic of Slovenia. The SAF will provide support within their capabilities and, if the requirements increase, the MoD will prepare and harmonise
plans on activating civilian capabilities.
The SAF General Staff is responsible for bringing Host Nation Support into line with the requirements of the Combined Joint Task Forces Command and the commands of troop contributing
nations. It receives all requirements expressed by countries and, in accordance with available military
capabilities, determines bodies responsible for support within the SAF. In the event of increased or
complex requirements, it provides for the possibility to form coordination groups that, in compliance
with the requirements and in addition to SAF representatives, include representatives of the MoD,
other ministries, government services and other state bodies, and also, if necessary, representatives of
certain enterprises, institutes and other organisations that, based on a decision of the RS government,
are significant for the defence of Slovenia.
The military territorial command provides the reception, staging and limited logistic support


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

to allied forces within its area of responsibility. It cooperates with regional defence administrations
in providing civilian capabilities. It provides materiel capabilities for the formation of regional coordination groups for support. Along with SAF representatives, the groups consist of members of state
administrative bodies, local self-governments and enterprises, institutes and other organisations. The
military contingent within the group is led by a representative of the military territorial command. The
civilian part is coordinated with representatives of competent regional defence administrations. The
military territorial command provides for possibilities for stationing liaison officers and national support elements of contributing nations.

##### 6.11 Consolidation

Consolidation is an activity of the SAF that is carried out in the area of operation and within SAF
units after completing operations and accomplishing their missions. The consolidation of the area of
operation comprises activities that are designed to protect the accomplished goals; to mitigate effects
of combat operations and to establish order and the proper conditions for normal life after completing
combat operations; to support the establishment of public services and infrastructure; transfer military
control to civilian control; and to ensure the safety of the population and the government. The consolidation of units comprises psychological, medical, spiritual, and security assistance and measures that
provide the conditions for the inclusion of SAF servicemembers into regular everyday work and their
return to their families.
Consolidation is an integral part of SAF planning operations. Activities after the completion of
operations are planned before beginning any mission. The planning phase must anticipate the final
situation and results of the military operations in the area of responsibility and the effects of a stressful environment on a unit’s members. In the majority of cases, consolidation in the area of operation
signifies the transition from the defensive or offensive forms of operations to stability or support operations.
High quality planning prevents collateral damage that can impede the establishment of normal
life conditions of the population in the area of operation. Additionally, it enables a timely replacement
of forces that have been engaged in combat. Operations after the conflict are taken over by fresh forces.
An integral part of consolidation is to envisage the scope of humanitarian and other activities that units
will carry out in support of local authorities and government and non-governmental organisations.

##### 6.12 Sustainability

Sustainability planning is an integral part of operations planning and depends on four factors:
designation, distance, demand and duration of operations. Designation defines the requirements that
derive from the characteristics of the environment and refers to equipment and physiological demands
on SAF servicemembers. Distance to the designation determines lines of communication and the
organization of supply and evacuation systems required for casualty management and equipment
repair. Demand is influenced by losses in terms of personnel and materiel in a certain period of time,
and is directly linked to the forms and types of operations. The duration of operations determines the
personnel and equipment supplements and replacements required to maintain sustainability during


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


operations. Effective sustainability planning is based on considering logistic principles and the commander’s sustainability statement.
The sustainability of the SAF can be considered at the strategic, operational, tactical and individual level. At the strategic level, the RS Government ensures an economic base for providing resources necessary for the development and operation of the SAF. Operational sustainability is planned by
the Force Command and delivered through the SAF General Staff and other bodies and organizational
units of the Ministry of Defence. Operational sustainability is provided through the system of personnel and logistic support of the Slovenian Armed Forces.
At the tactical level, requirements of individual sustainability are implemented that support the
physiological needs, morale, health and welfare of SAF servicemembers. It provides also sufficiently
trained manpower for manning, supplementing and replacing SAF personnel.
The maintenance of combat effectiveness of forces is of particular interest to tactical commanders, who try to achieve this effectiveness with minimal losses. Long-term combat in complex terrain
and weather conditions rapidly reduce the combat effectiveness of forces. Forces that are in contact or
in the reserve can be isolated or temporarily isolated, and the combat service support can also be cut
temporarily. The replacement of weakened forces, manpower and equipment and logistic support are
significant for the re-establishment of the forces’ combat capability.
The combat operations plan cannot be successfully implemented without dedicating much
attention to sustainability. It has to be flexible and formed so as to enable the commander to take free
decisions in combat operations. Successful combat service support is the capability of timely and efficiently utilising available assets. It is an indispensable factor of combat operations and is often decisive
when taking into account their feasibility. A commander must have full control of the combat service
support to be able to operate in compliance with his responsibilities.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

### Command Organisation

# 7.


##### 7.1 Strategic Level

The Government of the Republic of Slovenia harmonises the organisation and preparations for
military and civilian defence and runs its implementation. The National Crisis Management Centre
provides technical support, information and communication support, and the required work space for
the operation of the Government. The Ministry of Defence provides conditions for the centre’s operation.
The President of the Republic of Slovenia is the Commander-in-Chief of the Slovenian Armed
Forces. The command of SAF commands and units is under the competence of the Chief of the SAF
General Staff and subordinated commanders. The SAF Command Centre provides the command support at the strategic and operational level.
The RS Government coordinates the employment of the allied forces in the military defence of
the Republic of Slovenia with the North Atlantic Council. Based on a proposal of the Military Committee (MC), these organisations decide on the employment of the Combined Joint Tasks Forces. The Joint
Force Commander and the immediate higher command are appointed by the Supreme Allied Commander in Europe (SACEUR). The Combined Joint Task Force carries out operations in the Joint Area of
Operation (JAO) that comprises a part of, or the entire territory of the Republic of Slovenia.
Operations are carried out in compliance with the operations plan that is confirmed by the Supreme Allied Commander in Europe and rules of engagement adopted by the North Atlantic Council.
Based on an authorisation given by the RS Government, the Joint Force Commander has certain limited
competences to command the SAF and competences for leading the military defence of the Republic of
Slovenia. A part of the air defence system of the Republic of Slovenia has already been integrated into
the NATO Integrated Air Defence System (NATINADS) and is under the operational command of the
Allied Supreme Commander in Europe.
The coordination of the arrival and deployment of allied forces, the integration of the SAF forces
into the structure of the Combined Joined Task Forces, and Host Nation Support is harmonised by the
SAF General Staff. For this purpose it links-up with the Military Committee and the Allied Command
for Operations through permanent military representatives.
To bring military and civilian activities into line at the strategic level, the SAF General Staff serves
as the liaison between bodies responsible of planning and organisation of civil defence, the General
Police Administration and the RS Civil Protection Headquarters.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


##### 7.2 Operational Level

At the operational level and up to the employment of allied forces, the SAF operational command is in charge with the command of the Slovenian Armed Forces in carrying out the defence of the
Republic of Slovenia. It operates in compliance with the SAF employment plans.
Based on a decision of the RS Government, wartime operational control of the maritime aquatorium and navigational air traffic services of the Republic of Slovenia is assumed by a competent SAF
operational command, which in cooperation with the Civil Protection, the air traffic management,
forces of the security system and the system of protection against natural and other disasters, plans and
runs activities of military and non-military forces in the spheres of control and defence of the aquatorium and the coast, control of aviation information and air traffic control.
The Combined Joint Force Commander commands operations on the territory of the Republic
of Slovenia in accordance with Alliance defence plans and through the transfer of certain competences
from the RS Government. The Combined Joint Force Commander has the competence to organise
forces and to command operations on land, sea and in the air in compliance with the mission of the
forces.

_On 18 March 1991, the RS Presidency_
_established an operational coordination_
_body for emergency situations, called_
_the Republic Coordination. Thus, a_
_body was established that coordinated_
_all defence preparations for Slovenia’s_
_process of gaining independence and,_
_during the War for Slovenia, ran the_
_operation of the TD, the Police and_
_the Civil Defence. It was led by the RS_
_Secretary of National Defence, Janez_
_Janša, and the RS Secretary of Internal_
_Affairs, Igor Bavčar. During the most_
_critical moments, they communicated_
_their decisions directly to the com-_
_manders of the TD and the police. Janez_
_Janša emphasised in his assessment of_
_the operation: ”If all activities had not_
_been coordinated to the highest degree_
_possible, our advantages could not_
_have been expressed and our adversary_
_would have sooner or later achieved_
_better results due to his superiority in_
_strength and technology/equipment,_
_and the war would have inflicted more_
_casualties.“_


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

The SAF operational command coordinates military activities with the Combined Joint Task
Force Command that derive from obligations arising from Host Nation Support and the integration of
SAF units into the joint forces structure. Therefore, it fosters its communication with the combined Joint
Task Force Command and assigns officers and NCOs to duties carried out at the Joint Force Command
and at the Component Commands.
The Operational Commander of the SAF plays the role of an advisor in the Joint Force Command and, at the same time, the role of the national force commander in the joint forces’ structure.
He is competent to carry out functions that are of national competence, of maintaining sustainability,
establishing communications at the operational level, harmonising planning and targeting, coordinating Host Nation Support and reporting to the Chief of the SAF General Staff.

##### 7.3 Tactical Level

At the tactical level, operations in the context of battles and combat are led by brigade and
battalion combat groups and commanders of territorial commands. In compliance with employment
plans, they have the competences for the control of all military and civilian activities in an assigned area
of responsibility. For this purpose civilian-military cooperation centres are formed at the commands.
Upon deployment of combined joint tasks forces, the command at the tactical level in assigned
areas of operation is assumed by commanders of land, air and maritime joint force components as well
as the commander of special forces and commanders of brigade and battalion battle groups. For some
events units are under direct command of the Joint Force Commander.
In accordance with the organisational structure of joint forces, brigade and battalion battle
groups and individual units of the SAF are integrated into the structure of the joint forces. Forces of
military territorial commands, combat service support and command support units are not integrated
into the structure of joint forces and remain under the operational command of the SAF. These are
forces designed for the implementation of national competences with regard to sustainability of forces,
performance of Host Nation Support and certain tasks related to combat service support of the SAF
General Staff and the SAF operational command.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

### SAF Operations

# 8.


##### 8.1 Rules of Engagement and Caveats on Operations

The rules of engagement control the employment of military force and provide unit commanders and members with guidance to act within the limits of political and military goals. They define the
level and the method for the use of military force.
General rules of engagement are derived from the provisions contained in the international law
of war, the humanitarian law and from national legislation. Mission-specific rules of engagement may
be defined by the Government of the Republic of Slovenia, as required. Special rules of engagements
in NATO-led operations are defined by the North Atlantic Council.
SAF general rules of engagement demand that SAF units treat non-combatant civilians humanely and indiscriminately. Humane treatment also applies to POWs. The wounded and sick will be
provided medical treatment indiscriminately. Demilitarised zones and locations will enjoy full protection. Attacks on installations or buildings which contain hazardous material are forbidden. Military
targets should not be placed in the vicinity of such objects. Cultural goods and monuments should not
be designated military targets nor used for military purposes. Military activities must be conducted so
that they take into account environmental issues.
Caveats on operations instruct commanders about any restrictions on the employment of units
or conduct of certain operations. They are defined on a case-by-case basis by the SAF Chief of General
Staff for each military operation. The restrictions are derived from national legislation restrictions on
the employment of the SAF, restrictions because of equipment and weapons capacities, the level of
unit training and security, ecological and political causes. In the absence of a detailed definition of
restrictions, unit commanders will be guided by a general rule to employ a unit or conduct a task if
the unit has adequate equipment or weapons, if it is appropriately trained, and if the task is within the
scope of force mandate and rules of engagement. When in doubt, the commanders will act in accordance with applicable national legislation.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


8.2 Forms and Types of Operations

The SAF carry out offensive, defensive, special, stability, support, information and enabling operations. The form of operation is determined by the type which is predominant in terms of its scope,
intensity and duration. Offensive, defensive and special operations are usually predominant in war;
stability, support and information operations are predominant in peace.

Types of Operations

OFFENSIVE DEFENSIVE SPECIAL INFORMATION

STABILITY SUPPORT ENABLING


8.2.1 Offensive Operations

An offensive operation is the principle form of combat operations. Its aim is to defeat an enemy
by enforcing the commander’s will and using focused force. The SAF carry out the following types of
offensive operations: attack, reconnaissance in force, raid, demonstration of force, ambush, penetration, exploitation and pursuit. In order to achieve the aims of offensive operations, the commander
may combine also different forms of defensive operations. Offensive operations are characterised
through surprise, concentration of forces, operational tempo and boldness.
An attack is the principle type of offensive operations, the main objective of which is usually to
defeat an enemy. During the attack the forces use movement supported by fire on the enemy’s forward
elements and on the enemy’s rear area. Other aims of an attack include: seizing terrain and information, cutting off the enemy from supplies, redirecting the enemy from the main effort, deception, fixing
the enemy in specific area, and preventing the redeployment or regrouping of enemy forces, taking
initiative and disrupting enemy’s attack.
The attack types are hasty attack, deliberate attack, counter-attack, faint and spoiling attack.
The types of attack manoeuvre include envelopment, turning movement, infiltration, penetration and
frontal attack. The choice of the manoeuvre is determined by the objective, mission, time and forces
available, information on the enemy, weather and terrain.

8.2.2 Defensive Operations

A defensive operation is a temporary form of combat operations applied when the initiative
has been taken by the enemy. The basic objective of defensive operations is to disrupt the enemy’s
attack and to destroy his defensive capabilities, to deter a threat and to provide favourable conditions
for offensive operations. In addition, defensive operations are aimed at preventing the occupation of
the terrain or penetration into a defended area, gaining time, facilitating the concentration of forces
elsewhere, breaking down the enemy’s forces and preventing his intent. During defence operations
the commander focuses especially on the activity in the enemy’s battle formation, prevention of enemy
infiltration, encirclement and raid, security of forces, threats related to weapons of mass destruction
and on exploiting every possibility for counter-attack.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

The SAF conduct three types of defensive operations: mobile defence, area defence and delay.
Mobile defence is a form of defensive operations with an aim to destroy the attacking force by permitting them to advance to a position where it is exposed to counter-attack. The emphasis is on defeating
the enemy rather than retaining or retaking terrain.
Area defence is a form of defensive operations to retain terrain. It involves engagement with the
enemy in a series of mutually related positions from which the enemy can be destroyed mainly with the
use of firepower. The emphasis is on retaining of terrain or denying it to the enemy.
Delaying action is a form of defensive operations where flexibility and freedom of action is
maintained by yielding the terrain with an aim to inflict the enemy the maximum damage possible.
Delaying actions are carried out in order to slow down the enemy’s advance, gain time, direct the
enemy’s manoeuvre in the desired direction and avoid combat in unfavourable conditions.

_On June 27, 1991 Territorial Defence units from the Dolenjska region managed to block the column of YPA_
_tanks on the slope of Medvedjek, between Trebnje and Ivančna Gorica. The following day, the units en-_
_gaged in an armed conflict with fierce firing on both sides. The YPA units fired with anti-aircraft guns, and_
_the TD used anti-tank grenade launchers. In the afternoon, the YPA units conducted an air raid with cluster_
_bombs, killing several civilian truck drivers who were stuck in a column behind the road block. Despite fierce_
_fighting and numerous casualties, TD troops managed to halt the YPA column and stop its advance._


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


8.2.3 Stability Operations

A stability operation is a form of non-combat operations. SAF presence and activities ensure or
contribute to the creation of a secure environment. Diplomatic, economic, educational, development
and other programmes in this environment effectively eliminate the causes of crisis. Stability operations deter conflicts or prevent their escalation. In the event of hostilities, they help prevent the escalation of armed conflicts and encourage and help the warring factions to stop the conflict.
Stability operations also complement or reinforce offensive and defensive operations, before,
during and after these operations. Stability operations may be developmental, where the host nation
authorities are encouraged and assisted in elimination of the internal crisis or coercive, where a carefully selected force or threat is aimed at changing the situation in the area of operations.
In terms of stability operations, the SAF participate in crisis response operations or under the
provisions of international treaties. The predominant type of crisis response operations is peace support operations, in which SAF carry out the following types of stability operations: conflict prevention,
peace making, peace building, peace keeping, peace enforcement and humanitarian assistance.

8.2.4 Support Operations

Support operations represent a form of non-combat operations, mainly conducted in the
Republic of Slovenia’s territory to help civil authorities or organisations and to support security and
protection and rescue forces. SAF units provide assets and services to help civil authorities or organisations in managing the situation in peace and wartime.
SAF conduct the following types of support operations: protection, rescue and relief in the
event of natural and other disasters, the provision of safety, assistance in combating terrorism, search
and rescue, non-combatant evacuation, cooperation with civilian organisations as well as protection
of critical infrastructure and supplies.

8.2.5 Special Operations

Special operations is a form of combat operations carried out by specially selected, equipped,
organised and trained SAF units in support of military, political or psychological objectives of operational or strategic importance. They comprise non-conventional forms of combat operations, direct
actions, special reconnaissance, intelligence, counter-terrorist actions, psychological operations and
combat search and rescue. They are oriented towards military targets.
Typically, SAF Special Forces will operate in small groups, independently, deep in the enemy’s
rear area, over prolonged periods and under cover. They carry out their tasks in support of SAF offensive, defensive, information and stability operations.
Should the enemy occupy and control part of the Republic of Slovenia’s territory, SAF special
and other forces will carry out non-conventional forms of combat operations with an emphasis on
principles of guerrilla tactics. The units will regroup into smaller groups the aim of which is continuous
disruption, destruction, neutralisation and minimising the enemy’s morale. Combat operations will be
conducted independently, in a covert and resourceful manner, continuously, thus forcing the enemy
to refrain to static battle formation and expanding the terrain for the manoeuvre of SAF units. The units
avoid frontal engagement. Combat operations in an occupied terrain are based on aggressiveness and
surprise.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

8.2.6 Information Operations

An information operation is a form of combat and non-combat operations conducted in peace
and wartime to influence decision-makers. Such operations are directed towards their information,
information processing, command and control systems and communication and information systems,
thus protecting own information and communication and information systems. Information operations incorporate the entire range of offensive and defensive activities carried out through the planning


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


and implementation of operations security, deception, psychological operations, electronic warfare,
public information, physical destruction of command and control components and other measures as
well as simultaneous defence of own command and control systems.

8.2.7 Enabling Operations

Enabling operations link and facilitate the transition from one type of operations to another.
They comprise the activities the aim of which is to establish or break the contact with the enemy or
the activities out of contact, such as reconnaissance, security, advance to contact, meeting engagement, link-up, relief of encircled forces, relief of troops in combat, withdrawal, march and crossing of
obstacles.

##### 8.3 Levels of Operations

The SAF carry out combat and non-combat operations independently or as part of allied and
coalition forces at the strategic, operational and tactical levels. The boundaries between these three
levels are blurred and related to the level of command, unit type and size and assets used. Operations
are defined as strategic, operational or tactical based on their effect or contribution to the achievement
of strategic, operational or tactical goals. Understanding that levels of operations are mutually dependent is essential for predicting the courses of action and assigning the tasks and resources.
The strategic level is defined by clearly stated national goals and the allied and coalition goals
and objectives, reinforced by military capabilities that nations are ready to make available for the
achievement of these goals. The use of force at the strategic level is coordinated with other segments
of national power, such as economic, psychological and diplomatic.
At the operational level, tactical operations are coordinated to ensure the achievement of
strategic goals. The SAF achieve strategic goals at this level by preparing, organising, and carrying out
military operations in cooperation with Alliance forces. The tactical level is focused on warfighting and
winning the battles. Success and failure at the tactical level define the conditions for the operational
level.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


Types Of Combat Operations

OFFENSIVE SPECIAL DEFENSIVE ENABLING

-  Attack -  Direct actions -  Mobile defence -  Reconnaissance

-  Reconnaissance in -  Special -  Area defence -  Security ops
force reconnaissance -  Delay -  Advance to contact

-  Assault -  Intelligence -  Meeting

-  Demonstration of -  Counter-terrorism engagement
force -  Psychological -  Link-up

-  Ambush operations -  Breakout of encircled

-  Break-through -  Combat search and forces

-  Exploitation rescue -  Relief of troops in

-  Pursuit combat

-  Withdrawal

-  March

-  Crossing and
breaching obstacles


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

### Combat Operations

|TERRAIN|ENEMY|Col3|OWN/FRIENDLY FORCES|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|recconoiter control retain clear survey occupy secure seize|block isolate conduct envelopment canalise deny neutralise by-pass turn arrest fix capture deceive|locate interdict exploit demonstrate force contain limit defeat pursue disrupt destroy suppress delay|evacuate exfiltrate conduct faint attack conduct spoiling attack conduct attack conduct raid attack by fire conduct march breach forward and backward passage of lines retire conduct counter-attack withdraw recover penetrate|cover advance to contact relief of encircled forces provide fire support link up disengage screen follow and support follow and assume escort guard infilitrate releif of troops in combat ambush|
||||||


# 9.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

Combat operations is a common term covering all types of offensive, defensive or special operations conducted by the SAF in order to attain desired military or political goals. In addition, they
incorporate certain types of information operations. Combat operations comprise procedures and
activities, the effects of which cause the changes of combat power and tactical position of the enemy.
Their aim is to seize terrain or installations, neutralise or incapacitate the enemy, halt enemy advance,
and conduct defence of an area or installation.

##### 9.1 War Principles

When planning and conducting combat operations, the commanders of SAF units take into
account the following principles: maintaining combat morale, target selection, concentration, aggressiveness, freedom of action, economy of effort, surprise, security and simplicity and flexibility.

_The engagements in the Koroška area started on 27 June 1991, after the YPA units stationed in the Holmec_
_sentry house demanded that a border crossing surrender. When the request was refused, the YPA started_
_firing. TD units from the Zahodna Štajerska region and the Slovenj Gradec police delivered counter-fire and_
_prevented the occupation of the border crossing. In the early morning hours of 28 June, TD units regrouped_
_into groups, depending on knowledge of the terrain. Shortly after, an attack on the YPA sentry house_
_Holmec began and developed into one of the major engagements in the War for Slovenia. TD and police_
_force members demonstrated a high level of determination, courage and morale, while keeping in mind the_
_enemy and the cause. By 1330, all of the enemy’s soldiers had surrendered, and by 1900 a Slovenian flag_
_hung from the roof of the sentry. The neighbouring sentries of Sonjak and Strojna were also seized._


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


9.1.1 Maintaining Combat Morale

Success in combat often largely depends on the moral rather than physical characteristics of a
unit. The number, types and effects of weapon systems cannot replace courage, energy, determination
and motivation. Therefore, the development and maintenance of combat morale are essential for winning. In broader sense, combat morale encompasses the awareness of the need and necessity to conduct
combat. In narrower sense, it stands for the ability and moral and psychological readiness of units and
each individual to perform their tasks in a motivated manner, even if faced with the threat of death.
A high level of morale helps maintain combat spirit. The desire to win must be present in each individual, from commander to soldier. High morale is a quality which helps troops to stand even the most
difficult circumstances and to show extraordinary courage even when fatigued or in danger. This can be
achieved through demanding and thoughtful training and intelligent and firm leadership.

9.1.2 Objective Selection

The selection, definition and maintenance of an objective are essential for combat operations.
The selection of an objective enables forces to direct their activities to the centre of gravity or to the enemy’s weakest point, which ensures deliberate and economic warfighting. Goals at the strategic level are
compliant with political goals, at the operational level with strategic goals, and at the tactical level with
operational goals. Hierarchical coordination of goals ensures a coordinated operation on the part of all
participants involved in combat.
The selection of objectives demands logical thinking, consideration of operational factors and the
enemy and the superior commander’s intent. The objective must be clearly defined, understandable,
unambiguous, and attainable with forces available to the commander. Once defined, it is maintained
throughout the operation until the commander’s intent is implemented. The subordinates must know the
objective and bear it in mind when planning and carrying out operations. It can be defined precisely or
generally; however, there should be no doubt as to what a unit must achieve and by when.

9.1.3 Concentration

The achievement of operational objectives is ensured through the selection of the centre of gravity
and the main effort. The concentration is defined based on the force ratio, the possibility of massing the
forces, and the intensity of their employment given time, terrain and force capabilities. The main effort
is demonstrated by focusing the mental processes, forces and assets, firepower, manoeuvre and other
military activities towards the centre of gravity. The success is a result of concentrating the predominant
combat power at the right time and at the right place.
Mobility is of key importance for the concentration of combat power, directly affecting the ability for the achievement of goals. The units must be capable of movement in the changing weather and
terrain conditions. Having better mobility of own forces may help make up for the enemy’s manpower
superiority.

9.1.4 Aggressiveness

Aggressiveness is a principle applicable to all types and forms of combat operations, even when
the initial initiative is in the hands of the enemy. It applies to the strategic, operational and tactical levels.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

Commanders at all levels seek every opportunity to gain or take over the initiative and strike the enemy.
It is only through the aggressiveness that we can enforce our will on the enemy.
Success in combat is directly dependent on individual and collective determination to engage the
enemy and the tendency to destroy his will to combat. Very often, combat success will be a result of the
opportunities, recognised and used by the commander. Aggressiveness is sustained through continuous
fast movements, strikes and exploitation of success. Attacks are carried out in all circumstances. Even
when the enemy is at the advantage, weaknesses can still be found and exploited.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


9.1.5 Freedom of Action

By asserting his will, a commander creates the situation in the theatre so that he has the possibility for his success. In doing so he enforces his conditions on the enemy, expresses initiative and
preserves his freedom of action. Therefore, the commander needs to have the authority and possibility
of using any opportunity or favourable conditions in the theatre. He needs to have all the authorities
for the operations of his unit within the scope of its mission and the intent of the superior commander.
This includes appropriate measures to prevent surprise by the enemy and incapacitate his freedom of
action and maintaining of initiative.
Freedom of action is of paramount importance if communications are downgraded or if they
break down due to difficult conditions or an enemy’s action. Even though any operation will be subject
to political and military constraints, the commander needs to have the ability to state his intent and
the concept for the accomplishment of his unit’s mission clearly and the authority to coordinate all the
activities in his area of responsibility.

9.1.6 Economy of Effort

Economy denotes the deliberate assignment and use of resources for the achievement of a desired objective. The principle of economy means that to achieve his objectives, a commander will use
the minimum force necessary at specific routes without jeopardising the combat power and safety of
own forces at other routes. The commander needs to assign his forces based on the mission’s essential
tasks and priority goals; however; he should not employ the forces excessively. Since it is not always
possible to provide the required concentration of combat power, the principle of economy involves
accepting the risk for forces out of the centre of gravity.
The economy is the proportion between the achieved objective and losses. It is not only a supremacy of a smaller force over a larger force in terms of quality but also the ability and skill to have a
thoughtful battle formation, to use the combat systems efficiently, and to use the stocks and reserves.
Implementing the principles of economy is related to the seeking the balance between the principles
of security and concentration of forces.

9.1.7 Surprise

Surprise is an extremely effective and powerful factor that negatively affects the enemy’s morale
and reduces own losses. It relies on a thorough knowledge of an enemy’s weaknesses, his way of thinking and his expectations. In unfavourable conditions, success in combat may depend on the surprise.
Surprise can be used at the strategic, operational and tactical levels and can be achieved by
using new equipment or weapon systems and an unexpected selection of form of combat operations,
time, weather conditions, terrain and objectives. It comprises the following elements: confidentiality,
concealment, deception, inventiveness, courage and speed.

9.1.8 Security

A commander must take all precautions to secure and protect own forces so that he can accomplish his mission. Precautions must deny the enemy to know our plans, deployment, capability
and intent. These precautions include the protection of forces and areas against the enemy’s surprise


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

and other events, the provision of the reserve, counter-mobility operations and command and control
robustness. The precautions taken to safeguard the troops, key assets and information are important
and they reduce the freedom of action in the achievement of objectives. However, they should not lead
to excessive avoidance of all risks, thus preventing decisive actions.

9.1.9 Simplicity and Flexibility

The tempo of events and the complexity of modern warfighting can lead to great confusion.
For this reason, plans must be simple and clear. Complex and unclear plans may harm the tempo of
events and reduce the possibility of a successful outcome. Simple and clear plans ensure that all actors
involved have the same understanding of plans and that in the event of unpredictable circumstances
everybody is oriented and acts towards the right direction in the spirit of the commander’s intent and
the unit mission.
Operations plans must be flexible, in that they permit combat operations in unpredictable
circumstances and the exploitation of advantage whenever the events in the theatre change. Commanders and units must be able to react to the changed plans and to shift from one course of action
to another. Flexibility is derived from the level of training, organisation, communications, efficient
staff procedures and maintaining the reserve. At the strategic level, flexibility is achieved by predicting new security risks and planning of forces necessary for coping with such risks. At the operational
and tactical levels, flexibility is achieved through analysing potential enemy response and planning
counter-measures.

##### 9.2 Combat Functions

Combat functions serve as an analytical tool, which helps understand fundamental battle
systems in the theatre of operations. By processing combat functions, the commanders keep in mind
all combat factors pertinent to the planning and conducting of operations. Although the relative importance of individual functions depends on the form and type of operations, as a whole, they form an
integrated entirety and serve as a basis for balancing force capabilities.
SAF combat functions include manoeuvre, fire support, intelligence, mobility, counter-mobility
and survivability, air defence, combat service support and command. The SAF try to achieve combat
supremacy to win battles and operations by integrating these functions.

9.2.1 Manoeuvre

The manoeuvre stands for the use of forces through movement and in combination with speed
and firepower. The SAF use the manoeuvre to obtain advantage over the enemy. It is the most important factor for focusing all forces at the decisive point and for the economy of forces as well as for
obtaining surprise. It is used for operations in depth, close combat and operations in the rear area.
The manoeuvre facilitates a favourable position in the theatre and the transfer of the centre of
gravity. It also helps change the form and type of combat operations and helps maintain or take the
initiative, it provides freedom of action and reduces vulnerability. The manoeuvre is assured by exploiting the fire and the mobility of units and individual combat systems.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


_On 1 July, 1991, a column of the YPA armoured vehicles, blocked at Medvedjek, was withdrawing in the direc-_
_tion of Novo mesto. The Dolenjska pokrajina TD units redirected the armoured vehicles to the forest of Krakovski_
_gozd, where they were blocked and encircled by units commanded by Captain Mitja Teropšič. On 2 July, the_
_column tried to break through the barricade. Throughout the action, the commander of the enemy force, Major_
_Boško Prodanović, asked for reinforcement to remove the block. TD units attacked and disrupted the column_
_and withdrew immediately. The enemy air force fired on the vacated positions. Facing a hopeless situation, the_
_enemy left the armoured and other vehicles and tried to cross the border into Croatia, crossing the Gorjanci hill_
_range in three columns. One of them was caught by the Krško special police force unit. The success of the TD_
_was based on rapid manoeuvre, efficient block, and co-ordinated attack and deployment of units._

9.2.2 Fire Support

Fire support is a joint and coordinated engagement of land, naval and air combat systems and
the engagement of offensive electronic warfare and non-lethal assets on land or sea targets. Its purpose is to delay, neutralise, break or destroy enemy forces and combat functions and assets to achieve
operational and tactical objectives.
Fire support is coordinated with the manoeuvre. It provides combat support of forces at the operational and tactical levels. SAF forces provide the following types of fire support: artillery and mortar
support, air suppression and close air support.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

9.2.3 Intelligence

Intelligence is are critical for the success of SAF operations, since it provides key information
necessary for planning, decision-making and operations. Intelligence operations comprise measures,
procedures and activities aimed at knowing and understanding an enemy’s activity, capabilities and
intentions as well as terrain and weather. Intelligence operations incorporate reconnaissance, intelligence, systematic surveillance and target acquisition. They are conducted in war and in peacetime.
Among the sources of the intelligence activity are human resources, imagery and text materials, technical assets, signals, radars, open sources, and seized technical assets and equipment. The
backbone of an efficient intelligence activity is the intelligence cycle that includes the statement of
intelligence requirements and planning, collection, processing and dissemination of intelligence information or distributing of this information to users.

9.2.4 Mobility, Counter-mobility and Survivability

Mobility, counter-mobility and survivability are the elements of SAF force protection with the
goal to sustain combat power. Force protection stands for the activities aimed at reducing the vulnerability of troops, equipment, installations and operations against all threats and in all situations. It
incorporates air defence, nuclear, biological and chemical defence, counter-terrorism measures, protection of communication and information systems and tactical measures such as manoeuvre, camouflage, terrain reinforcement and security.
Engineer support comprises activities with an aim to provide the best conditions possible for
the operation and protection of own forces and for the obstruction of enemy operations. They include
counter-mobility operations, facilitating movement and survivability. Counter-mobility operations
prevent the enemy manoeuvre capability and indirectly enhance the efficiency of own fire operations.
The support of movement ensures the freedom of movement of own forces and includes breaching of
natural and man-made obstacles, mine clearance, the removal of obstacles and the construction or reconstruction of lines of communication. The support of survivability enhances the protection of forces
against enemy’s combat assets and natural factors. It comprises engineer support in the preparation
and fortification of positions, concealment and clearance of fire zones and deception measures.
Nuclear, radiological, chemical and biological defence reduces the effects of weapons of mass
destruction as well as dangerous substances. SAF units carry out general and special measures related
to nuclear, radiological, chemical and biological defence to ensure survivability and limited operations in case of the use of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons as well as measures applied in
an environment contaminated with toxic substances. General measures include personal and collective protection, detection and monitoring, alarming and reporting, risk and hazard analysis as well as
personal and collective decontamination. Special measures incorporate nuclear, radiological, chemical and biological reconnaissance and alarming and clean-up after incidents with NBC weapons and
dangerous substances.
Operations security serves the protection of own forces, installations, devices and areas against
the enemy to include the control of areas thus ensuring the freedom of action. Safeguarding facilitates
protection against enemy intelligence operations, sabotage or terrorist groups or large combat units.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


9.2.5 Air Defence

Air defence represents a set of measures, procedures and activities for the prevention and reduction of enemy combat operation effects from the air. The air defence system in Slovenia consists
of the following elements: airspace control, air command and control system, active air defence and
passive air defence.
Active air defence is carried out through combat operations against enemy attack assets from
the air to deter or neutralise his power or destroy his forces before they accomplish their mission. Active
air defence comprises the employment of airplanes, ground based air defence weapon systems and
other weapons and electronic warfare assets. Passive air defence is composed of procedures, measures
and activities to downgrade the enemy’s operations from the airspace, and at the same time, provide
favourable conditions for mission accomplishment.
Airspace control is defined as a continuous and systematic surveillance of the airspace with
electronic, optical and other resources for timely detection, identification and determination of flyovers
by all elements in the RS airspace and avenues of approach. Its main purpose is to provide comprehensive and detailed information for better situational awareness, to support commanders in the decision
making process, and to transmit real time air threat warnings to all users, including the system of
informing and alerting the civilian population and coordination of weapon systems.

9.2.6 Combat Service Support (CSS)

The main purpose of combat service support is to ensure capabilities for the functioning and
maintaining of SAF sustainability throughout the period necessary for the achievement of their objectives and missions. The basic components of CSS are human resources and logistics support.
Human resources support is an activity to ensure the adequate quality of human resources and
sustain the forces. It incorporates manning, replacement of losses, augmenting and replacing troops,
disciplinary affairs, preparing the troops for combat, POWs procedures and welfare issues for SAF
servicemembers.
Welfare in the SAF stands for activities to ensure the well-being of SAF servicemembers and
their families. It comprises mechanisms to promote mental health and personal growth and development of servicemembers, spiritual care, health care, accommodation, family support, occupational
safety, recreation and cultural events, various special-interest activities and an institutional framework
for the military personnel.
Logistic support is the process of providing operational capability and maintaining the sustainability of forces for all forms and types of operations. It comprises activities related to the acquisition,
storage, distribution, maintenance and evacuation of materiel, movement of troops and assets, the
acquisition, maintenance and management of the military infrastructure, and the provision of services
and medical support. Logistic support is conducted by six mutually related and interdependent functional areas of military logistics: supplies, movement and transport, maintenance, medical support,
military infrastructure and finances.
CSS focuses a great deal on medical support, since this not only impacts an individual’s ability
to conduct operations but also his morale. Therefore, it is one of the most important factors of unit
combat efficiency. The SAF provide their own first aid, general and urgent medical help, triage and
evacuation capabilities at the ROLE 1 level, and emergency surgical help and evacuation at the ROLE


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

2 level. ROLE 3 and 4 medical support is provided through the public health system or foreign health
systems and armed forces. Within the scope of primary medical care, the SAF Medical Service carries
out procedures and measures to protect health of SAF servicemembers, control injuries and prevent the
occurrence and spreading of diseases.

9.2.7 Command

Command is implemented through a commander’s activities and through the command and
control system. It is an authority, prescribed by law, that the commander needs in order to plan, organise, coordinate and control his assigned forces. It is a process in which the commander impresses
his will and intent on his subordinates. Command is based on SAF values, a commander’s competence
and leadership abilities, as well as legal acts that give him professional, formal authority and responsibility, and on an efficient command and control system.
The command and control system incorporates procedures, organisation, human resources,
assets, facilities and communication in support of the command function. The backbone of the command and control system is the intelligence, communication and information systems. The command
and control system helps the commander to make timely and sound decisions, to assign assets and
tasks, to coordinate combat functions and to coordinate and control operations from any point in the
theatre.
The command also comprises management. Unlike in the civil sector, where the management
process has a key role for the assignment and control of human, material and financial resources, the
basic function of conducting a military organisation is command based on legislative authority and
responsibilities for the employment of a unit.
The fundamental principle of command is the unity of command. The unity of command
means that there is only one responsible commander who commands subordinated forces within the
defined area of responsibility in the achievement of a common objective at the strategic, operational
or tactical levels.
Command in the SAF is based on timely decision-making, a clear understanding of the superior’s intent, the ability of subordinates to implement the intent, and the commander’s ability to communicate the implementation of the plan from beginning to end. The mission command approach
encourages decentralised command, freedom and speed of operations and initiative as well as consistent compliance with directions and instructions of the superior commander. With this approach it is
important that a commander makes sure that subordinates have understood his intent and their mission and role in strategic, operational and tactical terms. Subordinates must have an understanding of
the effects that need to be achieved and why. They need to have a clearly defined mission, time, space
and sufficient forces and assets to achieve their mission. The commander minimises the use of control
to avoid unnecessary disruptions of subordinate commanders’ freedom of action. Subordinate commanders themselves decide how to best accomplish the mission of units under their command.
Given the assigned authorities, a commander exercises full or limited command. Limited command comprises the following types of limited responsibility: operational command, operational
control, tactical command, tactical control, administrative control and coordination authority. A commander of the allied or coalition forces, under which SAF can operate, exercises only limited command
authority, i.e. is operational or tactical control.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


WAR PRINCIPLES

1. Selection of objective
2. Concentration
3. Aggressiveness
4. Freedom of action
5. Economy of effort
6. Simplicity and flexibility
7. Surprise
8. Security
9. Maintaining combat morale


COMBAT FUNCTIONS

1. Manoeuvre
2. Fire support
3. Intelligence
4. Mobility, counter-mobility, survivability
5. Air defence
6. Combat service support
7. Command


OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK

1. Decisive operations
2. Shaping operations
3. Sustaining operations


_Combat operations_

COMBAT
FORMS

1. Campaign
2. Battle
3. Engagement

LEVELS OF
OPERATIONS

1. Strategic
2. Operational
3. Tactical


##### 9.3 Forms of Combat Operations

The SAF conduct the following forms of combat operations: campaigns, battles and engagements. A campaign is a sequence of battles and/or engagements based on a unified concept on specific terrain and in a specific time period. It joins and directs battles, engagements and other activities
of units to achieve operational and strategic goals. In war, campaigns bring decisive results.
The type and the area of a military operation necessary for the achievement of a strategic goal
are defined by the strategic level of command. This level of command defines the criteria for success
and the end state. It also establishes any potential political, financial, legal or other caveats on SAF accomplishment of tasks on operations. The SAF conduct campaigns within the Alliance in the framework
of joint tasks forces.
Battles and engagements are forms of tactical operations that include direct contact with the
enemy. Battles are conducted independently or within the Alliance. They are conducted independently
or within an operation as part of land, sea and air activities in order to achieve a tactical goal. Tactical
goals and the sequence of their achievement are defined by the commands at the operational level,
which also assign the necessary assets. Battles are conducted by brigade combat groups.
An engagement is the fundamental, as well as the most massive, direct and intensive form of
combat operations and other activities conducted by individuals, groups, temporary tactical units and
company and battalion combat groups. An engagement is a direct coordinated confrontation between
troops, aircraft, ships and other combat systems. It is an element of battle or land, sea and air operations.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

##### 9.4 Operational Framework

The operational framework is a tool that provides a mental picture of the theatre and helps
coordinate operations. Usually, it is applied in the process of developing and describing the course of
action and the concept of operations derived from it. It shows how the tasks of subordinate units are
mutually interrelated in space and time in terms of the purpose and function.
The basic purpose of the operational framework is to help understand how the tasks are interrelated in terms of their purpose. A commander identifies the task which is decisive for mission accomplishment, and then he identifies the supporting tasks. In terms of their purpose, the operations are
divided into three types: decisive operations, shaping operations, and sustaining operations.
Decisive operations include the activities oriented towards the implementation of a unit’s mission. The purpose of shaping operations is to establish or preserve the conditions necessary for the
conduct of decisive operations. Sustainability operations maintain the conditions necessary for the
force to survive, move and conduct combat operations in the implementation of decisive operations
or shaping operations.

decisive operation
(envelopment) **V**


shaping operations
(fixing the forces)

###### rezervareserve


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


##### 9.5 Synchronisation

Synchronisation is the ability to direct resources and activities in time and place to achieve
the dominant relative combat power at a decisive point and in a decisive moment. Synchronisation
requires vertical and horizontal coordination of different units and activities in relation to all methods,
types and forms of operations. Synchronisation by itself is not a guarantee of a synchronised battlefield
unless a commander first has a clear picture of the sequence of the activities and their results. Therefore, the synchronisation starts with a commander who communicates his vision for the conduct of
operations to his subordinate commanders.
Synchronisation takes place across the commander’s geographical area of operation and comprises synchronisation of combat functions, units and combat systems. The commander synchronises
and conducts deep, close and rear combat operations to give the enemy an impression of one, continuous operation. The forces try to simultaneously attack the enemy across the battlefield and concentrate effects where necessary to accomplish the mission. Synchronisation is of key importance for the
achievement of the objective; however, the desire to have a coordinated effort in the area of responsibility should not negatively influence the initiative and the exploitation of favourable conditions.
Successful synchronisation is based on good planning before and during the conduct of operations, effective operational procedures, timely communication of orders, rigorous respect of control
measures and implementation plans and efficient conduct and control of operations. In order for
synchronisation to be more effective than the enemy, an efficient command and control system is
needed.
In order to achieve the aim of combat operations in conducting military defence of the Republic
of Slovenia, the SAF have affected efficient cooperation with adjacent units, the principle of combined
arms and services, as well as the cooperation with Alliance’s units and civil authorities. Such cooperation should be in place during planning and preparations and during the conduct of operations at all
levels of command and control. Efficient orchestration can be achieved through coordination and joint
training.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


### Information Operations


# 10.


Information operations can be carried out at all levels of command as an integral part of
operational planning. The aims of information operations are being implemented through military
and non-military measures and activities. Non-military measures and activities comprise political and
diplomatic actions, public information and civil-military cooperation. Military measures and activities
include an attack to physically destroy command and control elements, psychological operations,
electronic warfare, network centralised operations, security operations and deception and intelligence
operations.
Information operations can be offensive or defensive. Defensive information operations maintain access to information and help preserve the efficient use of information, the command and control
and communication and information systems and protect key information for the achievement of the
desired objective. The purpose of offensive information operations is to influence enemy information,
his command and control and communication and information systems in the effort to achieve a certain objective or in the face of a military threat.

##### 10.1 Psychological Operations

Psychological operations are planned peacetime and wartime psychological activities oriented
towards hostile, friendly or neutral audiences to influence their positions and behaviour affecting the
achievement of political and military objectives. The purpose of psychological operations is to weaken
enemy combat will, to strengthen the support and loyalty of own and friendly target populations and
to gain support of undecided or neutral populations. They comprise strategic psychological activities,
psychological consolidation and in-theatre psychological activities.
Target populations include SAF servicemembers, Alliance servicemembers, hostile or opposing
forces servicemembers and citizens of the Republic of Slovenia and other countries within the SAF area
of operation. Offensive psychological operations are directed towards an enemy. Defensive psychological operations are primarily directed towards strengthening the morale of SAF servicemembers
and friendly population and towards obtaining and maintaining the support of neutral and friendly
populations.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


##### 10.2 Electronic Warfare

Electronic warfare describes SAF activities which use electromagnetic energy, to include the
directed energy with an aim of exploitation and dominance in the electromagnetic spectrum or with
an aim to attack an enemy. It comprises the interception and identification of electromagnetic energy,
the use of electromagnetic energy to reduce and prevent hostile use of electromagnetic spectrum and
the activities to ensure the effective use of the electromagnetic spectrum by friendly forces. Electronic
warfare is directly linked with intelligence and is one of the pillars of information operations.
SAF conduct three types of electronic warfare measures: electronic warfare support measures,
electronic countermeasures and electronic protective measures. Support measures comprise activities
the aim of which is to detect, intercept, identify and define the location of transmissions in the electromagnetic spectrum in order to detect threats. Electronic countermeasures use electromagnetic energy
to prevent or reduce the hostile use of the electromagnetic spectrum. Electronic protective measures
protect own electronic systems against the hostile electronic warfare assets or against electronic interference by other friendly forces. They help ensure an efficient use of the electromagnetic spectrum
regardless of the hostile use of electromagnetic energy.

##### 10.3 Network Centric Operations

Network centric operations is a form of operations that uses information technology for the
achievement of military objectives. This form of operations means translating the information supremacy into combat power through an efficient network connection of sensors, decision-makers and actors
dispersed in the theatre in terms of geography and hierarchy.
Networking facilitates a common and comprehensive situation awareness, faster and better
command in terms of the quality, decentralised command, higher operational tempo, more lethal
effects, better survivability and automatic coordination of activities. Network centric operations help
commanders make decisions in a dynamic network based on the link-exchange and the principle of
cooperation.

##### 10.4 Operations Security

Operations security describes the SAF activities which use active and passive measures to provide force security by denying an enemy knowledge of the dispositions, capabilities and intentions of
the friendly forces. These measures are focused on the material that reveals key activities or weaknesses
or protect essential elements of friendly information.
Active security measures include the disruption or destruction of the enemy’s intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition and reconnaissance capability, attack on command posts and other command and control elements, deception and psychological operations. Passive measures incorporate
the protection of persons, physical and technical protection of areas and installations, safeguarding of
documents, camouflage and concealment, information security and communication and information
system security.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

##### 10.5 Deception

Deception comprises manipulation, distortion or falsification of data intended to mislead the
enemy and induce him to react in our interest. The SAF conduct deception in order to gain surprise,
force security, enhance a commander’s freedom of action, reduce casualties and minimise the use of
time and resources. Deception is carried out at the strategic, operational and tactical levels.
Offensive deception measures are used to actively disseminate false or misleading information
to the enemy to mislead him about future intentions or to achieve advantage. The basic aim is to gain
surprise and maintain the initiative. Defensive deception measures give false or misleading information to the enemy who has the initiative. The purpose of these measures is to divert his attention and
effort away from real order of battle and targets. The principle intention is to improve security of own
forces and provide the conditions for future actions.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


##### 10.6 Public Information

Public information incorporates SAF activities to inform the internal and external public about
their missions and gain understanding and support in the accomplishment of these missions. Public
information activities help create an environment that promotes trust in the SAF and the Alliance. These
activities are oriented towards all types of media, SAF servicemembers, Alliance forces servicemembers
and the citizens of the Republic of Slovenia as well as the citizens of countries where SAF troops may be
deployed, whereby the main focus is on SAF servicemembers and their families.
SAF conduct an active public information policy and try to ensure media coverage of events and
activities. Passive public information policy is applied if this is necessary to ensure operations security
for SAF or Alliance’s troops and units.
SAF treat all representatives of the public equally and do not produce exclusive stories. Everybody has free access to unclassified information or the information which can be released without
posing a threat to SAF servicemember security. Honesty is the main principle behind the relationship
between the commanders and the public.

##### 10.7 Civil-Military Cooperation

Civil-military cooperation comprises resources and activities that support relations between the
commanders and civil and military authorities and the civil population in the area of current and future
operations of the SAF. It also comprises cooperation with non-governmental and international operations. Successful civil-military cooperation enhances combat morale and brings tactical advantage.
The primary objective of civil-military cooperation is to establish and maintain full cooperation
of the civil population and institutions in the area of operation in order to have civil-military relations
that support SAF mission accomplishment as much as possible. The long-term goal of civil-military
cooperation is to create an environment favourable for a long-term solution of the crisis.
Civil-military cooperation is conducted in accordance with the rules of engagement that apply to SAF stability operations. In conducting civil-military activities the main priority must always be
the unit’s mission. Therefore, the conduct of civil-military cooperation is a commander’s priority. The
use of military resources must take into account the principles of economy and focus and should not
jeopardise a unit’s mission accomplishment. Therefore, resources must be focused in a way that is most
beneficial for the civil population or most supportive of the unit operations.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

### Stability Operations

# 11.


Decisions about SAF employment for stability operations are made by the Government of the
Republic of Slovenia in compliance with legislative provisions and international treaties. The political
and security interests of the Republic of Slovenia are to have a safe and stable security situation which,
in turn, guarantees a high level of national security. Based on these starting points, the SAF have to
play an active role in promoting international peace, security and stability. The SAF conduct stability
operations within the frame of crisis response operations and international treaties.

##### 11.1 Crisis Response Operations

Crisis response operations include political, military and civil actions conducted in compliance
with international law, with an aim to prevent crises and ensure crisis management in the achievement
of Alliance goals. Crisis response operations incorporate different forms and types of operations, ranging from support to civil organisations to combat operations. In contrast to Article V operations, which
put the Alliance’s collective defence principle in practice, the Alliance member states are not obliged to
participate and non-NATO states can participate. The SAF participate in NATO or EU-led crisis response
operations under the auspices of international security organisations and based on international treaties.
Crisis response operations are usually conducted by common joint task forces in cooperation
with governmental and non-governmental organisations and under international political leadership
and control. Normally, they are of prolonged duration and conducted in several mandates. The achievement of the target end-state is more difficult than in war. Because of the unpredictable environment in
which they are conducted, the guidelines, the end-state and the criteria for success may not be defined
clearly enough or might need to be adjusted to the changed situation in the area of operation.
Crisis response operations typically involve a large number of participants. In addition to
national and international military and diplomatic representatives, there are also numerous governmental and non-governmental organisations present in the area of operations. Therefore, special focus
must be on civil-military cooperation. In order for a crisis response operation to be successful, it is
necessary to gain and maintain the support of the public, both in the area of operations and at home.
Given the nature of such operations, the political influence extends not only to the strategic but also to
the tactical and operational levels.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


In place of the enemy, forces face the opposing or former warring factions. In some operations,
an adversary cannot be clearly defined, and there are several centres of gravity. Sometimes, members
of the opposing side need to be protected and not neutralised or destroyed as planned by the combat
principles.
Crisis response operations are very complex, which demands discipline and a high level of
flexibility to respond to the changed situation, which might include shifts from peacetime to wartime
circumstances. In most cases, crisis response operations are carried out in built-up areas and present a
special command challenge in a situation where operations by relatively small-size units can have an
impact on the achievement of the operational or even strategic goal. There are more restraints in the
rules of engagement than in those that apply to combat operations.

Crisis Response Operations

INTERNATIONAL
TREATIES

- Control of weapons, activities
and infrastructure

- Non-proliferation of WMD

- Military cooperation

PEACE SUPPORT
OPERATIONS

- Conflict prevention

- Peace making

- Peace building

- Peace keeping

- Peace enforcement

- Humanitarian assistance

OTHER
ACTIVITIES

- Protection and rescue

- Search and rescue

- Sanctions and embargo

- Evacuation

- Demonstration of force

- Counter-insurgency operations

- Military assistance

- Reconstruction


_Stability operations_

##### 11.2 Peace Support Operations

Peace support operations are impartial, multifunctional operations, usually conducted in support of international organisations. They include activities by military forces, diplomatic, humanitarian
and other organisations. The SAF conduct the following types of peace support operations: conflict
prevention, peace keeping, peace making, peace building, peace enforcement and humanitarian assistance.

11.2.1 Conflict Prevention

Conflict prevention is carried out with an aim of timely identification and elimination of possible causes of conflicts by using diplomatic, military and other means in an early phase of a conflict.
It comprises a number of activities from diplomatic initiative to the preventive deployment of forces.
Conflict prevention is a vital element in maintaining of international stability and security. However, it
is not a primary military task. The SAF support diplomatic and other efforts by participating in military
inspections, providing military observers and through the preventive deployment of forces.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

11.2.2 Peace Keeping

Peace keeping operations are conducted under Chapter VI of the UN Charter and based on
the agreement of all parties involved in the conflict with an aim to monitor and ensure possibilities
for implementation of a peace treaty. Peace keeping is directed towards managing residual conflicts
between warring factions while other diplomatic, economic and other measures are taken to achieve a
long-term solution to the conflict. In an environment where numerous actors are present, military force
is used to ensure stabile conditions in which they can perform their functions.
With their presence, the SAF deter the warring factions from violence, control the storage and
destruction of weapons and ammunition, have mediation tasks during negotiations, investigate peace
treaty violations, control withdrawal, disarmament and demobilisation of forces, collect information,
provide support to elections and the functioning of governmental and non-governmental organisations, and use force in the event of peace treaty violations or in the event of threat to peacekeeping
forces in accordance with the applicable rules of engagement.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


11.2.3 Peace Making

Peace making describes diplomatic efforts after the occurrence of a conflict to achieve a cease
fire or fast signing of a peace treaty. It comprises mediation between warring factions, reconciliation
and forms of diplomatic pressure, such as isolation and sanctions. Military force is used to control a
cease fire and support diplomatic efforts aimed at mediation, negotiations and other forms of finding
a peaceful solution to a conflict.
The SAF support diplomatic and other efforts by maintaining contacts between the forces of
warring factions, participating in joint exercises and trainings, deploying their forces, supporting the
work of security forces, deploying military observers and participating in the enforcement of sanctions.

11.2.4 Peace Building

Peace building comprises political, economic, social, military and other measures to promote
political solution of the conflict and eliminate the causes of conflict. It incorporates different mechanisms for the identification and support of the structures, the aims of which are to consolidate peace,
promote trust and prosperity and economic reconstruction. The aim of peace building is to promote
political solutions to a conflict and prevent new outbreaks of conflict.
The SAF’s roles in peace building includes help with the creation of civil authorities, reestablishment of public infrastructure, provision of conditions for the work of schools and hospitals and
performance of other tasks related to the restoring to normal living conditions.

11.2.5 Peace Enforcement

Peace enforcement activities are conducted in accordance with Chapter VII of the UN Charter. By nature, peace enforcement includes aggressive actions when no peace agreement has been
achieved by warring factions or if such an agreement is uncertain. The aim of peace enforcement is to
maintain or create peace or implement conditions defined by the force mandate.
Peace enforcement is a military activity, the nature of which is close to war. Usually, peace
enforcement missions are mandated by the UN and allow the employment of combat operations for
the achievement of desired objectives. The main task of peace enforcement is normally to coerce the
various parties to start peace negotiations and to deter them from further conflicts in the future. SAF
tasks incorporate the disengagement of warring factions, the establishment and control of a safe zone,
the enforcement of sanctions, the restoring of law and order, the protection of humanitarian activities
and support of the return of refugees.

11.2.6 Humanitarian Assistance

The purpose of humanitarian assistance is to alleviate human suffering, especially in circumstances where local authorities are unable or will not provide for appropriate support of the population. They are conducted based on a request and assist civil organisations if they are not able to provide
sufficient support for inhabitants. Humanitarian assistance is directed towards the provision of food,
water, housing and other activities for restoring normality to a population.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

SAF units may be engaged in the establishment of traffic communication, provision of medical
care, humanitarian demining, and delivery of supplies. In a hostile environment they protect humanitarian aid convoys and distribute humanitarian aid. They may also help with the reconstruction following the initial relief operations.

11.2.7 Other Stability Activities

SAF stability activities within the framework of crisis response operations include efforts primarily aimed at helping civil authorities and military and non-military organisations. These activities
incorporate participation in disaster relief efforts, search and rescue, evacuation, military assistance,
sanction and embargo implementation, show of force, post-conflict reconstruction and counter-insurgency operations.
Participation in disaster relief operations is closely related to humanitarian operations. It takes
the engagement of forces at very short notice and operation in extremely demanding circumstances
as a consequence of a natural or other disaster when the authorities are not able to provide adequate
relief by themselves.
Search and rescue operations involve the use of air, maritime and special rescue forces for
search and rescue of people on land and on the sea. Planning these operations must take into account
weather, terrain, capabilities of rescue forces, the level of threat as well as national constraints and
specifics. Within crisis management operations, the SAF do not conduct search and rescue operations
independently.
Evacuation defines operations when SAF units participate in the extraction of international military or security missions or own or allied forces from crisis areas abroad. A special form of evacuation
includes evacuation of the threatened non-combatants by SAF units in cooperation with allied forces
from foreign countries to Slovenia or to some other safe area.
Military assistance describes military activities that support civil communities or authorities
where civil authorities, due to circumstances or distress, are unable to cope. SAF units may be deployed
to help ensure public safety, safety during the elections, provide assistance to the local police, help
with the mine clearance and disposal of unexploded ordnance, as well as other forms of aid to civil
authorities so that they can successfully carry out their functions.
Sanctions and embargo implementation prevent the supplies, diplomatic, economic and other
privileges and freedom of movement of people in the area where sanctions are imposed. SAF units may
be engaged in the implementation and control of a selective barrier that allows transit only to allowed
goods, persons and services.
Demonstration of force is an activity by the armed forces of any country or group of countries
to coerce another country or group of countries into respecting international law or accepting political,
economic or other conditions. Together with allied forces, the SAF is involved in this activity by increasing its combat readiness, conducting a partial mobilisation, deploying or moving forces to or in the
vicinity of the crisis area or through conducting military exercises.
Post-conflict reconstruction comprises military, diplomatic, economic and humanitarian activities in order to ensure safety, order and public functions and create conditions favourable for the
transition from the military to civil control. SAF units may be engaged in the provision of safety, or
support the functioning of public services and legitimate government organisations in taking over of
their functions.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


Counter-insurgency operations comprise activities against insurgent forces. These forces try to
coerce political changes by using sabotage, propaganda and military pressure to convince or force the
broader public to support or accept such changes. The purpose of SAF participation in counter-insurgency activities is not a total destruction of insurgents, but to protect the population, minimise the
support of insurgents and incapacitate their operations.

##### 11.3 Operational Principles in Peace Support Operations

The basic operational principles of military forces in peace support operations include impartiality, consent and proportional use of force.

_In 2005, a group of 10 Slovenian soldiers from the Special Operations Unit, deployed to the ISAF peace sup-_
_port operation in Afghanistan, participated in a search and rescue operation trying to save the crew and_
_passengers of the crashed airplane B737 of the Kam air carrier. The plane crashed into a 3071m mountain_
_30 km southeast of Kabul. The group, which was led by lieutenant Anton Žbogar, was tasked to find any_
_survivors and secure the site of the accident. They arrived at the site on 7 February in the Alliance’s Cougar_
_helicopters. No survivors were found. The unit members demonstrated a high level of training, morale and_
_courage locating the plane’s wreckage, lying at an altitude of approximately 3000m, in deep snow and_
_precipitous terrain._


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

11.3.1 Impartiality

Impartiality dictates equal treatment of all parties involved in a conflict. All activities must be
conducted in accordance with the mandate of peace forces without giving advantage to any parties
involved. If force is used, it has to be directed towards what has been done and not towards who has
done it. Impartiality should not be mistaken for neutrality.
Impartiality is of key importance for the maintenance of trust in peace forces and consent between involved parties. In this way, impartiality directly promotes the attainment of the end result of
an operation. It is ensured through effective civil-military cooperation, preservation of contacts with
warring factions, information, rigorous compliance with the rules of engagement and transparent
functioning.

11.3.2 Consent

The principle of consent requires the attainment of consent from all parties involved in a conflict before the peace forces arrive and start implementing their mandate, except in the case of peace
enforcement operations. Consent is essential for gaining the support of local authorities and public
approval in the area of operation. In certain situations, consent may given at the strategic level but not
approved by specific groups at the tactical level. Therefore, peace forces need to have the necessary
capabilities to enforce their mandate and coerce the compliance with the peace agreement, and, in
turn, to ensure their credibility.
Consent is essential in achieving the end state of operations. Long-lasting peace will not be
achieved without the active participation of all parties involved and the local population. Therefore, efforts must be focused on bringing into line the different interests of all parties and the national interests
of countries which participate in the operation.

11.3.3 Proportional Use of Force

The principle of the restraint in the use of force requires the selection of appropriate and proportional force for the achievement of a desired objective. The situations and methods related to the
use of force are derived from the mandate of the peace forces, international law of war and humanitarian law and from the national legislation. They are defined in the rules of engagements.
If force is used, the consequences may go beyond the tactical level and have negative impact on
the consent, thus jeopardising military and civil efforts in achieving operational objectives. Therefore,
force must be used in a precise manner, proportionally in respect to the threat and in a way that it
prevents further expansion of the conflict. The restraints put on the use of force can never prevent the
use of force in self-defence.

11.3.4 Other Principles of Operation

In addition to fundamental principles of peace support operations, there are also other principles that need to be taken into account during the planning and execution phase, such as: identification of the objective, steadiness and persistence, the unity of effort, credibility, transparency, security
and protection of forces, flexibility, mutual respect, freedom of movement, legitimacy and civil-military
cooperation.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


The objective needs to be clear, feasible, determined in advance and focused on the achievement of the desired political end state. The identification of strategic military objectives is essential for
successful cooperation of all combined joint forces which closely cooperate with civil government and
non-governmental organisations.
Steadiness and persistence in the achievement of the desired political end state dictates patient, determined, gradual and consistent orientation of efforts towards the objectives set. Short-term
military success should not jeopardise long-term political, social, economic and other goals.
The unity of effort is manifested in the joint approach towards the set objectives, both among
the national military contingents and government, international and non-governmental organisations.
In order to achieve this unity, a liaison and coordination systems need to be established.
The credibility of forces conducting the operation must be ensured in the area of operation
and also by the political and military structures in charge of operations. The forces carrying out the
operation need to be adequately trained and equipped and have all necessary capabilities, will, determination and authorities for the accomplishment of their mission.
Transparency is necessary for the understanding of the peace support forces’ mission and
concept of operation, as well as objectives set for the achievement of the targeted political and military
state. The parties involved need to be informed of the mandate of forces and of the consequences,
should peace agreements provisions not be respected.
Security and protection of forces in the area of operations is the commander’s responsibility.
The orders need to clearly identify the responsibility for the own forces and the civilian forces involved
in the operation. It needs to be taken into account that the right of self-defence is inviolable and cannot
be restricted by any rules of engagement.
Flexibility is one of the preconditions for effective crisis management. The commanders need to
be vested sufficient authority to decide on adaptability in executing the planned activities within the
mission mandate. Flexibility dictates the ability of forces to quickly change from one type of operations
to another and from stability to offensive or defensive operations, if necessary.
Mutual respect promotes a high level of professionalism and respect of national, ethnic and
cultural specifics of all participants in the area of operation. The UN mandate, the Status of Forces
Agreement, and other arrangements give peacekeepers a certain level of immunity in the performance
of their tasks. Nevertheless, they must abide by local laws and regulations.
Freedom of movement for military forces is essential for mission accomplishment. The provisions contained in the mandate and in the rules of engagement must ensure free movement of military
forces across the area of operation without locals interfering with their tasks. Any problems should be
resolved with negotiations. If this fails, pressure will be escalated and, if necessary, force will be used.
In order to have support by the international community, the participating nations and the
warring factions, the operation must be legitimate. It is vital that the operation be conducted in compliance with the international law of war and humanitarian law and the provisions of the UN Charter.
Civil-military cooperation incorporates coordination and cooperation between the peace
keeping forces and national and local authorities and international and national governmental and
non-governmental organisations in the achievement of operational objectives. In order to have coordinated civil and military efforts mutual coordination and counselling is essential, because the mandates
and areas of work often overlap. Cooperation is promoted through joint commissions, working groups,
communication and liaison channels at all levels of cooperation and agreed coordination and information exchange procedures.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

##### 11.4 Crisis Response Operations Pre-deployment Activities

In order for the SAF to participate in crisis response operations, they have to plan the forces
available and their combat readiness. The forces must be capable of operating as part of common joint
task forces in and out of the NATO territory. Each operation has its own characteristics that define mission-specific methods of preparations and conduct of military tasks.
Preparations related to the personnel include the issuing of legal mission deployment orders for
SAF servicemembers, medical check-ups and security clearances, psychological and intelligence and
security briefings and other status related activities as required by the national legislation, the obligations derived from the status of forces agreements and special requirements set by the Alliance. These
preparations also involve family care and psychological and spiritual care for SAF servicemembers
when deployed in operations.
Prior to each mission, a special pre-deployment training has to be planned and carried out,
based on the unit’s mission, the mission essential task list and mission-specific rules of engagement.
The training programme provides the candidates with general, and specialised military topics, and
introduces them to the geographical, national, ethnic, religious, cultural and other aspects, typical of
the given area of operation.
Pre-deployment preparations also include procedures for the planning and carrying out of
communication and information support necessary to support the unit, to establish a connection with
the superior command in the area of operation as well as with the responsible SAF command back in
Slovenia.
Logistic planning ensures the weapons and the equipment for the accomplishment of missionspecific tasks in the area of operation and the sustainability of forces during an operation. Logistic
support during deployment includes movement, transport, supplies, assets maintenance and medical
support. It is provided by the national support elements, which are an integral part of SAF contingents
within the multinational forces and by other countries based on bilateral or multilateral agreements.
The SAF pre-deployment preparations also help create the possibilities for civil-military cooperation in
the area of operation.
Individual SAF servicemembers and units are deployed as part of common joint forces based on
the relevant national command acts as well as acts issued by a joint force commander who has been
vested temporary authority to exercise limited command functions over SAF troops. The national command acts define the relations within the Slovenian contingent and the chain of command between
the contingent and the responsible SAF command in the Republic of Slovenia.
During this phase, post-deployment consolidation procedures are determined, which focus
on the return of SAF servicemembers to a normal working environment and the lessons learned to be
included in the planning, preparation and implementation of future SAF involvement in crisis response
operations.
Pre-deployment preparations also include the harmonisation of measures to be taken by the
SAF commands, Ministry of Defence bodies and services as well as other government bodies and institutions in the event of incidents or contingencies in the SAF area of operation.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


##### 11.5 Operations Based on International Treaties

In compliance with the National Security Strategy, the Republic of Slovenia promotes friendly
relations with other countries. It is actively involved in the efforts made by the international community
oriented towards achieving global peace, security and stability. The SAF carry out part of the commitments made by the Republic of Slovenia in international treaties related to the confidence and security
building both regionally and globally. The tasks derived from these commitments pertain to control
of weapons, military infrastructure and military activities and to the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.
Based on the principles of equality and reciprocity, the SAF cooperate and further contacts with
other armed forces in the Euro-Atlantic area, which contributes to national and collective security. Bilateral or multilateral agreements set the cooperation framework for SAF and other armed forces in the
areas of education and training of troops, the exchange of experiences, familiarisation with training
and operational characteristics of forces and the formation of common units which may be used for
crisis response operations or other tasks based on international treaties.
The SAF comply with the international commitments made in relation to weapons control and
other confidence and security building measures. Verification training programmes are in place which
prepare the relevant personnel for hosting foreign inspection and evaluation teams if the Republic of
Slovenia is a subject of weapons control verification. These activities are conducted by the Verification
Centre as an expert authority for weapons control.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

##### 11.6 Characteristics of NATO-led Operations

11.6.1 Planning

The SAF is involved in joint planning for crisis response operations. The SAF participate in these
operations based on decisions made by the Government of the Republic of Slovenia, guidelines provided by the minister of defence and NATO defence plans which serve as a basis for SAF plans. Crisis
response operational planning primarily depends on Alliance plans. However, at the same time the SAF
and the MoD develop their own plans.
Elementary planning comprises permanent defence plans and contingency plans for potential
crisis areas. Based on contingency plans, area specific and crisis specific plans are developed. If an
appropriate decision is made by the North Atlantic Council, operational plans are drafted and implemented. The planning process follows the Alliance’s operational planning principles.

11.6.2 Conduct of Operations

SAF units conduct allied operations in the spirit of common doctrines and standards. As early
as in the process of the adoption of doctrines, the Republic of Slovenia is obliged to inform other Alliance members on any national caveats due to the specifics contained in the national doctrine or other


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


constitutional and legislative provisions related to the mission accomplishment. The caveats also need
to be communicated to the joint force commander in the phase of operational planning and in the
event of the transfer of commanding authority.
NATO-led operations are characterised by the unity of command manifested by the implementation of decisions made by the Alliance as well as by exercising delegated authorities to command
national forces in the form of operational control. The command is characterised by a clear hierarchical
delineation of authorities and the integration of command at the joint level, and decentralisation at
lower levels manifested by the transfer of authority to subordinate commanders who pursue common
goals, defined by operation orders and the commander’s intent, and consider doctrinal solutions for
specific operational methods.
Cooperation and mutual understanding are essential elements of efficient joint force operations. Therefore, all forces involved need to share a common approach to the training and implementation of common procedures and standards.

11.6.3 Logistic Support

Logistic support relies on national and multinational support. National logistic support is provided by the national support element. Multinational logistic support includes specialised roles, a lead
nation or a multinational joint logistic support unit. The logistic support within multinational logistics
is provided through cooperation agreements and technical arrangements. The Alliance plans and coordinates specific logistical activities such as strategic lift, either directly or through outsourcing.
The national support element will be mission-tailored for the needs of individual operations
and its size should be sufficient to provide logistic support to all SAF units deployed in a mission. The
SAF national support element will organise and coordinate the reception and accommodation of units
arriving to or departing from the area of operation. During an operation it provides sustained logistic
support from the Republic of Slovenia and coordinates logistic host nation or civil support.
As appropriate, planning and operation characteristics of NATO-led operations will also apply
to the EU-led operations.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


### Support Operations


# 12.


The aim of SAF support operations is to use SAF capabilities for various purposes both in peace
and in war, when the existing civil capabilities are overwhelmed or need to be complemented.
SAF support operations focus on supporting the system of protection against natural and other
disasters and on supporting other government bodies and organisations in providing security and
prosperity for the citizens of the Republic of Slovenia. The SAF carry out the following types of support
operations: protection, rescue and relief in the event of natural and other disasters, the provision of
security, counter-terrorism activities, search and rescue, non-combatant evacuation operations, cooperation with civil organisations, and the protection of key infrastructure and supply sources.
Based on bilateral or multilateral agreements, the SAF may conduct support operations outside
the national territory guided by the same principles of support to civil bodies and organisation that are
valid in the Republic of Slovenia.
The conduct of support operations should not interfere with the maintenance of SAF readiness
for the accomplishment of military defence tasks and crisis response operations.

##### 12.1 Protection, Rescue and Relief

The basic aim of protection, rescue and relief is to protect people, animals, property and the
environment against disasters and destruction, damage and other consequences caused by disasters
and to mitigate these consequences. This aim is pursued through preventative actions; establishing
and maintaining response readiness; monitoring, notifying, and alarming; offering protection, rescue,
and relief; and cleaning areas after disasters.
Disaster-related protection, rescue and relief efforts comprise extinguishing fires and rescue in
the event of fires and explosions, debris and avalanche rescue operations, mountain, cave, coal mine
and water rescue, rescue operations in storms, and other adverse weather situations, intervention in
traffic accidents, first aid and urgent medical and veterinary assistance, protection against unexploded
explosive ordnance, NBC-protection, victim and missing persons inquiries, assistance to the population in danger, general humanitarian assistance, and the provision of basic living conditions.
Recovery operations after disasters include urgent measures and activities to provide basic living conditions and to ensure the long-term reconstruction of the affected area. The provision of basic


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


living conditions includes the supplies of potable water, food, medicines, electrical energy, reconstruction of main lines of communication, utility services, animal care and protection of cultural heritage.
Unpredictability and the scope of natural and other disasters require activation of all resources
available to protect human lives and property and to remove disaster consequences within the shortest
time possible. Fires, floods, earthquakes and other disasters may require large scale engagements of
forces and assets to prevent and remove the consequences. Therefore, it may be urgent that the SAF
participate in these efforts. The expansion of international terrorism has also increased the nuclear,
radiological, chemical and biological level of threat of the population so that SAF assets will successfully complement the capabilities available within the system of protection against natural and other
disasters.
The SAF participate in protection, rescue and relief efforts in accordance with their organisation
and equipment. There are certain SAF units which are specifically equipped and trained to assist protection and rescue forces. The SAF involvement in protection, rescue and relief tasks includes participation in the protection of property and population in the event of natural and other disasters, recovery
operations after natural and other disasters, extinguishing of wild fires, air and road transport of rescue
personnel and assets, clean-up operations after NBC incidents, and the evacuation and rescue of civilian population in the event of natural and other disasters.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

##### 12.2 Counter-terrorism

In combating terrorism, the SAF will comply with the goals, principles, policy and operational
strategy of the Republic of Slovenia related to this area. The SAF are involved in this combat as prescribed by the legislation and guidelines provided by the Government of the Republic of Slovenia.
Counter-terrorism responsibilities of the SAF include the conduct of counter-terrorism measures and
operations and cooperation in clean-up operations after terrorist attacks. By carrying out certain measures, the SAF help reduce the level of national vulnerability. Counter-terrorism operations prevent,
deter or respond to terrorist threats.
Counter-terrorism measures describe the employment of protective measures to reduce the
vulnerability of forces, individuals and property to terrorism, to include the abovementioned response
and suppression of terrorists by the armed forces. These measures incorporate the intelligence collection and sharing, troops and unit security and safety, the protection of infrastructure, active participation in crisis management planning, tactical measures for the management of terrorist incidents and
other security measures.
Counter-terrorism operations are offensive activities which include attacks on terrorist organisations, installations, vessels and aircraft, and isolation and capturing of terrorists. Clean-up operations
after terrorist attacks include tasks normally performed by the SAF in support of protection, rescue and
relief effort after natural and other disasters.
To promote the implementation of the Republic of Slovenia’s counter-terrorism strategy, SAF
employment plans may designate key energy, transport, traffic, production, telecommunication and
other similar facilities as well as headquarters of national authorities at the national level installations
of special importance for the defence of the country. These installations and the airspace above them,
the coast, and the waters in front of these installations are protected also by the SAF in accordance with
plans and subject to preliminary consent by the Government of the Republic of Slovenia.

##### 12.3 Security Operations

The need to use military capabilities in support of security systems has occurred due to asymmetric threats, such as international terrorism and massive illegal migrations. In accordance with
relevant guidelines provided by the Government of the Republic of Slovenia, the SAF help perform
certain law enforcement tasks of the police, such as the protection of national borders, management
of major and illegal migrations, anti-terrorist activities, personal security, traffic regulations and other
peace enforcement tasks as stipulated by the pertinent legislation. In addition, they offer their logistic
capabilities to the police forces.

##### 12.4 Search and Rescue

Search and rescue operations are conducted by specially designated, equipped and trained
rescue forces with an aim to help persons in distress because of natural and other disasters or due to
their own actions. SAF units cooperate with the Civil Protection and local authorities in land and sea
search and rescue operations. SAF tasks include transport of rescue units and assets, surveillance and
search of the area, and provision of medical support.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

##### 12.5 Non-combatant Evacution Operations

Unpredictable occurrence of crisis areas within the regional and wider international context
concurrent with the presence of international terrorism may pose a serious threat to security and life of
the Slovenian citizens who may find themselves in such situations. The SAF will cooperate and provide
assistance to other government authorities in rescue and evacuation operations for Slovenian citizens
abroad. They will help by offering military lift capabilities and by collecting and safeguarding of assembly areas.

##### 12.6 Protection of Critical Infrastructure and Supplies

Based on the statement of requirements of the civil defence planning authorities and decisions
by the Government of the Republic of Slovenia, the SAF contribute to the protection of critical infrastructure and sources of supply of national importance. In order to perform these tasks, coordination is
required with civil defence planning authorities to harmonise the employment and operational plans
for the critical infrastructure and sources of supplies which are posed at risk. Such tasks include preventive deployment of forces, intelligence and reconnaissance activities and physical safeguarding.

##### 12.7 Cooperation with Civil Organisations

SAF units and commands cooperate with civil organisations which support SAF activities,
humanitarian actions, organisation of events of a wider social importance and the accomplishment
of goals of civil organisations and societies, the activity of which is closely linked with SAF. The basic
forms of cooperation with civil structures focus primarily on the coordination of defence and emergency response planning, information exchange and mutual informing of the goals and tasks, support
of the officer and other military personnel associations, participation in activities that help preserve
the tradition of the national liberation war and the war for independence of Slovenia, participation in
sports and cultural events, community and ecological events as well as participation in SAF promotion
campaigns.

##### 12.8 Command Organisation

The participation of the SAF in protection and rescue activities requires a decision by the Government of the Republic of Slovenia, and in the emergency by the Minister of Defence on a proposal of
the Civil Protection Commander or Chief of Defence Staff authorised by the minister. The Government
also makes decisions on the cooperation between the SAF and the police.
Through their Command Centre, the SAF participate in the National Crisis Management Centre. SAF units that participate in support operations are activated through the SAF Command Centre.
The units perform their tasks as ordered by the operational force commander who not only defines the
tasks, the method of their execution and service support, but also the relations between the commanders and persons in charge in the Civil Protection and police structures.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


When SAF units are involved in overall protection and rescue efforts, they are commanded by
SAF commanders, whereas the activities are conducted by heads of interventions or Civil Protection
commanders who have been vested the authority to give instructions to SAF units. The same principle
applies when SAF are involved in peace enforcement tasks. In this case, the activities are led by police
directorate chiefs or heads of police operational staffs.
At the strategic level, the General Staff of the Slovenian Armed Forces establishes contacts with
the General Police Directorate and the RS Civil Protection Headquarters. The operational level links the
SAF Command Centre, the Operations and Communication Centre of the General Police Directorate,
the Regional Air Traffic Control Centre and the Republic of Slovenia’s Emergency Response Centre.
At the tactical level, connections are established between the unit commands, military territorial
commands, municipal Civil Protection staffs, and operational and communication centres of police
directorates.
By participating in the system of protection against natural and other disasters and the security
system, the SAF will not take the responsibility for these areas unless the tasks are conducted in military
areas or if SAF servicemembers are exposed to security and medical threats.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

### The Future of Warfighting

# 13.


The key factor of future warfighting lies in communication and information technology that has
been redefining the relations between man and technology. Communication and information technology will not replace man or military technology, but will rather serve as a basis of future warfighting.
The first characteristic will be the change of the weapons concept, which will no longer be defined by
contents but by information. The development of weapons will not necessarily be oriented towards
the manufacturing of lethal weapons. The main objective of operations will not be to kill or to destroy.
Instead, the main targets of attacks will be the enemy’s point of concentration to paralyse or destroy
his capabilities.
The change of weapons will inevitably bring about changes of the theatre. The theatre of operations, which has so far been defined as a geographical area with clearly defined borders and identifiable terrain features and factors is becoming out of date. Future theatres will have no identifiable
borders and will comprise the following five dimensions: land, sea, air, space and the electromagnetic
spectrum. It will be present everywhere. The current borders between the military and non-military
areas of operation will be blurred. Space will no longer be divided in the close, deep and rear area, or
to war and non-war areas or other applicable categories. The theatre of operations will be more than
just a terrain. It will be a social meeting point to include elements such as the politics, economy and
culture. All will be linked through technology.
New forms of warfighting, with information as a dominant element and with undefined battlefield, will change the understanding of the main actors of war. The armed force will no longer be the
basic factor in the provision of security. Future attackers will mainly rely on non-military forms of operation in the achievement of their objectives. The most dangerous among them will be independent,
non-state actors whose attacks on individual countries or political systems will be driven by different
motives and personal goals.
Conventional warfighting will be characterised through high intensity combat operations and
other types of operation at any time of day, in all weather conditions and with the state-of-the art technology, armaments and military equipment by both or only one side involved in the conflict. Enhanced
manoeuvre capabilities of land and air forces will increase the tempo of operations and the number
of events per time unit. Information technology will provide commanders with accurate information
when they need it and with a picture of the entire theatre, thus giving an unachievable advantage
over the enemy. Improved capabilities of weapons and target identification assets will permit combat
operations over longer distances and with greater accuracy than ever before. The units will be smaller
and dispersed over expansive areas. The reduced battlefield density will permit fast manoeuvres.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


The changed theatre of war will present major challenges to individual combatants. They will
be facing high-intensity operations and a very dynamic operational tempo. Threats will sometimes be
unknown or unexpected. Weapon systems and equipment will permit better precision, and operations
in low visibility and in NBC environments, as well as permit protection against light infantry weapons.
With new weapons, equipment and information technology individual warriors will be better prepared for independent action; however, accompanied by a higher level of stress and moral and other
dilemmas. A greater level of independence also means taking individual decisions in situations where
civilians assume the role of an attacker or even enemy.
The warriors will find it difficult to recognise who the enemy is. The effects of their operations
will sometimes be unclear, intangible or without public approval. Also in the future, the globalisation
of information will put individuals in situations where his activities will be followed by the masses,
potentially causing strategic consequences. Therefore, more than ever before, warriors will need to
possess qualities such as personal initiative, resourcefulness, solid judgement and adaptability.


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

### Conclusion

# 14.


This military doctrine provides guidelines and principles for the implementation of the Republic
of Slovenia’s defence strategy. As a guiding document, it serves as a basis for planning the development, employment, organisation, education and training and operations of the Slovenian Armed
Forces for the next five years.
To promote its implementation, the Minister of Defence can prescribe area-specific doctrines
which detail forms and types of operations as well as the activities of the Slovenian Armed Forces.
The General Staff of the Slovenian Armed Forces will be monitoring the implementation of the
doctrine and propose, as appropriate, any amendments based on the changes of the defence strategy,
the SAF mission, Alliance doctrines, changes in the provision of resources and new lessons learned by
SAF units on operations.
Once published, this doctrine supersedes the military doctrine adopted by the RS Government
no 801/95-25, dated 27 July, 1995.

_Doctrine implementation_

CONCEPTS

TASK
ACCOMPLISHMENT
PROCEDURES


MILITARY
DOCTRINE

AREA SPECIFIC DOCTRINES

TACTICS
FIELD
MANUALS

STANDARD OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES
CRITERIA AND METHODS


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

### Contents

1. Introduction 7

2. Operational Environment 9
2.1 Conflicts 9
2.2 Crises 10
2.3 International Security Environment 11
2.4 Sources of Threat to National Security 12
2.5 Participation in Implementing the Alliance’s Strategic Concept 12
2.6 Participation in Implementing the European Security and Defence Policy 13
2.7 Multinational Operations 14

3. Fighting Power 15
3.1 Conceptual Component 16
3.2 Moral Component 17
3.2.1 Motivation 17
3.2.2 Values 17
3.2.3 Leadership 20
3.2.4 Management 21
3.3 Physical Component 21
3.3.1 Manpower 21
3.3.2 Weapons and Equipment 22
3.3.3 Operational Readiness 22
3.3.4 Sustainability 22
3.3.5 Collective Performance 23

4. Mission and Tasks of the SAF 24

5. Types of Forces and Organisation of the SAF 26
5.1 Types of Forces 26
5.1.1 Division in Terms of Combat Role 26
5.1.2 Division in Terms of Deployment Capability 26
5.1.3 Division in Terms of Levels of Operational Readiness 27
5.2 Task Organisation 28


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


5.2.1 Battle Groups 28
5.2.2 Territorial Forces 28
5.2.3 Response Forces 29
5.2.4 Combined Joint Task Forces (CJTFs) 29

6. Provision of Operational Conditions 30
6.1 Human Resource Management 31
6.2 Materiel and Financial Resources 31
6.3 Military Intelligence 32
6.4 Development and Equiping 34
6.5 Operational Planning 34
6.6 Mobilisation Preparations and Operational Development….. 35
6.7 Military Education and Training 35
6.7.1 Military Education and Training of Individuals 36
6.7.2 Unit and Command Training 37
6.8 Preparedness of the Slovenian Armed Forces 38
6.9 Real Estate Management 40
6.10 Host Nation Support 40
6.11 Consolidation Planning 41
6.12 Sustainability 41

7. Command Organisation 43
7.1 Strategic Level 43
7.2 Operational Level 44
7.3 Tactical Level 45

8. SAF Operations 47
8.1 Rules of Engagement and Caveats on Operations 47
8.2 Forms and Types of Operations 48
8.2.1 Offensive Operations 48
8.2.2 Defensive Operations 48
8.2.3 Stability Operations 50
8.2.4 Support Operations 50
8.2.5 Special Operations 50
8.2.6 Information Operations 52
8.2.7 Enabling Operations 52
8.3 Levels of Operations 52

9. Combat Operations 54
9.1 Warfighting Principles 55
9.1.1 Maintaining Combat Morale 56
9.1.2 Objective Selection 56
9.1.3 Concentration 56
9.1.4 Aggressivness 56
9.1.5 Freedom of Action 58
9.1.6 Economy of Effort 58
9.1.7 Surprise 58


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e

9.1.8 Security 58
9.1.9 Simplicity and Flexibility 59
9.2 Combat Functions 59
9.2.1 Maneouvre 59
9.2.2 Fire Support 60
9.2.3 Intelligence 61
9.2.4 Mobility, Counter-mobility and Survivability 61
9.2.5 Air Defence 62
9.2.6 Combat Service Support 62
9.2.7 Command 63
9.3 Forms of Combat Operations 64
9.4 Operational Framework 65
9.5 Synchronisation 66

10. Information Operations 67

10.1 Psychological operations 67
10.2 Electronic Warfare 68
10.3 Network Centric Operations 68
10.4 Operations Security 68
10.5 Deception 69
10.6 Public Information 70
10.7 Civil-Military Cooperation 70

11. Stability Operations 71

11.1 Crisis Response Operations 72
11.2 Peace Support Operations 72
11.2.1 Conflict Prevention 72
11.2.2 Peace Keeping 73
11.2.3 Peace Making 74
11.2.4 Peace Building 74
11.2.5 Peace Enforcement 74
11.2.6 Humanitarian Assistance 74
11.2.7 Other Stability Activities 75
11.3 Operational Principles in Peace Support Operations 76
11.3.1 Impartiality 76
11.3.2 Consent 77
11.3.3 Proportional Use of Force 77
11.3.4 Othe Principles of Operation 77
11.4 Crisis Response Operations Pre-deployment Activities 78
11.5 Operations Based on International Treaties 79
11.6 Characteristics of NATO-led Operations 80
11.6.1 Planning 80
11.6.2 Conduct of Operations 81
11.6.3 Logistic Support 83

12. Support Operations 83


-----

M i l i t a r y D o c t r i n e


12.1 Protection, Rescue and Relief 83
12.2 Counter-terrorism 85
12.3 Security Operations 85
12.4 Search and Rescue 85
12.5 Non-combatant Evacution Operations 87
12.6 Protection of Critical Infrastructure and Supplies 87
12.7 Cooperation with Civil Organisations 87
12.8 Command Organisation 87

13. The Future of Warfighting 89

14. Conclusion 91


-----

