# DEFENCE WHITE PAPER OF THE REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA


## 2020


-----

-----

### Dear Readers,

Both in everyday life, and in the operation and development of a country, we occasio­
nally need to stop and strategically assess our efforts to see whether they are leading
towards the desired objective. The result of our strategic reflection is the Defence White
Paper of the Republic of Slovenia, which represents a high level of consistency of views
within the defence sector on the future security environment, and on the necessary
measures to enhance the country's defence capacity, taking into account real human,
economic and other capabilities. The purpose of the Defence White Paper is to define
a gradual long-term development of the Republic of Slovenia’s defence system in order
to ensure the necessary levels of capacity and preparedness for the implementation of
national defence, and the fulfilment of the adopted international obligations.

I believe that, through diligent work and analysis, we have acquired a good basis for
directing the further development of the defence system, which will be able to function
effectively and in accordance with its mission. This document provides guidance
for the change, reform and strengthening of both military and non-military defence
mechanisms to meet the contemporary security challenges. It provides the starting
point for the preparation of planning documents which will specify the key defence
objectives by 2035, and the way they are implemented.

The security of the country and its citizens is not self-evident and should not be taken
for granted. It is a benefit and a value that is directly related to the existence of a nation,
a government, a democratic system, the sovereignty of a state, the protection of one's
identity, the exercise of human rights, and other interests of nations and states. Without
it, other national objectives relating to social, economic, political and cultural develo­
pment and the well-being of individuals and the state cannot be achieved. Slovenia,
like other European countries, is facing a changing and highly dynamic security envi­
ronment. There is instability in both the eastern and southern European neighbourho­
od. No part of Europe is safe from contemporary threats. Hybrid operations call for the
modernization and strengthening of defence capacity, and the increased resilience of
countries.

On this basis, a new Resolution on the National Security Strategy of the Republic
of Slovenia was adopted in 2019, which was fundamental to the preparation of the
Defence White Paper of the Republic of Slovenia. The Defence White Paper provides
the basis for continuing the debate on the adoption of the Resolution on the General
Long-Term Development and Equipping Programme of the Slovenian Armed Forces.
In it, we will strive for the widest possible consensus of the professional public and the
policy on the long-term development of the defence system, and the manner in which
the Slovenian Armed Forces will ensure national defence and fulfil the obligations of
Slovenia as a member of various international organizations.

The Ministry of Defence will strive to provide an efficient and resilient defence system
which, taking into account the country's human resources, and material, financial and
other capabilities, will develop the necessary level of Slovenia’s defence capacity.

I believe that the vision presented in the Defence White Paper of the Republic of Slovenia
will help to create the basis for the building of confidence in the defence system. We
need confidence to create the conditions for a flexible and modern defence system
which responds to changes in the international security environment and provides
conditions for the functioning of other social subsystems for a quality living envi­
ronment, development and prosperity, while giving perspective to future generations.

Karl Erjavec

Minister of Defence


-----

-----

**VISION FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE DEFENCE SYSTEM OF THE**


### VSEBINA

**INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6**


**REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7**

**2** **THE INTERNATIONAL SECURITY ENVIRONMENT AND SECURITY**
**THREATS** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

**3** **DEFENCE AND SECURITY POLICY OF THE REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA . . . 10**

**3.1** **National defence and mutual security assurances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11**

**3.2** **Defence policy and international cooperation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12**

**4** **THE SLOVENIAN ARMED FORCES** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

**4.1** **Vision for the development of the Slovenian Armed Forces. . . . . . . . . . . . . 14**

**4.2** **Military capabilities and military infrastructure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15**

4.2.1 Combat capabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

4.2.2 Combat support capabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

4.2.3 Combat service support capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

4.2.4 Military aviation capabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

4.2.5 Naval capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

4.2.6 Cyber defence capabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

4.2.7 Command support capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

4.2.8 Military education and training capabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

4.2.9 Military infrastructure development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

**4.3** **Size and structure of the Slovenian Armed Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24**

4.3.1 Size of the Slovenian Armed Forces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

4.3.2 Structure of the Slovenian Armed Forces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

**4.4** **Human resources** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

**4.5** **Financial resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28**

**5** **CIVIL DEFENCE AS A RESILIENCE BUILDING BLOCK OF THE**
**STATE AND SOCIETY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30**

**6** **RESPONSE TO HYBRID THREATS IN THE FIELD OF DEFENCE. . . . . . . . . . 32**

**7** **COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SYSTEM CAPABILITIES**
**AND CYBER SECURITY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33**

**8** **INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY CAPABILITIES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36**

**9** **STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

**10** **MEASURES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE WHITE PAPER** . . . . . . 38

**CONCLUSION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40**


-----

### INTRODUCTION

In the last decade, the defence system of the Republic of Slovenia has faced
challenges in financial, human and material resources, which, given the increa­
singly unpredictable and uncertain international security environment, hinders
its development and operation in accordance with the law and the adopted de­

velopment guidance and planning documents.

The Defence White Paper of the Republic of Slovenia is a strategic document
outlining the vision for long-term development, the functioning of Slovenia’s
defence system, and the achievement of key defence objectives by 2035.
The Paper explains the policy framework and commitments for adapting the
defence system to changes in the security environment. It takes into account
the measures to strengthen Slovenia’s defence capacity, which were proposed
in the Strategic Defence Review 2016, and in NATO’s defence planning and
capabilities assessments and other findings on the condition of the defence
system.

The Defence White Paper provides planning guidance based on realistic me­
dium-term bases for pursuing the objectives of the defence system’s deve­
lopment in the long term. It recognizes the effects of the deterioration in the
security environment, the emergence of new technological trends, and demo­
graphic trends in the Republic of Slovenia and abroad. It expresses the deter­
mination of the Republic of Slovenia to strengthen its defence system, and
stresses the need for the implementation of measures in the field of defence.

The greatest challenges for the development of the defence system, especially
for the Slovenian Armed Forces as the entity responsible for military defence,
are to reach the planned number of personnel, complete its professionalizati­
on, continue with modernization, and appropriately fund its operation and de­
velopment.

The purpose of the Defence White Paper is to define the gradual and long-term
development of Slovenia’s defence system, in order to ensure the necessary
level of capacity and preparedness for the implementation of national defence
and the fulfilment of the adopted international obligations. It takes into account
the comprehensive approach and importance of the resilience of the country
and society as a whole to various forms of security threats and risks.

The following points were taken into account when preparing the Defence
White Paper:

– The complexity, variability and uncertainty of the future international security

environment;

– The appropriate organization and effective defence of the Republic of

Slovenia;

– The national defence of the Republic of Slovenia as part of the collecti­

ve defence within the framework of NATO and the common security and
defence policy of the European Union;

– The primary responsibility of the Republic of Slovenia to ensure the capacity,

preparedness, resilience and sustainability of the national defence;

– The unfavorable long-term demographic trends in the Republic of Slovenia

and abroad;

– The poor competitiveness of the military profession in the labour market;

– The consequences of the lack of financial resources and investments in the

development of defence capacity in the past.


-----

### REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA

### 1 VISION FOR THE
 DEVELOPMENT OF THE DEFENCE SYSTEM OF THE


The defence system of the Republic of Slovenia will adapt to changes in the
strategic environment, which is characterized by the deteriorating security
in Europe and its periphery. It will be resilient and able to respond to future
security threats and challenges. The development of the defence system will be
based on two important assumptions: that efforts by the state and society are
essential for the proper organization and preparation of the national defence
of the Republic of Slovenia; and that the national defence of the Republic of
Slovenia is closely linked to NATO’s collective defence and to mutual assistan­
ce within the European Union.

The defence system of the Republic of Slovenia will provide the necessary
level of competence, preparedness, resilience, and sustainability of defence
capacity, and will contribute to the overall resilience of the state and society to
respond to contemporary and future security challenges and threats.

The effectiveness of the defence system will be based on professionalism,
transparency, belonging, patriotism, mutual respect, and recognition of the im­
portance of the defence system entities in the wider social environment.

With an ambitious and predictable level of defence spending, the Republic of
Slovenia will, in the long term, provide human, financial and material resources
for the continual modernization of the defence system, and the development
of defence capacity.

The national interests of the Republic of Slovenia in the field of defence will be
achieved by strengthening a credible defence posture, by active engagement
in the international environment, and by carrying out the adopted international
obligations.

The Republic of Slovenia will have an army capable of defending the country
from military threats; an army which will contribute a proportional share of
its capabilities to the Alliance's common defence; and an army whose skills,
knowledge, training level, and capabilities will help to ensure the security of the
country and its citizens, and establish and preserve peace in the world. The
updated strategic and planning guidelines and normative bases will provide
the Slovenian Armed Forces with system, status, financial, material, human
resource, doctrinal, and other conditions for its development and the provision
of necessary readiness.


-----

### 2 THE INTERNATIONAL
 SECURITY ENVIRONMENT AND SECURITY THREATS


After a period of the easing of tensions in the international security envi­
ronment, these are increasing once more. The modern international security
environment is changing rapidly. Globalization has made it more intercon­
nected, complex and interdependent, which, in addition to the positive con­
sequences, also has negative ones.

The state of international relations is shifting towards multipolarity, with the
emergence of new centres of power at the global and regional levels, and the
related expansion of areas of influence. We are facing a transformation in the
established international connections and relationships; new dynamics within
the existing organizations and mechanisms of the international community;
and challenges in the European security architecture, international law, multila­
teralism, and democratic values.

In the area of security, the levers of national power of conventional and uncon­
ventional origin are strengthening, along with the use of hybrid actions across
the broader social, political, economic, financial, intelligence, information, and
media spectrums. National interests are pursued through the engagement of
non-state actors, especially in fragile and conflict areas.

Security risks stem mainly from unstable geographical areas characterized
by internal conflicts, failure of authority, corruption, poverty, scarce resources,
land degradation, and population growth, which creates conditions for the
spread of radicalism, terrorism, crime, and illegal mass migration. The impact
of climate change is another factor influencing the development of the security
situation, while the speed and scale of population movements cause increased
epidemiological risks.

Technological advances and the availability of knowledge, products, and tech­
nologies to state and non-state actors have a significant influence on the deve­
lopment of security threats, which may in turn influence the emergence of new
security challenges in new domains of operation. All this brings new challen­
ges and requirements for preserving the effectiveness of the defence system.

The Republic of Slovenia recognizes and manages the consequences of the
changed security environment surrounding the European Union, and with the
risks from its periphery. The processes of stabilization in the Western Balkans
remain unfinished, causing an increase in the radicalization and influence of


-----

external actors. Migration pressure remains strong in the south and may affect
the security and stability of the country.

Given its geostrategic and geopolitical position, the Republic of Slovenia may
be exposed to hybrid operations, attacks on critical infrastructure, terrorism,
mass migration pressures, and potential military threats in the event of a dete­
rioration in the international or regional political security situation.

An effective response to modern threats requires an improvement in the
defence capacity of the Republic of Slovenia. The Defence White Paper of the
Republic of Slovenia focuses on the introduction of a wide range of measures
for the organizational, human resources, material, and technological moder­
nization of the defence system. In order to achieve these objectives it is of
primary importance to gain a broad social understanding of the changing
security environment and the associated risks of the operation and develo­
pment of the Republic of Slovenia in the long term, which requires a responsive
and functioning defence system.


Complex,

interdependent


and unpredictable

security ATTACK ON THE

environment OPERATION OF CRITICAL

INFRASTRUCTURE

MILITARY
THREATS

CRIME

HYBRID

OPERATION ILLEGAL

MIGRATION

TERRORISM

**D**

**PEACE** SCARCITY

**SECURITY** OF

RADICALISM RESOURCES

**STABILITY**

ADJUSTING THE

DEFENCE SYSTEM


-----

### 3 DEFENCE AND SECURITY
 POLICY OF THE REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA


The Republic of Slovenia is a globally and regionally responsible country,
committed to solidarity and striving for the promotion of peace, security and
stability, respect for human rights and international law, prevention of conflict,
and jointly addressing global security challenges. The defence system of the
Republic of Slovenia will support lasting and strategic national interests which
will enable the creation of a safe environment as a condition for the welfare of
the state, society, and citizens.

The permanent and vitally important interests of the Republic of Slovenia are
to maintain the independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of the state,
and to maintain the national identity, culture, and authenticity of the Slovenian
nation within the internationally recognized borders of the Republic of Slovenia,
abroad, and throughout the world.

The strategic interests of the Republic of Slovenia are the recognition of and
respect for the inviolability of the country's internationally recognized borders
and its national territory, including the territorial waters and the airspace of the
Republic of Slovenia; the functioning of the democratic parliamentary political
system; respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms; strengthening
of the rule of law and the social state; the welfare of its people and a com­
prehensive development of society; the protection of life and a high level of
all forms of security for its people; the protection of the rights and prosperity
of Slovenian indigenous ethnic communities in neighbouring countries; peace,
security and stability in the world; and the preservation of the environment and
natural resources of the Republic of Slovenia.

The Republic of Slovenia is an integral part of the Euro-Atlantic political,
economic, security, and cultural environment. It respects and shares important
values with its allies and partners – respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and the strengthening of democracy and the rule of law.

The Republic of Slovenia pursues its vital and strategic national interests auto­
nomously, through intense bilateral cooperation, and by maintaining an active
role in the region and in the United Nations Organization, the European Union,
NATO, and other international organizations. It uses mechanisms and means
in compliance with the provisions of international law.

The defence system ensures the defence of the country and contributes to
other national security objectives of the Republic of Slovenia, such as ensuring
a high level of security and prosperity of the citizens; cooperation in deterrence
and defence against the threats to security and in ensuring peace in the world;
strengthening its international reputation, the political security position, and
the visibility of the Republic of Slovenia in the world; and developing good rela­
tionships with its allies, partners and other countries. Strengthening the wider
involvement of countries in the Euro-Atlantic environment, defined by stability,
equality, prosperity and solidarity, is in the national interest of the Republic of
Slovenia. Such an environment remains an important factor in a more equal
position of all actors in the international community, and a guarantee of stability.


-----

proportionate share of the burden and risks in relation to the European Union

#### 3.1 National defence and mutual
 security assurances

A responsive and effective national defence is the cornerstone of a sovereign
state in ensuring its security and defence. It reflects credibility in assuming a

and NATO. The most important element of national defence is sufficient in­
vestment in the development of the national defence capacity based on the
national planning priorities, NATO's defence planning process, and defence
planning within the European Union.

The Republic of Slovenia will ensure its defence capacity and its preparedness
for and responsiveness to military and other threats. This includes the approp­
riate size, structure, equipment, and capabilities of its military and civilian
defence capacity. National defence is based on the implementation of military
defence and on the implementation of measures to ensure the resilience of
society as a whole.

The implementation of the military defence of the Republic of Slovenia will,
as a matter of priority, be ensured by respecting the mechanisms of mutual
assistance and solidarity within the European Union, and by an appropriate
level of Slovenia’s own defence capacity, which is the basis for effective inte­
gration into NATO’s collective defence system.

As a member of NATO, the Republic of Slovenia receives security assuran­
ces and accepts commitments, since NATO's collective defence is based on a
sufficient range of the Allies' national capabilities. Involvement in the collecti­
ve defence system allows for a more rational development of Slovenia’s own
defence capacity. Strengthening the national defence means strengthening
the collective defence and vice versa, based on burden sharing and the develo­
pment of agreed capabilities.

Building defence

NATO’s collective

National capacity while

defence

defence of the respecting the

and mutual

RS principle of burden

assistance

sharing

within the EU


The Republic of Slovenia has committed itself to a gradual long-term approxi­
mation to a defence spending target of 2% of GDP within broad fiscal fra­
meworks, and a defence investment share of 20% of defence spending, with
an intermediate target of 1.5% of GDP by 2024.


A responsive and

effective national

defence is the

cornerstone of a

sovereign state in

ensuring security

and defence


-----

The long-term strengthening of the deterrence and defence posture increases
the importance of NATO's collective defence, in line with the negative changes
in the international security environment. In the coming years, all allies will be
required to make additional efforts which will be reflected in the development
of more advanced capabilities, additional contributions to allied and related
structures, a greater range of exercises, and a higher level of force readiness.

#### 3.2 Defence policy and
 international cooperation

The consequences of crisis situations, instability, and conflicts in the world
may have negative effects on the national security of the Republic of Slovenia
in the globally interdependent and interconnected environment. It is therefore
important to address the causes of instability at the place of their origin
through various foreign, defence, and security policy mechanisms, and in
accordance with the provisions of international law.

The Republic of Slovenia, as a responsible member of the international
community, will contribute to international political, military and other efforts
for peace, security and stability in the Western Balkans and in the wider
European area, the Mediterranean, the Middle East, Sub-Saharan Africa, and
Central Asia, in accordance with its capabilities and the provisions of national
and international law. It will also be active in providing assistance in the event
of natural and other disasters in these areas.

Participation of the Slovenian Armed Forces in international operations and
missions, and in NATO and European Union response forces, will remain an
important factor in achieving responsiveness and a higher level of compe­
tence, efficiency and interoperability of forces. The Republic of Slovenia will
maintain a discernible comparative share in terms of broader burden-sharing,
and adjust the contribution ratio for international operations and missions
and for NATO and European Union response forces in line with its operational
priorities. It will also support the mission and efforts of the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in various fields.

The Republic of Slovenia will contribute to ensuring the common defence
of its territory, people and values by participating in the basic tasks of the
Alliance, such as collective defence, crisis management and cooperative
security. The commitment of the Republic of Slovenia to the North Atlantic
Treaty will be manifested through joint contribution to the deterrence and co­
llective defence measures, contribution to response forces, and participation
in exercises and other activities to ensure preparedness for various security
challenges and threats, taking into account the sustainability of forces and
their capabilities. The Republic of Slovenia will establish its national defence
capacity and the agreed target capabilities of the Alliance in accordance with
its national interests and needs.

It will contribute to the implementation of the Global Strategy for the European
Union's Foreign and Security Policy in the area of security. It will strengthen
the efforts to ensure resilience in the south and east of the European Union,
a common approach to conflicts and crises, regional cooperation, and inter­
national law.


-----

Close involvement of members will be important in the development of
defence capacity and permanent structured cooperation, the fulfilment of
commitments to mutual assistance and solidarity, response to hybrid ope­
rations, and cooperation with NATO in the development of capabilities and
activities in crisis areas.

The Republic of Slovenia will respect the principle of a single set of forces

and capability development. Coordination in counteracting cyber and hybrid
threats and active participation in the development of military mobility will be
important for Slovenia’s national security on the basis of the Joint Declarati­
on of the European Union and NATO. A cohesive and credible European Union
strengthens NATO's European pillar as the foundation of Europe's collective
defence and transatlantic ties, and enhances the role of the European Union
as a global security and defence actor.

Regional and bilateral cooperation will be an important complement to co­
operation in a multilateral context for the Republic of Slovenia. Enhanced
cooperation with our allies and strategic and other defence and security
partners, based on similar interests, objectives and starting points, will focus
on the joint building of specific capabilities, the implementation of moder­
nization projects, participation in international operations and missions, the
implementation of joint training and exercises, the transfer of experience in
defence and security, and potential joint action within different international
organizations. Cooperation with the countries of the Western Balkans will
also be enhanced in order to strengthen the Euro-Atlantic integration of these
countries.


-----

### 4 THE SLOVENIAN
 ARMED FORCES

The mission of the Slovenian Armed Forces is to deter military aggression

allies, and to contribute to international peace and stability both within and
outside the Alliance’s borders. The Slovenian Armed Forces provides military
defence to the Republic of Slovenia independently and in cooperation with its
allies in the event of military aggression.

The modern security environment requires the Slovenian Armed Forces to
increase its ability to operate in various security, military and defence scenarios
across the entire spectrum of operations; increase its level of readiness; and
increase the resilience and sustainability of military capabilities.

The capabilities of the Slovenian Armed Forces support various national
security subsystems in the territory of the Republic of Slovenia in crisis and
other security-critical situations.

#### 4.1 Vision for the development of
 the Slovenian Armed Forces

The Slovenian Armed Forces will be able and prepared to defend and protect
the country with its own capabilities and in cooperation with its allies. It will
cooperate in ensuring the overall security of the country and its citizens, and in
maintaining and establishing peace, security and stability in the world.

The ability and readiness of the Slovenian Armed Forces will be based on
trained and skilled soldiers, competent leaders, quality equipment, high-level
commands and units, and the ability to adapt to the complex security envi­
ronment.

The Slovenian Armed Forces will be an advanced and effective military organi­
zation which will develop the necessary military capabilities, raise the level of
general readiness and resilience, and create conditions for increasing its size
in the event of a sharp deterioration in the security situation or an immediate
military threat to the country.

The following development objectives will need to be met to achieve this vision:

– Modernization of the Slovenian Armed Forces, with a focus on developing

the military capabilities of two medium battalion battle groups;

– Construction and modernization of critical infrastructure and training areas

for the operation and development of the Slovenian Armed Forces and the
defence system;

– Strengthening of technologically advanced military capabilities as a force

multiplier;


-----

– The fulfilment of international commitments of the Republic of Slovenia

relating to the establishment of agreed military capabilities, to military con­
tribution to international operations and missions, to response forces, and to
the provision of financial resources;

– Improvement in the position and reputation of the military profession in

society;

– Upgrading of the system of recruitment, retention and exit of members of

the Slovenian Armed Forces;

– Development of military professionalism, leadership and organizational

culture, which are the foundations of an effective military organization;

– Upgrading of the military education and training system;

– Establishment of conditions for increasing the contract reserve component

and the voluntary military service;

– An active role of the Slovenian Armed Forces in the recruitment and

promotion of the military profession;

– Strengthening of the connection of the Slovenian Armed Forces to the local

environment in the wider area of the Republic of Slovenia;

– Strengthening of the connection of the Slovenian Armed Forces to other

national security subsystems.

#### 4.2 Military capabilities and
 military infrastructure

The Slovenian Armed Forces will develop combat, combat support, combat
service support, command support, and military education and training capa­
bilities. Part of these capabilities will be dual purpose, which means that they
can be used both for protection and rescue and for support to other national
authorities.

Certain capabilities will not be developed by the Slovenian Armed Forces on its
own, but will be provided within the Alliance or jointly through appropriate agre­
ements with individual allied or partner countries.

Financial resources will be primarily devoted to launching major modernization
projects and to infrastructure capabilities of the Slovenian Armed Forces. To
this end, appropriate legislation will be prepared for the implementation of key
equipping projects of the Slovenian Armed Forces.

Key modernization projects will be the purchase of wheeled combat vehicles,
self-propelled howitzers, short- to medium-range air defence systems, and
multi-purpose helicopters. The possibilities for joint procurement with other
countries or within the agencies of the European Union and NATO, and through
intergovernmental agreements, will be primarily taken into account when the
market analysis concludes that such purchases represent the best option in
the light of cost optimization and transparency of procurement. This includes
the purchase and modernization of military equipment already held by the
Slovenian Armed Forces. Tested military equipment will be selected, with no
risks in its development and use. The possibilities and purpose of purchasing
used military equipment and weapons will be examined.


-----

the establishment of the capabilities of a medium battalion battle group. Its key

4.2.1 Combat capabilities

The combat capabilities of the Slovenian Armed Forces will be based on
medium infantry with the ability to form a task brigade-level unit.

The core of the Slovenian Armed Forces’ capabilities and modernization will be

building blocks will be wheeled armoured vehicles with appropriate firepower,
and ballistic and counter-mine protection of the crew. The capabilities of air
defence, artillery, engineering, nuclear, radiological, chemical and biological
defence, communications, and reconnaissance will be included in the medium
battalion battle group. These capabilities will be designed in accordance with
the standards of the Alliance. Taking into account the principle of a single set
of forces, the medium battalion battle group will be dedicated to ensuring
national defence and meeting the international obligations of the Republic of
Slovenia. The first medium battalion battle group will be formed by 2027, and
the second by 2030.

Light infantry will carry out tasks within the national territory and in internati­
onal operations and missions. It will complement the capabilities of medium
infantry, and provide training and operation of the contract reserve component.
It will enable the establishment of the elements for the growth of the force,
based on the activation of the concept of military strategic reserve.

The capabilities of special forces will be dedicated to carrying out special
reconnaissance tasks, training foreign armed forces, obtaining important
military information, and fighting against military objectives in the depths of
the enemy’s territory.


-----

Armoured capabilities will participate in joint combat operations at the national
level and, to a limited extent, within the Alliance’s territory, and provide capabi­
lities for the training of infantry units.

4.2.2 Combat support capabilities

Combat support capabilities will be based on joint fire support capabiliti­
es (artillery support, anti-tank missile support, air support); intelligence and
reconnaissance support; electronic warfare; combat engineer support; air
defence; nuclear, radiological, chemical and biological defence; psychological
operations; civil-military cooperation; and ensuring the security and legality of
operations.

The capabilities of artillery support will support units up to the brigade level in
the territory of the Republic of Slovenia, and provide appropriate capabilities for
the medium battalion battle group. These capabilities will be based on self-pro­
pelled artillery systems with digitized and networked systems for fire control
and long-range operations.

Anti-tank capabilities will be upgraded within the infantry capabilities, either as
part of infantry units or as part of task anti-tank formations, operating indepen­
dently or within the medium battalion battle group. They will be equipped with
modern portable and mobile anti-tank weapons.


-----

capabilities for the medium battalion battle group. General engineering capa­

Air defence capabilities will be based on modern short- to medium-range
mobile systems. They will provide direct and indirect protection to the Slovenian
Armed Forces and critical infrastructure.

The capabilities of combat engineering will ensure the mobility and survival of
friendly forces, and prevent the manoeuvring of enemy forces. They will provide

bilities will ensure the construction and maintenance of military infrastructure.

Nuclear, radiological, chemical and biological defence capabilities will be able
to detect and identify nuclear, radiological, chemical and biological substan­
ces, and to decontaminate personnel, equipment and assets. Modules for the
medium battalion battle group will be established from a range of nuclear, ra­
diological, chemical and biological defence capabilities. Nuclear, radiological,
chemical and biological defence capabilities will be deployable.

Military intelligence and reconnaissance capabilities will be used for reconna­
issance, observation, targeting, data collection and analysis, and the provision
of intelligence. They will consist of intelligence acquisition, analysis and dis­
tribution capabilities. These capabilities will be deployable and interoperable
with the capabilities of the Alliance; they will be able to support the operation
of units to the brigade level.

Electronic reconnaissance and warfare capabilities will support the implemen­
tation of the Republic of Slovenia's defence interests, and protect the Slovenian
Armed Forces’ units in the electromagnetic spectrum. Electronic warfare ca­
pabilities will be deployable, while electronic reconnaissance capabilities will
be partially deployable.

Psychological operations (PSYOPS), civil-military cooperation (CIMIC), and
Military Police capabilities will be deployable and will support the operation of
the Slovenian Armed Forces.

4.2.3 Combat service support capabilities

Combat service support capabilities will enable the operation and sustaina­
bility of the Slovenian Armed Forces within the national context, while part of
the capabilities will be able to support the Slovenian Armed Forces outside the
country. Development will cover autonomous and organic deployable logistic
capabilities providing logistic sustainability and support to tactical units of the
Slovenian Armed Forces in international operations and missions.

Tactical units of the Slovenian Armed Forces will be logistically self-suffici­
ent. The development of non-deployable logistic capabilities to support the
Slovenian Armed Forces will be directed towards increasing its combat effecti­
veness.

The deployability of the Slovenian Armed Forces will be based on land, maritime
and air strategic transport, which will be provided through various initiatives by
NATO and the European Union, and by contractors.


-----

4.2.4 Military aviation capabilities

Military aviation capabilities consist of the capabilities for air operations, air
support, and aviation education and training. These capabilities will support
air transport, provide protection to the Republic of Slovenia’s airspace, and

operations within the Slovenian Armed Forces, and on joint operations within
the Alliance.

Military aviation capabilities will be deployable within the Alliance’s territory,
and partly deployable outside it.

The establishment of new capabilities will follow the principle of reducing the
number of different types of aircraft, and the principle of their multi-purpose
use. Efforts will also be directed towards the establishment and provision of
medium-range air transport capabilities.

Air surveillance by interceptor aircraft (air policing) will take place within NATO.


-----

4.2.5 Naval capabilities

The Slovenian Armed Forces will develop capabilities for naval operations
designed to operate at sea, on the coast, and on rivers and lakes, either inde­
pendently or in cooperation with other units of the Slovenian Armed Forces

operations, and for combat service support. Part of the naval capabilities will
be deployable mainly within the Alliance's European area.

4.2.6 Cyber defence capabilities

The Slovenian Armed Forces' cyber defence capabilities will be integrated
into the Ministry of Defence's comprehensive system and the national cyber
security and defence system. Part of the capabilities will be deployable.

The Slovenian Armed Forces will establish cyber defence capabilities which
will be able to detect, prevent, and respond to cyber security incidents in real
time. They will be based on a comprehensive approach that ensures secure
communication channels and the protection of military information systems.

In the development of these capabilities, the Slovenian Armed Forces will be
closely involved in NATO and European Union projects. The possibilities in the
context of bilateral cooperation with key strategic partners will continue to be
used in the development.

4.2.7 Command support capabilities

Command support capabilities will support command and control functions
at strategic, operational and tactical levels. The command and control system
will enable interoperability and cooperation within the national and internati­
onal environments.

A secure and flexible high-availability network infrastructure will be establi­
shed. The command and control system will be supported by application
solutions to support decision-making and command. Part of these capabili­
ties will be deployable.

The Slovenian Armed Forces’ airspace command system will, in the long
term, be based on NATO’s air command and control system. Air surveillance
capabilities will be based on current long-range radar systems. The Airspace
Surveillance and Control Centre will be an integral part of NATO's Integrated
Air and Missile Defence System.

Naval capabilities will be connected to maritime communication and in­
formation systems in accordance with international standards. Situational
awareness at sea will be established in cooperation with other maritime
security actors at national and international levels.


-----

4.2.8 Military education and training capabilities

Military education and training capabilities will enable and support the operation
and development of the Slovenian Armed Forces. Their proper integration into
the civilian education system will be ensured to support the development of

To this end, military education and training capabilities will focus on enhancing
professionalism and expertise, including in relation to foreign military educati­
onal institutions. Military education and training capabilities will be developed
and upgraded in line with changes in society, technological advances, the de­
velopment of the military profession, and lessons learned in contemporary
armed conflicts.

Particular attention will be devoted to the development of the combat character
and organizational culture of the Slovenian Armed Forces, to leadership skills,
and the professionalism and morale of members.

Research and scientific work will be strengthened and integrated as much as
possible into civilian scientific research processes. An important mission and
objective of military education and training will be to provide members of the
Slovenian Armed Forces with an appropriate level of knowledge and compe­
tence, and thus ensure their competitiveness in the civilian environment, espe­
cially after the end of their military careers.

The system of officer education will be renewed, with entry to the officer corps
being made possible chiefly directly after the first level of Bologna education.


-----

The military education system will be expected to be verified and habilitated at
the level of comparable civilian education systems. Basic military training will
take place in the Republic of Slovenia. Military education and training abroad
will be used to develop specific, specialized and high-skill profiles.

There will be more specialist military education and training for the needs of
branches and services, more functional and joint training and practice, and

more joint tactical exercises, including tactical live-fire exercises. High-quality
training will be ensured through the purchase of modern training equipment
and assets, and the upgrading of training infrastructure.

Military education and training of contract reserve officers and non-commissi­
oned officers will be organized in order to increase the size of the Slovenian
Armed Forces, and thus will ensure the necessary human resources for the
operation of the contract reserve component and for the training of the military
strategic reserve.

Military exercises – as the most demanding form of training – will be intended
for the training and verification of the competence and readiness of the
Slovenian Armed Forces’ commands and units to operate across the entire
spectrum of operations. The priority in the area of international exercises will
be to participate in exercises that support the development of target capabiliti­
es, and which are included in the Alliance’s exercise programme.

4.2.9 Military infrastructure development

Military infrastructure will provide the conditions for operation, training,
practice and education. The infrastructure of the Slovenian Armed Forces
will be adapted to the needs of the armed forces, and the development of
the defence system. The development of military infrastructure will focus on
system maintenance and the upgrading of infrastructure, equipment, devices
and systems, on energy and the environmental rehabilitation of infrastructure,
and on ensuring the prescribed conditions for its use.

Parts of military infrastructure will be included in Host Nation Support to allied
forces. Specific barracks capabilities will be arranged and modernized for the
purpose of Host Nation Support.

Firing ranges and training areas, by their regional location and equipment,
will enable the training of units, and will be adapted to the increased size of
the Slovenian Armed Forces. The Main Training Area of the Slovenian Armed
Forces in Postojna will be the key training capability for the Slovenian Armed
Forces’ commands and units, and for joint training and exercises with partners
and allies. The Slovenian Armed Forces will also use the infrastructure of the
Alliance member states and partner countries abroad for their training.

The construction of infrastructure for the operational functioning of the
Slovenian Armed Forces at Cerklje ob Krki Airfield will be completed, giving the
airfield the status of an entry-exit point into international airspace for military
aircraft. The airport will carry out the allied task of Host Nation Support.

Part of Jože Pučnik Airport will remain in use for the Slovenian Armed Forces,


mainly for the operation of the helicopter units of the Slovenian Armed Forces


-----

in support of the system of protection against natural and other disasters, and
for the surveillance, control and protection of Slovenia’s airspace.

Mooring of military vessels will be provided in the Port of Koper. The necessary
additional naval infrastructure will be provided in the vicinity of existing military
facilities.

Infrastructure for cyber defence capabilities will be provided.

The construction of infrastructure, equipment and facilities for communication
and command support will continue. Telecommunication and optical networks
will be upgraded, modernized and adapted.

Repair shops, military depots and other necessary infrastructure will be built
and modernized simultaneously with the purchase and introduction of new
weapon systems into the operational use of the Slovenian Armed Forces.


-----

4.3.1 Size of the Slovenian Armed Forces

#### 4.3 Size and structure of the
 Slovenian Armed Forces


The size of the Slovenian Armed Forces will reflect the real possibilities of
the country’s human and economic capabilities, with an enhanced role of
the contract reserve component in order to strengthen the country’s defence
capacity and resilience.

In pursuing the long-term target size and structure of the Slovenian Armed
Forces within the framework of recasting development guidance and planning
documents, it will be necessary for it to be based on the real situation and cir­
cumstances under which the defence system and the Slovenian Armed Forces
operate now and will operate in the future. The most important issue for armed
forces with a professional system of recruitment is the establishment and ma­
intenance of mechanisms to increase their size and structure, in accordance
with the need and the available sources and resources of the state and society.
On the basis of military professional assessments, the fulfilment of legal tasks
and commitments, and the need to respond effectively, taking into account the
uncertain security environment in the future, the target size of the Slovenian
Armed Forces is set at 8,000 members of the active component and 2,000
members of the contract reserve component.

In order to achieve the long-term target size and structure of the Slovenian
Armed Forces, it will be necessary to implement measures to successful­
ly address both wider demographic trends and the decline in the population
who have completed military service or have fundamental military knowledge,
who represent an important resource of personnel for completing the active
component and, even more so, the contract reserve component and the
military strategic reserve. The actual human and financial resources, and also
the current level of modernization and the already developed capabilities of
the Slovenian Armed Forces, will be taken into account in the preparation of
appropriate normative, development guidance and planning documents, and
the proposal of the new Resolution on the General Long-Term Development
and Equipping Programme of the Slovenian Armed Forces and the future me­
dium-term defence programmes.

The target size of the Slovenian Armed Forces will be achieved in stages.
The objective in the period 2020-2025 is to have 7,000 members of the active
component of the Slovenian Armed Forces, and 1,000 members of the contract
reserve component of the Slovenian Armed Forces, while at the same time fun­
damentally reforming the system of recruitment and retention of members and
their leaving the service. The objective in the period 2025-2030 is to increase
the size and structure of the Slovenian Armed Forces to 7,500 members of the
active component and 1,500 members of the contract reserve component, if
the measures to improve human and financial resources are successfully im­
plemented and the process of modernization and capability development is
strengthened. In the period 2030-2035, the target size of 8,000 members of
the active component and 2,000 members of the contract reserve component
will be achieved.


-----

Target for the

number of SAF

members


8000

6000

4000

2000

0

2020 2025 2030 2035

Active component Contract reserve

A concept of the contract reserve component, divided into a manoeuvre and a
territorial part in the future, will be redefined. The manoeuvre part of the contract
reserve component will carry out the whole range of tasks of the Slovenian
Armed Forces, and will supplement the capabilities of their units manned by
the active component, including participation in international operations and
missions, and in collective defence. The system of training for the members
of the contract reserve component to achieve an appropriate and comparable
level of competence and training will be re-designed accordingly. The status
of the members of the contract reserve component in the civilian environment
will be improved; in particular, adequate legal protection for labour rights during
longer absences from work due to the performance of military service.

The territorial part of the contract reserve component, led by the active core
of the active component, will operate exclusively in national territory. It will be
trained for national defence, and will participate in support activities to the
entities of the security system and of the system of protection against natural
and other disasters.

The military capabilities of the Republic of Slovenia will be increased through
the military strategic reserve in the event of an imminent risk of an attack
against the state or the declaration of a state of emergency or war.

If the planned measures in the stated periods do not contribute to an
increased number of personnel in the Slovenian Armed Forces (both the active
component and the contract reserve component) or if the result is far from the
target objective, it will be necessary to rethink the defence system concept of
the Republic of Slovenia, the size and structure of the Slovenian Armed Forces,
and the introduction of other components of military service.


-----

Armed

4.3.2 Structure of the Slovenian Armed Forces

The Slovenian Armed Forces will be organized at strategic, operational and
tactical levels.

Structure

of the STRATEGIC

GENERAL STAFF OF THE SAF

Slovenian LEVEL

Forces


OPERATIONAL FORCE COMMAND OF THE SAF

LEVEL MILITARY SCHOOLS CENTRE


MANOEUVRE PART (commands and units)

TACTICAL LEVEL TERRITORIAL PART (military territorial

commands and units)


The highest military professional body charged with commanding the Slovenian
Armed Forces at the strategic level will be the General Staff of the Slovenian
Armed Forces.

At the operational level, the Force Command of the Slovenian Armed Forces will
be responsible for the readiness and competence of subordinate commands
and units; for the operation of the SAF forces in Slovenia and abroad, including
support to the system of protection against natural and other disasters; for
assistance to other state authorities; for civil-military cooperation; and for the
maintenance of the peacetime cores which will enable a gradual increase in
the size of the Slovenian Armed Forces. If other components of military service
which would significantly increase the planned target size of the Slovenian
Armed Forces are to be activated, the possibility of establishing additional
commands at the operational level will be examined, if need be.

The Military Schools Centre will be responsible for the organization and imple­
mentation of military education.

Commands and units, in addition to military territorial commands, will be esta­
blished at the tactical level, representing the maneouvre part and, to a certain
extent, the support part of the Slovenian Armed Forces. The main tasks of
the manoeuvre part of the Slovenian Armed Forces, which will be composed
mostly of the active component, self-sufficient in terms of logistics and mainly
deployable, will be to ensure and maintain the required level of readiness of
the response and declared forces intended for operations in the Republic of
Slovenia and for collective defence, and to develop capabilities, maintain the
ability to rapidly generate crisis response forces, form, train and prepare con­
tingents for international operations and missions, and ensure interoperabili­
ty and the ability to operate in a multinational environment. The support part
of the Slovenian Armed Forces will be responsible for the maintenance of
technical goods, equipment and weapons.

The military territorial commands will complete the manoeuvre part of the
Slovenian Armed Forces through territorial units; train the territorial part of the
contract reserve component; implement civil-military cooperation; support the
system of protection against natural and other disasters; provide assistance to
other state authorities; carry out services regarding territorial logistics; provide
Host Nation Support services; and maintain the peacetime cores which will


-----

enable a gradual increase in the size of the Slovenian Armed Forces. The core
of commands will be manned by the active component.

The Slovenian Armed Forces will conduct joint combat operations and be
capable of forming a task tactical unit to the brigade level in the national
framework, manned by the active component and the contract reserve
component.


The units of the Slovenian Armed Forces intended for combat, combat
support, combat service support and command support will consist of the
active component and the manoeuvre contract reserve component, and will
be organized as battalions or regiments. The military territorial commands
will be manned by the active component and the territorial contract reserve
component at the regiment and brigade levels.

The peacetime structure of the Slovenian Armed Forces will enable voluntary
military service under its fundamental tasks.

The proportion of deployable forces of the SAF land component will be 50%,
meaning that up to 50% of the SAF land component will be organized, equipped
and trained for operations outside national territory. Deployable forces will be
declared as potentially usable in participation in international operations, parti­
cularly in NATO’s collective defence. Up to 10% of the SAF land component will
maintain a high level of readiness within the national territory, or for participati­
on in international operations and missions.

#### 4.4 Human resources

Human resources are the major factor allowing the Slovenian Armed Forces
to achieve its target size and fulfil its mission. A fundamental challenge with
regard to the future development of the Slovenian Armed Forces, the achieve­
ment of the development objectives, and its technical modernization, lies in
providing a suitable number and quality of personnel.

Efforts to increase the number of personnel in the Slovenian Armed Forces will
be focused on the promotion of the military profession; the entry and recru­
itment of new personnel; the retention of current personnel, including the
provision of rewards, compensations and bonuses; and the exit of personnel
from the defence system, including system solutions for all categories of
members of the Slovenian Armed Forces (the contract reserve component
and voluntary military service). The situation relating to human resources in the
Slovenian Armed Forces will only improve through a comprehensive personnel
approach within the entire national security system and the wider society,
requiring certain adjustments and changes to legislation and implementing
Acts. This is in fact a combination of necessary organizational and status-rela­
ted measures in connection to specific features of the military profession and
changes to legislation.

Measures to encourage entry into the Slovenian Armed Forces will be focused
on the acceleration of procedures, improved promotion of military professi­
on and employment, the possibility of awards of scholarships, and the oppor­
tunity to gain education during employment, among other things. Measures
to improve the status of the members of the Slovenian Armed Forces, such
as appropriate evaluations and rewards, housing, the regulation of status
during education and of different obligations, and other measures under the


-----

comprehensive care for the members, will contribute to the retention of the
members in the system.

Measures to facilitate members to leave the Slovenian Armed Forces after
reaching the age of 45 will be focused on ensuring the acquired rights, re­
gulating the status, and providing financial and other benefits. Measures
related to the contract reserve and voluntary military service will be focused

on appropriate reimbursements and the motivation of employers for support,
timely planning, better earnings, promotion, and so on. In order to successfully
implement the measures in the area of human resources, it will be necessary
to include the tasks related to the recruitment and retention of personnel in the
work processes of the Slovenian Armed Forces.

Improved implementation of strategic communication, the promotion of the
military profession, and the increase in the territorial part of the Slovenian
Armed Forces will contribute to a better integration of the defence system into
the local environment and to permanent close contacts with the citizens.

In addition, the system of career development for the members of the Slovenian
Armed Forces will be upgraded, providing individuals with the possibilities of
career promotion and professional development, and also enabling them to
leave at a certain career level.

#### 4.5 Financial resources

Due to the changed international security situation, and the extremely negative
consequences of several years of reduction in defence expenditure, large
financial investments are required. Only by making these investments will the
Republic of Slovenia be able to ensure an appropriate level of preparedness
of the defence system in the future, and to meet all its obligations related to
common defence arising from its membership in NATO and the European
Union.

By signing the Defence Investment Pledge in 2014, the NATO member states
committed themselves to halting the trend of declining defence expenditure,
and to aiming to gradually increase defence expenditure in real terms, as GDP
grows, towards 2% of GDP for defence within the next decade. At the same
time, the NATO member states will increase their defence spending on major
equipment and on research and development, with the aim of allocating at
least 20% of their defence spending for these purposes within the next decade.

For national defence purposes, it is necessary to provide financial resources
in the long term, which will enable the implementation of the development
objectives of the Slovenian Armed Forces as laid down in national strategic
and development guidance documents, including the development of defined
capabilities and an increased number of Slovenian Armed Forces personnel in
the event of a sharp deterioration in the security situation.


-----

Target defence 2,00 %

expenditure share

of GDP

1,50 %

1,00 %

0,50 %

0,00 %

2020 2025 2030 2035

Rational and sustainable defence expenditure able to effectively support the
development objectives in this document and at the same time follow the
Defence Investment Pledge, should gradually increase to at least 1.5% of GDP
in 2024. Between 2024 and 2035, the share of GDP for defence will move
towards 2% of GDP within broad fiscal frameworks.

If defence expenditure in the next medium-term period does not reach the
defined proportion, the vision of the Defence White Paper of the Republic of
Slovenia will not be fully implemented. Moreover, it will be necessary to reflect
on the level of the defence system’s capabilities and the adopted internatio­
nal obligations, and on the related consequences for a wider national security
system.


-----

### 5 CIVIL DEFENCE AS A
 RESILIENCE BUILDING BLOCK OF THE STATE AND SOCIETY


Civil defence, ensuring the conditions for the continual functioning of the autho­
rities and the functioning of the entire defence system, will contribute to the en­
hancement of civil preparedness and to the resilience of the state and society,
and support the Slovenian Armed Forces and the Allied forces in the territory
of the Republic of Slovenia in peace, crisis, emergency and war, through civilian
capabilities and by preparing and implementing measures.

In line with the new strategic reality, and towards the growing interdependen­
ce of civilian and military capabilities, the content and tasks of civil defence
will be adapted and updated accordingly. In terms of the enhancement of civil
preparedness and the resilience of the state, the defence planning entities in
the state will, through activities and measures, ensure civilian capabilities for
Host Nation Support; the strengthening of resilience to hybrid threats; the pro­
tection and resilience of critical infrastructure, information and communicati­
on support; geospatial and cartographic support; and the implementation of
military duties and of material and medical care.

Solutions for the effectiveness of the defence system will be drafted in the
defence planning process in the state, on the basis of defence plans prepared
by all entities. With regard to intensified activities in planning civil prepared­
ness, hybrid and cyber threats will also be taken into account, whereby the con­
ditions for the state’s comprehensive responses to various security threats and
risks will be ensured.

Crisis response measures, as part of state preparedness measures, will be
supplemented, updated and reviewed accordingly, both in national exercises
and in the crisis management exercises of the European Union and NATO.
Efforts towards the supply, protection and survival of the population will also
play a key role in terms of strengthening civil preparedness at the national level.
Here, constant inter-ministerial cooperation, responsibility, and the appropria­
te organization of entities responsible for planning will be taken into account
for the performance of tasks in crisis, emergency and war, in accordance with


-----

international obligations and the ability to adapt to change. Under changed cir­
cumstances, the most important function of the Ministry of Defence will be
the coordination of tasks in the field of defence at both the regional and local
levels.

By ensuring civil preparedness, civil defence will carry an important share
of the functions of the Republic of Slovenia, including in the performance of

tasks related to NATO’s collective defence and mutual assistance within the
European Union. The established solutions will take into account NATO’s
general requirements and criteria for the assessment of civil preparedness
in order to ensure the continual functioning of the authorities, support to the
armed forces with civilian capabilities, and the protection of key civil services.
Defence planning upgraded in this direction will, on the basis of assessments,
enable the Republic of Slovenia to respond in line with the risk degree of a state,
NATO, and the European Union. The Ministry of Defence, responsible for the
coordination and guidance of defence planning, will continue to facilitate co­
operation with all entities responsible for defence planning.

Activities of planning in the provision of support to the Slovenian Armed Forces
and the Allied forces will complement NATO activities in the provision of Host
Nation Support, and will be coherently developed in the strengthening of
military mobility within the framework of the European Union. In this way, the
coordination and implementation of Host Nation Support and military mobility
will be improved. The Ministry of Defence, together with other competent go­
vernment authorities, will find solutions and methods to ensure the approp­
riate capabilities to support national and Allied transport needs and military
mobility in the Republic of Slovenia and outside its territory. Simplified proced­
ures for border crossings under military mobility will be in line with solutions in
the European Union and NATO, and efforts should be made to synchronize and


Since infrastructure is exposed to contemporary threats, appropriate protecti­
ve and defence measures, and measures to prevent and mitigate the consequ­
ences of such attacks will be adopted. In planning the effective protection,
security and defence of critical infrastructure and strengthening its resilience,
close cooperation will be established between the private and public sectors,
and between critical infrastructure operators and managers.


-----

### 6 RESPONSE TO HYBRID
 THREATS IN THE FIELD OF DEFENCE


One particular challenge for the state’s defence is hybrid threats, whose
negative effects have significantly magnified due to the development and
use of new technologies and the coordinated operation of various actors. In
carrying out activities to strengthen civil preparedness and adopt appropriate
national solutions, vulnerability will be reduced and resilience to hybrid threats
improved.

In line with the efforts of NATO and the European Union to strengthen resilience
in dealing with hybrid threats, national solutions and activities will be prepared
and implemented in order to comprehensively address hybrid threats. Coordi­
nation and other capabilities to identify and respond to hybrid threats will be
developed within this framework. Situational awareness, resilience to hostile
intelligence activities, cyber and information security and defence, strategic
communication, and crisis management mechanisms will be enhanced, taking
into account various methods of hybrid operation.

Response to hybrid threats within the framework of defence planning and crisis
response measures will be developed, with an emphasis on strengthening the
resilience of the state and society, cyber security and defence, civil prepared­
ness, and the protection of critical infrastructure.

Within defence planning, measures and procedures will be developed for the
event of the operation of non-military instability factors and hybrid factors
which, due to their multiplicative effect, may require the engagement of military
capabilities to manage and ensure the resilience of the state and society.


Complexity and

multidimensionality

of hybrid threats


-----

### CYBER SECURITY

### 7 COMMUNICATION AND
 INFORMATION SYSTEM CAPABILITIES AND


The importance and role of the capabilities of the communication and infor­
mation system as one of the key elements affecting the operation and de­
velopment of defence capacity are constantly growing, due to the intensifi­
ed digitalization of processes and weapon systems, and the establishment
of cyberspace as a domain for military operations. In parallel with the above,
advanced computer technologies have inexorably changed both the theatre of
war and the methods of military operations and defence processes.

Cyber attacks on both state and non-state actors are growing in number, and
becoming more aggressive and sophisticated. The defence system in cyber­
space follows the norms and rules of operations in accordance with internati­
onal law. The applicable international law, rules and norms for the responsible
conduct of states in cyberspace are an important factor for reducing risks, pre­
venting conflicts, and establishing trust and stability in international relations.

The most important objective of the establishment of the capabilities of the
defence system’s communication and information system will be to ensure
adaptability and interoperability of timely, accurate and comprehensive data in
real time which are necessary for the effectiveness of the defence system and


-----

the performance of military operations in Slovenia or abroad. The communi­
cation and information system of the defence system will represent the whole,
together with the communication and information system of the Slovenian
Armed Forces.

The development of capabilities will be based on the preparation and provision
of dynamic and flexible information and communication solutions, with an

emphasis on the introduction of advanced computer technologies, integration
and security, and simple and safe user access. The interconnection of infor­
mation systems and various data security domains will enable easier dataflow
and thus more effective decision-making, resulting in cost optimization and
more economical functioning of the defence system.

By effectively managing cyber threats and responding to cyber security events,
a safe and reliable communication and information system will be provided,
with its services readily available to all users regardless of location and time.

The most important objectives will be constant raising of awareness with
regard to the possibilities enabled by the effective use of information solutions,
the active participation of users in improving information systems, and a high
level of users’ awareness of cyber threats.

Bearing in mind that cyberspace has no borders and that defence is our
common responsibility, the cyber resilience of our own communication and
information systems will be developed, thus providing our contribution to the
comprehensive system of national cyber security of the Alliance, in coopera­
tion with other state, public and private, national and international actors. The
establishment of a responsive management system, policies and the organi­
zational structure, the introduction of advanced technologies, the development
of relevant skills, knowledge, qualifications and awareness, and the enhance­
ment of cooperation between national and international actors will contribute
to the development of capabilities for protecting communication and informa­
tion systems in the field of defence, and responding to cyber threats.

A system of comprehensive management of cyber threats will be established,
which will include all actors from the Ministry of Defence. Cooperation with the
competent national authority and other actors in the system of cyber security
will be developed.

Intensive and systematic training, education and exercises in the area of
cyber security will contribute to raising awareness of cyber threats, acquiring
knowledge, and developing trust both at the national level and within the
Alliance.

The fulfilment of international commitments made in the area of cyber
security will be accelerated. A comprehensive range of functionalities to
ensure cyber security, encompassing defence, prevention, assessment,
sustainability, and notification, will be set up in accordance with the national
policy, and the policies of NATO and the European Union.


-----

-----

of threats to the Republic of Slovenia and its defence system will be developed

### 8 INTELLIGENCE AND
 SECURITY CAPABILITIES

Intelligence and security capabilities aimed at timely detection and countering

in the field of defence. The complexity and changeability of contemporary
security threats require the adaptation of intelligence and security capabilities.
The integration of intelligence and security processes, and their technological
and personnel capabilities will be reasonably strengthened, which will enable
successful and timely detection of individual threats. An assessment of how
appropriately the capabilities are placed in the defence system will be made in
order to allow for the effective and expert implementation of tasks.

The subsystem of rapid and safe exchange of data and information between
the entities in the intelligence and security community and their users will be
modernized. Thus, the subsystem of early warning, threat detection and situa­
tional awareness will be strengthened. The thorough monitoring of and infor­
mation on military and other threats likely to affect the security of the Republic
of Slovenia and the situation in crisis areas and those areas where members of
the security system operate, will continue.

Individual entities of the intelligence and security community in the Republic
of Slovenia will continue to cooperate in the exchange of data, capabilities,
and expertise. Coordination of work in detecting and counteracting individual
threats and data exchange between the entities forming part of the national
security system will be strengthened. In addition, cooperation with the partner
intelligence and security services of the member states of the European Union
and NATO, and with other countries, if required, will continue in the exchange
of data and experience.

In the area of security, the procedures and standards for the protection, vetting
and monitoring of people having access to security sensitive work posts,
people, facilities, areas and classified information at the Ministry of Defence
will be updated. Processes for the timely identification of security vulnerabiliti­
es of the defence system will be developed and modernized. Also, appropriate
normative and other solutions will be sought in the area of security.

In addition to the development of traditional intelligence and security capabi­
lities, with a focus on counter-intelligence activities, cyber, technological, and
other support capabilities will be developed,, which will enable successful co­
unteracting of threats.


-----

### 9 STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION

In an increasingly complex, highly developed, and dynamic information envi­
ronment, we are faced with continual information flow, a global audience, in­
formation overload, fake news, and social media. Given the above, the defence

system will develop the capabilities and potentials of strategic communica­
tion, complemented by public diplomacy activities, and of all other actors of
the national security system to support the implementation of the national
security policy and strategic objectives in the field of defence. Such capabilities
are vital for the assertion of the national security and defence interests of the
Republic of Slovenia, and represent an essential element of informing society
and raising awareness of the importance and role of the defence system in
carrying out all functions and activities. This can contribute to transparency
and broader social consent in relation to the functioning and activities of the
defence system. Strategic communication also actively contributes to the limi­
tation and reduction of the effects of contemporary security risks and threats.

The adaptation and responsiveness of the defence system to the changing
security environment requires the relevant placement and use of various
elements of the concept of strategic communication, which will at the same
time follow the concepts and guidelines of NATO and the European Union. By
doing this, the development of strategic communication in the defence system
will be inextricably connected to the development of the national concept.

Through the preparation of a strategy, the concept of strategic communication
in the defence system will be gradually established in all areas and levels of the
functioning of the defence system, with the purpose of achieving the desired
response of selected target audiences to support the implementation of the
set objectives. Strategic development guidance documents will form the basis
for the preparation of fundamental messages in the field of military defence,
aimed at the widest public, and strengthening the functioning of the state and
society in the field of military defence. In doing this, a fundamental principle
of strategic communication will be followed, i.e. a consistency between the
messages and the activities carried out.


-----

### 10 MEASURES FOR THE
 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE WHITE PAPER


The fulfilment of these measures will be defined by implementing strategic
guidance and planning documents, and by amendments to legal and other
normative bases for the functioning and development of the defence system in
the Republic of Slovenia. The implementation of the guidelines and measures
contained in the Defence White Paper of the Republic of Slovenia will be
reviewed every two years.


## 1.
 2.
 3.

 4.

 5.

 6.

 7.


The main

measures for the

implementation

of the Defence

White Paper of

the Republic of

Slovenia


To provide the bases for improved effectiveness and development of
the defence system through amendments to the legislation.

To gradually increase defence spending towards 2% of GDP and an
investment share of at least 20% of defence spending.

To implement measures to strengthen civil defence and prepared­
ness, and in doing so the resilience of the state and society, with an
emphasis on the continual operation of government at all levels, the
continuity of public infrastructure and services, and the uninterrup­
ted provision of energy, information and communication support
and other resources important for the functioning of the state, the
security and the lives of citizens, and for the protection of critical in­
frastructure.

To establish mechanisms providing the conditions for an increase
in defence forces to successfully implement the Doctrine of Military
Strategic Reserve of the Republic of Slovenia in the event of a sharp
deterioration in the security situation or an immediate military threat
to the Republic of Slovenia.

To implement solutions regarding the territorial organization of the
Slovenian Armed Forces, and to ensure their greater involvement in
and connection to the local environment in the wider territory of the
Republic of Slovenia.

To re-define the concept of the contract reserve component by
dividing it into the manoeuvre contract reserve component and the
territorial contract reserve component, and to link it with the system
of transition between the various forms of military service.

To improve national solutions and activities for raising resilience to
hybrid threats through comprehensive and uniform coordination, and
the monitoring of hybrid threats in the Republic of Slovenia.


-----

effective protection of critical infrastructure and to strengthen its re­

To ensure situational awareness and to provide an analytical as­
sessment of hybrid threats in support of the decision-making

## 8.

process, with the purpose of effectively responding to hybrid threats.

To enhance cooperation between the public and private sectors, and
between critical infrastructure operators and managers, to plan the

## 9.

silience.

To upgrade the crisis response measures in the field of defence. To

periodically check, through national crisis management exercises,

## 10.

the crisis management system and the state's ability to promptly and
effectively respond to various security threats.

To upgrade the military education and training system.

## 11.

To renew the system of recruiting members to the Slovenian Armed

Forces by improving their labour status and through financial rewards,

## 12.

and to enhance the promotion of the military profession.

To examine the methods of recruiting more personnel in the Slovenian

Armed Forces, including a potential introduction of all components of

## 13.

military service.

To prepare legislative solutions for the implementation of key

equipping projects of the Slovenian Armed Forces.

## 14.

To take into account, to the maximum extent possible, the possibilities
for joint procurement with other countries or within the agencies of the

## 15.

European Union and NATO when purchasing military equipment and
weapons, including through intergovernmental agreements, in the light
of cost optimization and transparency of procurement. This includes the
purchase and modernization of military equipment already held by the
Slovenian Armed Forces. To examine the possibilities and purpose of
purchasing used military equipment and weapons.

To strengthen cooperation with and support to the public education

system in relation to civic education.

## 16.

To upgrade strategic communication capabilities in the field of
defence.

## 17.

To review and update normative solutions related to intelligence and

security activities in the field of defence, and to integrate intelligence

## 18.

and security capabilities and processes.


To intensify the introduction of advanced computer and communica­

tion technologies into weapons systems and defence processes.

## 19.


To establish a comprehensive system for cyber defence manage­

ment in the field of defence within the national cyber security system.

## 20.


-----

### CONCLUSION

The Defence White Paper of the Republic of Slovenia deals with the fundamen­
tal challenges which the defence system of the Republic of Slovenia faces, and
defines measures to improve its defence capacity. The measures to develop
the defence system are, as a matter of priority, aimed at ensuring the stable and
sufficiently ambitious funding of the defence system; reaching the necessary
number of personnel in the Slovenian Armed Forces; completing its professi­
onalization; improving the members’ status; carrying out modernization with
a view to building defence capacity; modernizing the key infrastructure for the
operation and development of the Slovenian Armed Forces; and strengthe­
ning the connection of the defence system with the wider society, and thus
achieving better recognition of national defence within society.

The defence system of the Republic of Slovenia will pursue an intermedia­
te defence spending target of 1.5% of GDP by 2024 within broad fiscal fra­
meworks, and a gradual long-term approximation to the defence spending
target of 2% of GDP. Increased investment in defence must be sufficiently
ambitious and predictable, and at the same time balanced between financial
resources to implement urgent personnel measures, resources to carry out
priority modernization projects, and resources to ensure the preparedness and
operation of the defence system in Slovenia and abroad.

The recommendations in the Defence White Paper of the Republic of Slovenia
will be the basis of the preparation of new normative, development guidance
and planning documents, such as the defence strategy, the Resolution on the
General Long-Term Development and Equipping Programme of the Slovenian
Armed Forces, and medium-term defence programmes, which will define,
on the basis of realistic assumptions, how intermediate targets in the deve­
lopment of the defence system capabilities will be achieved in reaching the
desired state by 2035.

Monitoring the successful achievement of targets related to recruiting more
personnel in the Slovenian Armed Forces, the changes to the system, the
development and modernization of defence capabilities, and, consequen­
tly, strengthening the defence capacity of the Republic of Slovenia, will be a
continual process which will be based on clearly defined progress indicators.

Building defence capabilities will be a gradual and long-term process requiring
constant political support, stable long-term funding and a relevant normative
framework. The effects of the measures to strengthen the defence capacity
of the Republic of Slovenia and, particularly, to improve the capabilities and
readiness of the Slovenian Armed Forces, will be visible in the middle of the
long-term period.

Through an effective, modern, and responsive defence system, the Republic of
Slovenia will ensure security to its citizens as a condition for the functioning of
other social subsystems, and contribute to a quality living environment for the
development and perspective of all generations.


-----

-----

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER OF THE REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA

Published by: Ministry of Defence of the Republic of Slovenia

Ljubljana, January 2020

Material is also available at:
https://www.gov.si/en/state-authorities/ministries/ministry-of-defence/

Kataložni zapis o publikaciji (CIP) pripravili v Narodni in univerzitetni
knjižnici v Ljubljani

COBISS.SI-ID=303943424

ISBN 978-961-92687-8-0 (pdf)


-----

