**Republic of Slovenia**
**Ministry of Defence**

# STRATEGIC DEFENCE REVIEW
 Comprehensive Summary

**Ljubljana, May 2004**


-----

Editor and Publisher: Republic of Slovenia
Ministry of Defence

Print: Birografika BORI, d.o.o.,
Ljubljana

CIP - Kataložni zapis o publikaciji
Narodna in univerzitetna knjižnica, Ljubljana

355.02(497.4)

STRATEGIC defence review : comprehensive summary. Ljubljana : Ministry of Defence, 2004

ISBN 961-228-046-0

214086144


-----

**CONTENTS**

MINISTER’S ADDRESS ............................................................................ 6
1 INTRODUCTION .................................................................................. 7
1.1 Purpose of defence reforms .............................................. 7
1.2 Process of defence reforms ............................................... 7
1.3 Key starting points of the Strategic Defence Review ...... 8
2 CHANGES IN THE STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENT ......................................... 9
2.1 Living environment ........................................................... 9
2.2 Economic and social environment ................................. 10
2.3 Information technology environment ..............................11
2.4 Political environment ...................................................... 12
2.5 Military environment ...................................................... 14
2.6 Threats to the national security of the Republic
of Slovenia ....................................................................... 16
3 NATIONAL SECURITY AND DEFENCE POLICY OF THE REPUBLIC
OF SLOVENIA ................................................................................ 17
3.1 National security policy ...................................................17
3.2 Defence policy ................................................................ 18
3.2.1 Multinational integration and cooperation ........... 18
3.2.2 Participation in international operations .............. 23
3.2.3 Defence planning ................................................... 24
3.2.4 Defence resources.................................................. 25
4 STRATEGIC VISION TO 2015 .............................................................. 27
4.1 Strategic environment of the Republic of Slovenia ....... 27
4.2 Security policy of the Republic of Slovenia ................. 28
4.3 Defence policy of the Republic of Slovenia................... 29
4.3.1 Defence planning ................................................... 29
4.3.2 Defence resources and key capabilities ................ 30
5 SLOVENIAN ARMED FORCES ............................................................. 34
5.1 Purpose of the SAF ......................................................... 34
5.2 Tasks of the SAF ............................................................. 34
5.3 Scale and structure of the SAF ....................................... 35
5.4 Key challanges ................................................................ 37
5.5 Development assumptions .............................................. 38


-----

5.6 Key development principles and development
of SAF capabilities .......................................................... 38
5.7 Long-term SAF capabilities 2015 ................................... 39
5.8 Capabilities and envisaged structure of the
SAF in 2010 ......................................................................41
5.9 Modernisation of military capabilities ........................... 42
5.10Key development challenges and priorities.................... 42
6 CIVIL DEFENCE AND CRISIS MANAGEMENT .......................................... 44
6.1 Purpose ............................................................................ 44
6.1.1 Civil defence .......................................................... 44
6.1.2 Crisis management ................................................ 44
6.2 Tasks ................................................................................ 45
6.2.1 Civil defence .......................................................... 45
6.2.2 Crisis management ................................................ 46
6.3 Planning assumptions...................................................... 47
6.4 Key development principles............................................ 48
6.5 Modernisation ................................................................. 49
6.6 Key development challenges .......................................... 49
7 INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY ACTIVITIES ........................................... 51
7.1 Purpose ............................................................................ 51
7.2 Tasks ................................................................................ 51
7.3 Planning assumptions...................................................... 52
7.4 Key development principles............................................ 52
7.5 Modernisation ................................................................. 52
7.6 Key development challenges .......................................... 52
8 LOGISTIC ................................................................................ 54
8.1 Purpose ............................................................................ 54
8.2 Tasks ................................................................................ 54
8.3 Key challenges ................................................................ 54
8.4 Planning assumptions and key development
principles ......................................................................... 55
9 COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION SYSTEM ................................... 56
9.1 Purpose ............................................................................ 56
9.2 Tasks ................................................................................ 56
9.3 Key development challenges and goals .......................... 56


-----

10 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT .................................................... 60
10.1 Purpose ........................................................................... 60
10.2 Scale and structure of human resources ........................ 60
10.3 Human resource development ........................................61
10.4 Establishing a modern personnel function .....................61
10.5 Overall development of human resources and
human capital ................................................................. 62
11 ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE MOD ..................................... 64
11.1 Characteristics ................................................................ 64
11.2 Future.............................................................................. 65
11.3 Administrative territorial organisation .......................... 66
12 Conclusions ................................................................................ 69


-----

**MINISTER’S** **ADDRESS**

Dynamic changes in the security environment, membership of the EU and
NATO and the professionalisation of the Slovenian Armed Forces have all
lead to the need for a rational modification of Slovenia’s national security
and national defence system.

Radical changes in security are the result of internal and external security
issues, while the consequential reform of the defence sector is aimed at
improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the defence system.

Defence reforms must follow from a comprehensive analysis of all the elements
related to defence and the current status of the defence system. A decision
was therefore taken to conduct a Strategic Defence Review which would
include long-term guidelines and a vision of the defence system up to 2015.

Development of the defence system must take into account new circumstances
and changes in the international security environment as well as national
interests, goals and available resources.

The effectiveness of the defence reforms and the systematic transformation
of the Slovenian Armed Forces into a professional force depend on sufficient
financial resources being made available. Similarly important is functional
professionalisation which requires a holistic and coherent structure relating
to organisation, processes, values and motivation.

The importance of the Strategic Defence Review lies in the linkage between
theoretical assumptions relating to national security and defence, and practical
experience. The document is at the same time general and focused on the
long-term, but also practical with short-term orientations.

The Strategic Defence Review has given us the relevant basis for an extensive
and thorough analysis of the further development of the Slovenian Armed
Forces and of the defence system. It has also defined a firm basis for further
implementation of the defence reforms and strong guarantees for matching
defence reforms with available resources and the new security challenges.
The resulting defence system will enable the development of well trained,
motivated and combat capable defence forces which will be able to carry out
all types of missions and tasks.

As the Strategic Defence Review is successfully brought to a conclusion, the
necessary defence reforms must now take a place.

**Dr. Anton GRIZOLD**


**Minister of Defence**


-----

**1 INTRODUCTION**

**1.1 Purpose of defence reforms**

Defence reforms are a necessary consequence of changes in the external and
internal factors which have affected, or will affect, the operation and
effectiveness of the defence system. Defence reforms have been under way
for some time, and with changes in national goals, availability of resources
and threats to national interests, we now need to carry out a Strategic Defence
Review which will result in orientations being set for further implementation
of reforms in the defence field.

In the past decade many changes have occurred in the security environment,
and with its accession to NATO and the European Union in 2004 Slovenia is
taking on a growing obligation in relation to the controlling and shaping of
these changes. The key changes in external factors are the increasingly diverse,
unpredictable and constantly changing international environment, the ever
more frequent and intensive regional and local conflicts, and the changing
nature and priorities of security risks and threats (particularly since 11
September 2001).

The changes in the environment necessitate a thorough consideration of the
new mission, tasks and capabilities of the defence forces of the Republic of
Slovenia (Slovenian Armed Forces or “SAF”), and Slovenia’s entire defence
system will need to adapt to these changes. The main goal of the defence
reforms is to form and provide trained, motivated, combat-ready and
interoperable defence forces which, under clear leadership that is changeoriented and based on knowledge, experience and positive tradition,
supplemented by modern doctrine and technology, will effectively pursue
clear strategic goals. This is what the defence forces of the Republic of Slovenia
must be if they are to be recognised as trustworthy at home and abroad and
capable of fulfilling their national and international role.

**1.2 Process of defence reforms**

The Strategic Defence Review is the basis for the implementation or
continuation of defence reforms. In the review we set out the long-term
strategic goals, founded on national interests but balanced by membership of
NATO, and the required capabilities and force structure, as well as the
intermediate goals leading to their achievement. The review is the basis for
determining competencies and responsibilities in the defence system, priority
activities and the resources for achieving the goals. It is essential that the
activities and resources enable achievement of the desired strategic results as
far as ensuring national security is concerned.


-----

On the basis of the results of the Strategic Defence Review, the defence reforms
carried out will include changes to the defence strategy and plans, the
capabilities and structure of the SAF and the related manning, modernisation,
infrastructure, doctrine and training. The implementation of the defence
reforms also encompasses financial and human resource management,
armaments and military equipment, as well as the other parts of the defence
system.

**1.3 Key starting points of the Strategic Defence Review**

1. The national security environment is exposed to new and changed risks
and threats which represent the main challenge to the security of the
Republic of Slovenia, while the likelihood of a military threat remains
relatively small.

2. The strategic assessment of the security environment dictates the need
for a security and defence policy that will form a suitable basis for the
effective operation of the defence system, and the SAF in particular, in
preventing and managing crises and conflicts, and also the basis for
activities within alliances and coalitions.

3. With a view to strengthening national security and reducing exposure to
risks, Slovenian defence policy is oriented towards an active and
constructive role, particularly within the various bodies of the United
Nations, NATO and the European Union. International organisations will
continue to have a key role in the stabilisation of the Euro-Atlantic security
environment.

4. The transformation of the SAF must take into account the need for a
balance between mission, tasks, modernisation (equipment) and resources.
The priority tasks of the SAF and its capabilities need to be determined
in relation to the changes in the security environment and the availability
of financial resources.

5. Participation by the SAF in international operations, particularly in crisis
response operations, requires them to be operationally trained and
prepared and able to make forces available. These forces must be capable
of operating in joint international operations together with other armed
forces.

6. In accordance with legislation, by 2003 the conscript system for manning
in the SAF had already largely been replaced by professional recruitment.
Also introduced were contractual reserves, which in accordance with the
legislation will continue to be supplemented with compulsory reserves
until 2010 at the latest.


-----

**2 CHANGES** **IN** **THE** **STRATEGIC** **ENVIRONMENT**

The strategic environment is characterised by a high degree of complexity,
instability and changeability and a growing number of low-intensity conflicts.
In the past decade conflicts have been dominated by ethnic and border disputes,
which are frequently incited and accompanied by political, economic and
social destabilisation of environments.

Potential points of conflict in our immediate region and beyond are the
Balkans, the Middle East and the Caucasus. In Slovenia’s strategic
environment the majority of sources of threat are asymmetric. The importance
of traditional military threats is declining, although they cannot be entirely
ruled out. While military sources of threat are limited, non-military sources
of threat are becoming ever more frequent, with terrorism, drug trafficking,
organised crime and weapons of mass destruction particularly notable. The
appropriate response to asymmetric threats lies in forming a unified and
integrated national security system, incorporated into both the collective
defence system and the collective security system, with the key elements of
the power of the state needing to be used effectively to ensure political,
diplomatic, economic, information and military security.

Slovenia needs to set up a responsive national security system, including the
defence system as part of it, which will be able to adapt effectively to frequent
and intensive changes in the strategic environment and reduce the possibility
of crises occurring, and which will be able to respond decisively and
successively to negative developments that may lead to a state of emergency.

As the strategic environment changes, so too does the range of military tasks
undertaken by the SAF. In peacetime its tasks will be dominated by various
forms of exercise and training, providing assistance in the event of natural
and other disasters, participating in crisis response operations and tasks
connected with supporting other governmental agencies and organisations in
ensuring the security and welfare of the citizens of the Republic of Slovenia.
The range of military tasks in wartime will be wider, and the unpredictability
and range of operational tasks will be increased.

**2.1 Living environment**

A healthy and stable living environment is an essential precondition for
ensuring an appropriate level of general (national) security. The living
environment is a complex structure that has a decisive impact in ensuring the
various aspects of security – global, international, regional, national and even
individual – as it determines the possibilities for development and defines
relations both in the international community as well as at the regional and
national levels. At the same time it also has a strong influence on the personal
development of the individual and the development of society as a whole, as
well as general social welfare.


-----

Both the natural environment and all the interferences and activities of man
within the environment have an impact on the guaranteeing of security. General
social and technological development has further increased the importance
of these factors. As society in general has developed, so the dependence of
the individual, society, the state and also the international community on the
state of the environment has increased. At the same time we need to
acknowledge the fact that in an absolute sense dependence and vulnerability
resulting from the natural environment remain high.

The social environment has developed in parallel with technological
development, including the aspect of guaranteeing greater human security.
General social progress and prosperity also directly increase the level of
security. At the same time this same environment represents new sources of
threat which result from man’s interference and activities in the environment.
In particular, the possibility of planetary destruction in the event of global
nuclear conflict has increased, as has the possibility of technological and
other disasters.

As far as national security is concerned, the natural environment is important
primarily because it represents a source of many natural disasters, such as
earthquakes, landslides, floods and so on.

But the threat from technological and other disasters is also important,
including those that can have cross-border effects, and therefore in the future
Slovenia will have to continue to pay close attention to this aspect of
guaranteeing national security.

The living environment will always represent an essential security element,
and with the changing strategic environment will continue to have a decisive
influence on the guaranteeing of national security in the future.

**2.2 Economic and social environment**

The economic and social environment, its laws, characteristics and
phenomena, directly affect and shape the political and security processes,
and therefore we treat this environment as an essential element as far as
guaranteeing security is concerned. Following the end of the cold war era,
with an increasing trend towards the demilitarisation of the sources of threat,
it has been the social and economic aspects of security that are becoming
increasingly important to the preservation of general (national) security.

In this era of globalisation, countries’ economies are becoming increasingly
connected and inter-dependent, and thus more sensitive to global economic
trends. The Republic of Slovenia must therefore actively endeavour to ensure
stability in the region and beyond, because stability in the regional and global
economic environment has a positive impact on the country’s economy.


-----

Slovenia is also actively working to achieve a stabilisation and strengthening
of the social environment in the region, as greater social security in the region
means greater security for the Republic of Slovenia and a reduction in nonmilitary sources of threat to our country. The security and stability of the
economic and social environment is dependent on a large number of mutually
related factors. Therefore it is essential as far as regional stabilisation is
concerned that appropriate social patterns based on mutual tolerance and
modern civilised values develop alongside the development of the economy
and general social well-being.

Slovenia’s membership of the EU will certainly have positive effects that will
strengthen the capacity of the Slovenian economy. And membership of NATO
also has a positive impact on our economic strength and on the economic and
political standing of Slovenia in the international environment. These effects
will be mainly medium and long term, and dependent above all on the
preparedness of the Slovenian economy.

The expansion of markets and the opening up of Slovenia’s economy are also
increasing the danger and the possibility of economic destabilisation in
Slovenia resulting from economic shocks in the international market. Although
extreme forms of economic threat (boycotts, blockades, industrial sabotage)
to Slovenia on a large scale are unlikely at the present time, they nevertheless
have to be prepared for.

Slovenia must seek to formulate a social policy that guarantees social security
for all its inhabitants. The key elements of such a policy are socially oriented
education and health systems and an effective policy to reduce unemployment.

In the future the Ministry of Defence (MoD) and in particular the SAF will be
among the country’s bigger consumers, and also one of the bigger employers,
and one which will have an impact on both economic dimensions (e.g.
promoting research and development and production for specific purposes)
and social dimensions (e.g. employment).

**2.3 Information technology environment**

General technological advancement, and in particular the development of
digital technology, over the last twenty years has dictated the transition from
an industrial society to an information society in which new forms of
communication, business, management, education and training are being
introduced. The information technology environment is one of the fastest
developing environments. It has a complex social impact because the pace at
which it is developing and the numerous innovations force us to make rapid
changes in many areas of human activity, and thus it has a decisive role in
helping to shape changes in the security and defence field too.


-----

In today’s world the timely possession and management of relevant information
is of critical importance. All social systems and the whole of public life are
becoming vitally dependent on information technology.

Information technology is also essential for management of the defence system,
as up-to-date collection and rapid processing of data mean successful planning
and correct decision-making. A modern information technology environment
also dictates the adaptation of the armed forces and thoroughly redefines the
nature of warfare. Theatres of war have become digitalised, and weapons
systems are increasingly automated. In the forefront is the development of
modern, computer-supported weapons systems and command and control
systems.

Incursions into information systems, blocking of entire systems, unauthorised
access, alteration or destruction of data, and dissemination of inaccurate,
incorrect or misleading information are new forms of threat made possible by
the use (or abuse) of information systems. Therefore the formation of
information systems that will enable integration and adequate protection and
security of all their elements is extremely important for the national security
system.

Control and adequate protection of the information technology environment
is extremely important as far as guaranteeing national security is concerned
because otherwise the positive effects of information technology development
can have very negative effects on national security.

**2.4 Political environment**

With the globalisation of economic and political relations comes security,
defence and military globalisation too. Security threats today are becoming
ever more unpredictable, asymmetric and trans-national. Already they are
too complex for the security and defence capabilities of individual countries.
Because of the complexity and unpredictability of the sources of threat and
the limited nature of national resources, in the future political and security
environment countries will be increasingly compelled to strengthen
international cooperation and integration in the fields of security and defence.

Therefore, with the aim of ensuring its own national security and consolidating
peace, security and stability in the international community, Slovenia will
continue to develop its own national security system. It will supplement and
enhance the effectiveness of its national security system by means of active
cooperation in systems of collective security (UN, OSCE) and collective
defence (NATO) and the EU, and through inclusion in regional security
initiatives where appropriate.


-----

The United Nations represents one of the foundations for the management
and regulation of international political and security issues and challenges.
Although questions are often asked about its effectiveness and the need for
reform, its size in terms of membership and the nature of the tasks it carries
out make the UN an invaluable organisation. The UN is the only global
organisation tackling security and other issues in the international community
at such a high level.

Membership of the EU and NATO are of particular importance to Slovenia as
they represent the strategic mechanisms for ensuring a stable and secure
environment which will enable the peaceful development of the country.

Changing political and security circumstances mean NATO too is undergoing
intensive change. In order to confront today’s security threats NATO must be
capable of effective command of military operations outside the territory of
its member states. Both for NATO and for its individual members this
represents a new political and military challenge. Processes currently
underway within the Alliance point to a determination to set up the force
structure and capabilities necessary to implement the aforementioned tasks
while retaining its status as a credible military force in the international
environment. At the same time it should be stressed that Slovenia and the
other future NATO members are already actively cooperating to develop the
joint capabilities of the Alliance and as a result are to a certain extent already
included in the formation of joint capabilities. Slovenia will continue the
restructuring of the SAF so that, together with the Allies, it will be able to
participate as effectively as possible in ensuring peace, security and stability
in the international community, including collective defence tasks.

In the international security and defence environment the EU is also having
an increasing presence, and is expressing a clear interest in forming its own
military capabilities which it would use in cases where it wished to carry out
or lead military operations outside the framework of the Alliance. Slovenia
will be actively involved in the processes of closer European defence
cooperation, on the evident assumption that this will not mean a duplication
of existing NATO capabilities. The formation of European military capabilities
is still only in the initial phase, and the full realisation of this project will first
of all require a general political consensus among the EU members as to its
content and scale. For Slovenia it is particularly important that joining NATO
and the EU will further strengthen its security position and increase its
possibility of influencing political and security processes in the international
community.

Another organisation of particular importance as far as the stabilisation and
strengthening of positive international relations and ensuring international


-----

security are concerned is the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). The OSCE has played a very active role in the former
Yugoslavia and directly contributed to the stabilisation of the security situation
in Slovenia’s immediate neighbourhood. In the future the OSCE will continue
to be present primarily in areas where there is inadequate political, economic
and social stability and where preventive political measures are required to
ensure stability.

In South-East Europe, despite a consolidation of the security situation, the
need for active reduction and prevention of tension will continue in the future.
Preserving the stable peace in the region will be achievable with a
strengthening of cooperation together with a continuing visible passive and
also, where necessary, active military presence of the international community.
Incorporating the countries of East and South-East Europe into West European
international economic, political-security and defence integrations will
contribute to reducing instability in this region. Nevertheless, instability and
tension in South-East Europe and its margins will remain a potential source
of threat to European security and hence to the security of the Republic of
Slovenia. A definitive settling and stabilising of the political and security
situation in the former Yugoslavia and the wider region is of vital importance
for Slovenia. It is very much for this purpose that Slovenia is highly active in
the Stability Pact for South-East Europe. By continuing to make an active
contribution to a normalisation of relations in the region, which is not limited
solely to political and economic mechanisms but also includes a military
presence, Slovenia is directly strengthening its own security position and
reputation in the international community.

**2.5 Military environment**

The role and significance of the military environment have changed greatly
since the end of the bipolar global division. In the forefront now are different
sources of threat which in the past were pushed into the background. The
armed forces of the advanced industrial nations have brought what was the
primary task of protecting national and Allied territory into line with changes
in the strategic environment. As well as preventing and managing conflicts
outside the national territory and Allied territory, armed forces today are
managing crisis and post-crisis environments and providing assistance in the
elimination of non-military sources of threat.

In the future, basic sources of security threat will come from politically,
socially, economically and ecologically destabilised areas, terrorist
organisations and international organised crime groups, mass migration,
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and so on. Armed forces too
will be more involved in controlling these threats, and because of the


-----

globalisation of the sources of threat they will be obliged to carry out combined
and joint international operations. Only multipurpose security and defence
forces will be able to adapt rapidly to the changing content and dynamics of
developments in the security environment.

The main principles of the (combat) operations of armed forces in the future
will be:
– rapid reaction, i.e. the ability to react to a crisis as quickly as possible;
– deployability, i.e. the ability to reach a crisis area in the shortest possible
time and be capable of (combat) operations as soon as possible;
– sustainability, i.e. the ability to carry out tasks independently and effectively;
– diversity, i.e. the ability to carry out the entire range of tasks, or as full a
range as possible;
– survivability, i.e. the capability to defend one’s own forces;
– resilience, i.e. resistance to various forms of attack and the capability of
long-term operation and performance of various tasks.

Preparations for (combat) operations of the armed forces in the future will
require thorough changes in exercises, management training, development of
concepts and doctrines and development and introduction of new (combat)
equipment. Modern armed forces will be capable of operating in very diverse
weather conditions and in very diverse terrains where the enemy may use
conventional and unconventional forms of warfare. Unconventional,
asymmetric warfare and system-against-system warfare are taking the place
of conventional forces-against-forces warfare.

In line with changes in the strategic environment, which is increasingly being
defined by a high degree of dynamism and unpredictability of events, the
SAF will have to be capable of adapting, operating and responding to both
conventional and unconventional types of national security threat. The SAF
will develop and maintain adequate capabilities for deterring conventional
and unconventional types of threat to national security interests, for effective
national defence, participation in alliances and coalitions, and in civil
protection and disaster relief.

SAF units will have to be modular and adaptable to different tasks and
requirements, capable of joint and simultaneous operation with other units
and linked to a modern information system. This will provide SAF units with
greater knowledge of battlefield developments and enable simultaneous
operations against the enemy. In the future SAF units will have to be capable
of integrated operation in the international environment.


-----

**2.6 Threats to the national security of the Republic of Slovenia**

Slovenia enjoys a relatively high degree of security in a relatively unstable
regional and international environment in which, like other advanced industrial
nations, it may in the future be increasingly exposed to asymmetric, nonmilitary security risks and threats. Slovenia recognises that its small size and
limited resources mean that it cannot on its own guarantee an effective and
self-sufficient national security system, and therefore it strengthens it through
integration in collective security and collective defence systems.

Among the most obvious forms of threat to the national security of the Republic
of Slovenia in the forthcoming period are international organised crime, illegal
migration, international terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass
destruction. Therefore we need to further improve the coordination and
integration of security and defence structures to meet such threats and for this
purpose to supplement the regulatory, technical and other solutions. In terms
of substance these are traditional security problems but ones which, because
of their growing dimension and intensity, may in specific circumstances also
require the cooperation of defence structures to a certain limited extent.

In general, all the most current forms of security risk and threat are
transnational. As a result, international cooperation, including participation
in the collective security and collective defence system, is an increasingly
indispensable part of preventing and controlling such risks.

A condition for successful prevention, limitation and control of modern-day
security risks and threats is their constant and comprehensive monitoring and
evaluation, which in the defence field must always be followed by timely and
appropriate adaptation of military and non-military mechanisms and
instruments.


-----

**3 NATIONAL** **SECURITY** **AND** **DEFENCE** **POLICY** **OF** **THE REPUBLIC** **OF SLOVENIA**

**3.1 National security policy**

The national security policy is a balanced set of activities and programmes
comprising, in particular, foreign, defence, economic, environmental, social
and cultural policies. The most important goal of national security policy,
deriving from the permanent vital and strategic interests and values of the
Republic of Slovenia, is to ensure the security of the Republic of Slovenia, to
protect and preserve the national identity and to cooperate in the strengthening
of peace, security and stability at the regional and global levels. For the purpose
of achieving this goal Slovenia is actively participating in regional and global
security institutions such as the UN, NATO, the EU and the OSCE.

Slovenia’s foreign policy goals, including consolidation of the country’s
international position and reputation, good and stable relations with its
neighbours, membership of the EU and NATO, membership of the OECD,
active participation in the UN, the OSCE and the WTO, closer cooperation
with the countries of Central Europe in the Central European Initiative, active
participation in the stabilisation of South-East Europe and strengthening
economic cooperation, to an important extent directly determine the national
security policy of the Republic of Slovenia.

As a small country with limited resources, Slovenia must ensure its longterm security primarily through constructive cooperation with its neighbours
and inclusion in the Euro-Atlantic integrations. Slovenia is endeavouring to
establish and strengthen relations with countries in the region and beyond
based on mutual trust and intensive, multifaceted cooperation. The changing
strategic environment and the unpredictability of security risks and threats
mean that national security policy must put in place effective security
mechanisms and instruments for ensuring an adequate level of national and
international security.

In view of these circumstances, the main strategic goals of national security
policy in the future will be:
– to ensure national integrity and prosperity by means of an active role in the
international community and in the globalised world;
– protection and preservation of the national identity;
– to pursue Slovenia’s interests through a system of democratic decisionmaking;
– active participation in the NATO Alliance;
– cooperation in the European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP);
– cooperation in the OSCE and, in particular, in the UN which, as well as
ensuring national security, also makes an important contribution to


-----

protection of human rights, respect for international law, ensuring
international economic and social development, protection of natural
resources and reducing class divisions in society;
– preventing and tackling crises, mutual assistance in the event of natural
and other disasters, and carrying out joint international humanitarian and
relief activities.

**3.2 Defence policy**

As part of the national security policy, the defence policy of the Republic of
Slovenia comprises plans, programmes and activities enabling the defence of
the state using the country’s own defence capabilities and in cooperation with
Allies.

With membership of NATO and the EU, the security and defence of Slovenia
are no longer just national issues but become an integral part of European
and international security and defence. The security and defence of the
Republic of Slovenia are thus also ensured in the wider international arena.

The active presence of Slovenian military capabilities in international peace
support operations is therefore becoming an important element of our foreign
policy. This approach requires the defence system to be transformed into a
modern, responsive and internationally interoperable system.

Slovenian defence policy today is determined by three factors:
– the multinational integration and cooperation of the SAF in Euro-Atlantic
security integrations;
– the increased scale of participation in international operations;
– defence planning in line with available defence resources.

**_3.2.1 Multinational integration and cooperation_**

_3.2.1.1 United Nations_

In the 21[st] century the United Nations will continue to have an important role
and importance in preserving international peace and security. UN-led peace
support operations are taking on a new image as the UN is increasingly
becoming involved in conflict prevention operations comprising both political
and military activities.

In April 2003 Slovenia signed a Memorandum of Cooperation with the
Multinational United Nations Stand-by Forces High Readiness Brigade
(SHIRBRIG), to which it has committed a detachment of military police and
appointed one officer as a non-permanent member of the command.


-----

_3.2.1.2 NATO_

At the Prague summit Slovenia was invited to begin negotiations leading to
its accession to the North Atlantic Treaty. During its accession negotiations
the Republic of Slovenia formally confirmed its readiness and capability to
assume the political and military obligations and commitments arising from
the North Atlantic Treaty, the Study on NATO Enlargement and the entire
political and legal acquis of NATO, including the policy of NATO and of
third countries.

Slovenia will ensure sufficient budgetary resources for implementing its
membership obligations in the Alliance. Slovenia will make a contribution to
the joint civil and military budget and to the NATO Security Investments
Programme based on the proposed criteria, according to which Slovenia’s
share is 0.26% and 0.3018% (for activities in which France does not
participate).

Slovenia recognises and accepts the fact that the Alliance acts on the basis of
common positions and the principle of unanimity, and will endeavour to
achieve unanimity within the Alliance.

Separately from the accession discussions that dealt with the formal obligations
of full membership, Slovenia also took account of the Allies’ advice and drew
up a timetable for implementation of defence reforms. This comprises tasks
which will enable Slovenia to make a suitable contribution to the Alliance
and in connection with which NATO expects Slovenia to make further progress
before it joins the Alliance. Slovenia joined NATO on 29 March 2004.

Membership of NATO has further accelerated certain areas of defence reform
and created numerous additional responsibilities and obligations connected
with the implementation of collective defence and cooperation with the Allies.

We have adopted the relevant legislation for cooperation in collective defence,
which provides an appropriate statutory basis for participation by Slovenian
forces abroad and also enables Allied forces to enter Slovenia. With full
membership of NATO Slovenia will introduce defence planning that is
comparable with NATO defence planning. Slovenia is also introducing
corporate planning, an improved system of defence resource management
and planning, and an annual review of the success of the implementation of
its plans. As part of this process, a two-year national budget has already been
brought in.

For the requirements of NATO’s military capabilities, as expressed in Force
Goals, Slovenia will provide a motorised infantry company with rotation
capability for cooperation in all NATO tasks, with limitations relating to air
defence and communications. By the end of 2006 we will be capable of


-----

providing a motorised infantry battalion. By the end of 2009 we will be able
to provide a fully deployable and supported battalion combat group, and by
the end of 2012 a fully deployable and supported battalion combat group
with rotation capability. In agreement with the Alliance, Slovenia will also
develop other capabilities: NBC defence, Host Nation Support, military police,
communications and information and systems support.

As far as guaranteeing airspace sovereignty is concerned, the initial operability
of the operations centre has been upgraded by full membership of NATO, so
that we will be ready to carry out urgent measures to ensure interoperability
of airspace control with NATO’s integrated air defence system (NATINEADS).
We will also upgrade the communications system for voice and data transfer.
A Host Nation Support system for Allied forces will put in place. Military
education and training will be brought into line with NATO strategy, doctrines,
procedures and standards – reaction force units are already being drilled in
accordance with these principles. To meet the need for alignment with the
Alliance, we will be training units of the main defence forces in accordance
with the common doctrine and procedures of NATO by the end of 2005, and
the other units of the SAF by the end of 2007. By the end of 2003 arrangements
were in place for personnel to have the appropriate language skills for carrying
out routine work on NATO-related matters.

Slovenia will maintain defence spending at a level which will ensure continued
implementation of defence reforms and restructuring and modernisation of
the armed forces, and enable an appropriate level of investment in the
modernisation of equipment and infrastructure. This will strengthen
interoperability, combat effectiveness and deployability and sustainability of
units. We will continue to work towards establishing and retaining a personnel
structure comparable with the structure in the Allied nations. Any surpluses
in the armed forces will be tackled by means of retirement, retraining and
transfer to positions in other governmental agencies. We will preserve and
improve the transparency of the human resource management system and
ensure a career path for officers and civilians comparable with the Allied
nations. Taking into account the new systemic legislation, priority will be
given to improving the system of assessment and monitoring of individuals,
and the training system will be adapted to incorporate a clearly defined career
path.

_3.2.1.3 EU and ESDP_

Slovenia’s inclusion in the ESDP is one of its major foreign and security
policy goals. Slovenia favours a further strengthening of the security and
defence policy of the EU because the EU can have an important influence on
stability on the European continent and throughout the world. With a
strengthening of its defence element, the EU will become a reliable


-----

transatlantic partner as European security and defence policy and NATO
should complement one another.

Slovenia attributes particular importance to the strategic partnership and
cooperation between the EU and NATO. Slovenia is endeavouring to ensure
its strategic security interests through cooperation in the European Security
and Defence Policy, which is becoming an increasingly important tool of
crisis management, including military operations in which NATO as a whole
is not taking part.

As far as membership of the EU and NATO is concerned, Slovenia does not
intend to duplicate costs, capabilities or defence planning. In the near future,
Slovenia’s contribution to the joint military capabilities of the EU will remain
the same as its contribution to NATO, but it will increase in terms of quality
in line with the progress of the professionalisation of the SAF and the
implementation of defence reforms. Slovenia is also cooperating in the
formulation of a European Security Strategy (ESS), by means of which the
EU will be able more effectively to implement its foreign and security policy.

_3.2.1.4 OSCE_

In 2005 Slovenia will hold the presidency of the OSCE. This will enhance its
profile in the Euro-Atlantic integrations and confirm its readiness to accept a
greater responsibility for strengthening security and cooperation in the OSCE’s
area of activity as well as in the wider international community. During its
presidency, the Republic of Slovenia will follow the guidelines and
commitments laid down in existing documents, in particular the European
Security Charter, and the concepts of comprehensive and cooperative security.
The goal will be to secure more flexible and effective operation of the OSCE.

For Slovenia the forthcoming presidency of the OSCE represents a major
substantive and organisational challenge, but at the same time an opportunity
for promoting and pursuing the security and political interests of the Republic
of Slovenia within the multilateral framework of the OSCE. With accession
to the EU and NATO, Slovenia recognises the importance of those countries
in South-East Europe, Central Asia and the Caucasus, which are not included
in other European integration processes but which are important for European
security and stability, being included in the deliberation of security issues on
an equal basis.

_3.2.1.5 Regional cooperation_

The regional strategic environment of the Republic of Slovenia comprises
South-East Europe, which includes the western Balkans. For more than a
decade international, regional and national organisations have been intensively
involved in attempts to stabilise this region.


-----

By playing an active role and supporting the democratic processes in SouthEast Europe, Slovenia is seeking to establish itself as a credible partner in the
international community. Ensuring a presence in the region, particularly in
South-East Europe, and making a contribution to peace and stability will be
key long-term elements in relation to the security of the Republic of Slovenia
and the operations of the SAF.

Regional cooperation and cooperation with neighbouring countries is one of
the priorities of Slovenian foreign policy and of international cooperation by
the MoD. The aim is to strengthen peace, security and stability and to
consolidate trust between the countries of Central and South-East Europe.

Multinational Land Force

Within the framework of the Quadrilateral (Slovenia, Italy, Hungary and
Croatia), the MoD and the SAF are participating in the activities of the
Multinational Land Force (MLF). Slovenia’s aim is for the MLF to operate
under NATO as a brigade within the high readiness forces. The MLF command
was first deployed on peacekeeping operations in November 2003. As part of
the Joint Guardian (KFOR) operation in Kosovo, the MLF command operates
within the Italian-German contingent of the Multinational Brigade SouthWest.

CENCOOP

The Central European Nations’ Cooperation in Peace Support (CENCOOP)
initiative was created to meet the challenges facing the international
community in connection with preserving and maintaining peace, security
and stability. At the 5[th] ministerial meeting, Ministers adopted guidelines on
the main areas of cooperation in CENCOOP, which envisage the formation
of a unit from the CENCOOP member states to be deployed on peacekeeping
operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

SEDM

In 1997 Slovenia joined the South-eastern Europe Defence Ministerial, an
initiative to promote cooperation between defence ministries. The aim of
defence cooperation between these countries is to strengthen peace, security
and stability and to consolidate trust between the countries of South-East
Europe. This cooperation is proceeding in the spirit of the Partnership for
Peace programme and is promoting the inclusion of the countries of SouthEast Europe in Euro-Atlantic integrations.


-----

Slovenia is active in the coordinating committee (SEDM-CC) and is also an
observer on the Political-Military Steering Committee (PMSC). The PMSC
heads the military cooperation within the initiative (MPFSEE). Slovenia is
also actively participating in the South-Eastern European Simulation Network
(SEESIM). Slovenia initiated the setting up of a working group on cooperation
between defence ministries in the areas of WMD counter proliferation, border
security and counter terrorism. Since 2002 Slovenia has also had observer
status in the Satellite Interconnection of Military Hospitals (SIMIHO) project.

Stability Pact for South-East Europe and RACVIAC

The Regional Arms Control Verification and Implementation Assistance
Centre (RACVIAC) operates on the basis of an agreement on the founding of
RACVIAC between Germany and Croatia within the framework of the Stability
Pact for South-East Europe. The headquarters of RACVIAC is in Croatia.
The aim of RACVIAC is to promote effective implementation of weapons
control agreements in the countries of South-East Europe and to reinforce
trust and cooperation in the region. RACVIAC also carries out training in the
implementation and verification of weapons control. Slovenia is actively
cooperating in the work of RACVIAC and in September 2003 handed over
the one-year presidency to Turkey.

_3.2.1.6 Other forms of cooperation_

The MoD acts as a coordinator between various governmental agencies. The
amendments to Protocols II and IV of the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May be
Deemed to be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects (CCW)
have been ratified. Procedures for the ratification of the Open Skies Treaty
will continue. The Ministry of Defence will also submit an initiative for
Slovenia’s accession to the adapted Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE)
Treaty.

March 2003 saw completion of the destruction of anti-personnel mines in the
SAF in accordance with the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their
Destruction (the Ottawa Convention), which has applied to Slovenia since
1998.

**_3.2.2 Participation in international operations_**

It is in Slovenia’s political and security interests to have a secure and stable
immediate and wider security environment because this is the only effective
guarantee of a high level of national security. This basic starting point dictates
the need for an active role for the SAF in strengthening international peace,


-----

security and stability and in participating in crisis response operations,
including peace support and humanitarian operations. The primary focus of
these operations will continue to be oriented towards South-East Europe. And
as a responsible member of the international community, Slovenia will also
be prepared to take action in other crisis areas. A total of approximately 200
members of the SAF are currently involved in the NATO SFOR peace support
operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the NATO KFOR international force
in Kosovo, in the UN Office of the High Representative (OHR) in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in the UN UNTSO mission on the Israeli-Lebanon border and
in the peacekeeping operation ISAF 4 in Afghanistan.

**_3.2.3 Defence planning_**

_3.2.3.1 Defence planning as part of defence policy_

The national defence policy is determined by national security threats and
national security interests. Defence planning transforms defence policy into
a defence concept and defines the scale and structure of the defence forces.

Defence planning represents an important tool of the state in forming the
necessary capabilities of the defence system and defence forces, and in the
development of the national defence infrastructure. Defence planning is an
integral part of the planning process with the aid of which the government
can oversee and coordinate the planning, maintenance and rational use of
defence resources for the development of the national defence system.

The process of defence planning begins with the setting of security goals at
the national level. National security goals also represent guidelines for the
formation of a defence system that will enable the formation and establishment
of defence forces capable of achieving the goals. The process needs to have
several feedback or control channels.

_3.2.3.2 Current defence planning situation_

In the MoD there are elements of defence planning that are not yet entirely
linked in an integrated system. In addition, there is as yet no clear definition
of who is responsible for the individual parts of the defence planning process.
Medium-term planning is also being put in place as a basis for preparation of
personnel plans, training plans and planning for development, equipping and
procurement of military equipment. Coherence between the defence budget
and the long-term and medium-term goals of the defence system also remains
inadequate. However, significant progress has been made recently in the area
of control, especially internal and external auditing.


-----

**_3.2.4 Defence resources_**

A substantial reduction has been made in the wartime strength of the SAF
from 76,000 in 1999 to around 39,000 members in 2002. The transition to a
professional army with contractual reserves will enable a further reduction in
the size of the wartime strength of the SAF to about 18,000 members when
Slovenia joins NATO.

At the end of 2003 the SAF had 24,500 members, of which the professional
army numbered 6,376 members, and 1,183 people were employed in the defence
part of the MoD. In 2003 a total of 981 new employees were recruited into the
SAF and 186 employees left.

In line with plans, the number of professional soldiers in the SAF is increasing
and certain units are being supplemented by members of the contractual
reserve. This means that the SAF is becoming an important employer in the
labour market.

The transition to a professional army also includes a process of so-called
functional professionalisation, implying appropriate ways of thinking, planning
and operating.

Within the SAF there are marked personnel disparities in terms of education,
rank and age resulting primarily from the rapid development since Slovenia
gained independence. Personnel disparities in terms of education are also
evident in the administrative section of the MoD. A comprehensive personnel
and career development plan and a concept for recruitment and manning in
the SAF with career and contractual members have yet to be formulated. Staff
retention in the military service is an area that still needs to be developed.
The system of exercising, training and education in the SAF has not yet been
fully harmonised with the change in the recruitment method and the changed
force structure of the SAF. Functional training and education have also been
neglected in the administrative section of the MoD. So far there have been no
serious problems in ensuring a sufficient number of quality new staff for the
SAF.

The rapidly changing strategic environment, even in the smaller countries,
means that ensuring an appropriate level of security and setting up an effective
defence system is fast changing from a labour-intensive to a capital-intensive
activity. This shift results from more expensive manpower, more expensive
weapons and equipment, increasing international commitments and, in the
case of Slovenia, also certain problems and shortcomings from the past.
Establishing adequate defence capabilities therefore also requires substantial
funds in Slovenia.


-----

In the last two years we have managed to halt the decline in the proportion of
GDP allocated to defence requirements, turn the trend around and secure a
satisfactory financial framework sufficient to continue a serious and
comprehensive reform of the defence system. Thus the share of GDP allocated
to defence requirements has risen gradually from 1.21% in 2000 to 1.39% in
2001, 1.49% in 2002 and 1.52% in 2003.

Given the limited nature of the funding, it is highly important that funds be
used rationally. This aspect can be improved primarily through better functional
organisation of the administrative section of the MoD and the SAF, elimination
of unnecessary activities and systems, standardisation of procedures and
investment in improving the quality of personnel. The advantages of EuroAtlantic integration and cooperation will also need to be fully exploited, in
particular within joint planning, joint operational use of weapons systems
and joint training.


-----

**4 STRATEGIC** **VISION** **TO 2015**

The strategic vision for the development of the defence system is to form and
provide trained, motivated, combat-ready and interoperable armed forces
which, using modern doctrine and technology, will be capable of carrying
out tasks determined at the national and international level. At home and
abroad the SAF must be recognised as being a trustworthy and innovative
force which, under leadership that is change-oriented, clearly led and based
on knowledge, experience and positive tradition, will pursue clear strategic
goals.

**4.1 Strategic environment of the Republic of Slovenia**

The forthcoming period will be characterised by a reduction in conventional
military threats, with warning times being greatly increased. However, for
certain sources of threat, such as international terrorism, the warning time
will be far shorter, or entirely absent. The military threat will decline, although
there will be a number of major military powers with high-technology weapons
at their disposal. Armed conflict within the wider region may occur, but in a
limited form. The likelihood of military conflict between the major powers
having an impact on Slovenia is minimal.

There is a small possibility of renewed conflict in the region, particularly in
the case of enduring political instability or poor security conditions. In this
case Slovenia may be confronted with a problem of refugees and violence
spilling over from areas of conflict.

The international community will continue to be confronted with risks and
threats associated with the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
long-range systems (which may find their way into the hands of global or
national terrorist groups), but the impact on Slovenia is likely to be very small.
Other circumstances which may influence national security will be economic
pressures, unbalanced economic, social and environmental development
worldwide, technological development, threats to the information and
communications infrastructure, terrorism, organised crime, unbalanced
demographic development, migration, and natural and other disasters.

Because of the many mutually linked and interdependent processes of
globalisation, the European security environment is constantly changing. The
security risks that might emanate from this are primarily of an international
dimension. Therefore Slovenia too requires a responsive defence system that
will adapt appropriately to changes in the strategic environment. Depending
on the trends in this strategic environment, the capabilities and available
resources, the SAF must be capable of adapting its scale and structure to
these changes and of fulfilling the country’s international commitments.


-----

Military defence of the state as we understand it today will in the future go
beyond the traditional concept of defence activities within national borders.
Defence activities are increasingly incorporating military crisis management
operations which will help preserve international security and peace regardless
of international borders. The inclusion of new activities within the SAF’s
mission and tasks requires an appropriate organisation and flexibility on the
part of the SAF.

**4.2 Security policy of the Republic of Slovenia**

Slovenia is joining the common fight against terrorism, in which it will support
the relevant resolutions of the UN and the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe. It will engage actively in international counter terrorism
conventions. The Slovenian government will adopt EU and NATO measures
in the fight against terrorism. In addition, the MoD will participate in the
relevant counter terrorism activities taking place in the country.

As far as weapons of mass destruction are concerned, Slovenia will actively
participate in activities and initiatives aimed at preventing WMD proliferation
at the regional and global level. It will ally itself to the policy of WMD control
and non-proliferation and support the universality of international multilateral
disarmament agreements. Slovenia abides by international agreements in
connection with the ban on production and proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and will therefore consistently monitor transfers of all types of
weapons across Slovenian territory.

It will formulate and implement a national policy in connection with WMD
that will support NATO and EU policy. As a member of NATO, Slovenia will
actively participate in the Mediterranean Dialogue.

As far as the western Balkans are concerned, Slovenia will contribute its
share to strengthening security in this region within the relevant policies of
the UN, the EU, NATO, the OSCE and other organisations. It will develop
bilateral and multilateral relations in all areas with countries in the region.
With the aim of increasing stability and security, Slovenia will make available
to the countries of the western Balkans the experience and knowledge it has
gained in different areas from the processes involved in acceding to NATO
and the EU, as well as other knowledge concerning the administration of
modern states. It will be particularly active in 2005 when it holds the
presidency of the OSCE.


-----

**4.3 Defence policy of the Republic of Slovenia**

**_4.3.1 Defence planning_**

The MoD will put in place a comprehensive system of defence planning by
the end of 2005. The defence planning concept and the new defence planning
handbook in the MoD will be prepared by the end of 2004. These procedures
will also take account of the experience and recommendations from defence
planning in NATO and from defence capability planning in the EU.

The new system of defence planning will encompass the formation of
guidelines by the Minister which will include guidelines for the preparation
of the long-term strategic plan, the medium-term defence programme,
decisions on major purchases of military equipment and the basis for budget
planning.

For the purpose of ensuring more transparent planning, we will elaborate and
expand the programme structure which will cover not only SAF functions.
We will put in place improved criteria and methods for measuring results
attained in the implementation of the budget, ensure the further development
of the analytical and evaluation function in the MoD and formalise the defence
resource management processes.

On the basis of the new concept and the defence planning handbook in the
MoD, by the end of 2005 we will harmonise the major procurements,
equipment and modernisation plans, infrastructure plans, personnel plans and
R&D projects with the long-term plans and medium-term defence
programmes. By the end of 2005 the MoD will also set up a system of business
planning which will link the strategic goals and tasks with the financial
(budgetary) and human resources. In order to further rationalise resource
application we will set up a comprehensive control system by the end of 2006
which will have suitable computer support and will enable control of financial,
human and material resources. For realistic planning on the basis of the results
achieved, by the end of 2006 we will develop a system for evaluating results
and set up a comprehensive system for reporting on deviations from the plan
and progress made towards the achievement of goals.

The comprehensive three-phase defence planning system (planning-analytical
phase, programming phase, and the phase of drawing up the defence budget
and business plan) will link the long-term strategic planning, medium-term
programming and preparation of the defence budget and business plan. The
planning system will be based on the recognised PPBS method (Planning,
Programming and Budgeting System) and on the Business Planning System.


-----

**_4.3.2 Defence resources and key capabilities_**

Personnel

In the future the manning system in the SAF will continue to be based on a
professional army, contractual military service in the reserve forces and
voluntary military service.

In 2008 the SAF will have around 15,000 members, of which the professional
force will number around 8,000 members, while around 1,100 people will be
employed in the defence part of the Ministry of Defence. In the period 2010
to 2015 the level of employment in the defence system will not increase; new
recruitment will be oriented towards increasing the quality of personnel. It is
estimated that in 2015 the SAF will have up to 14,000 members, of which the
professional force will number at least 8,500 members while around 1,000
people will be employed in the defence part of the Ministry of Defence (Table

|1).|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|Col11|Col12|Col13|Col14|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||2003|2004|2005|2006|2007|2008|2009|2010|2011|2012|2013|2014|2015|
|MOD - defence|1,183|1,219|1,207|1,195|1,183|1,172|1,160|1,149|1,138|1,126|1,115|1,104|1,094|
|MOD - protection and disaster relief|391|402|399|399|399|399|399|399|399|399|399|399|399|
|Total MOD|1,574|1,621|1,606|1,594|1,582|1,571|1,559|1,548|1,537|1,525|1,514|1,503|1,493|
|SAF - professional|6,376|6,950|7,350|7,550|7,750|8,000|8,250|8,500|8,500|8,500|8,500|8,500|8,500|
|SAF - contract reserve|434|800|1,500|2,200|3,000|3,800|4,650|5,500|5,500|5,500|5,500|5,500|5,500|
|SAF - compulsory reserve|17,690|10,250|7,150|6,250|5,250|3,200|2,100|||||||
|Total SAF|24,500|18,000|16,000|16,000|16,000|15,000|15,000|14,000|14,000|14,000|14,000|14,000|14,000|
|Total MOD and SAF|26,074|19,621|17,606|17,594|17,582|16,571|16,559|15,548|15,537|15,525|15,514|15,503|15,493|



Table 1 : Personnel projection to 2015

Eliminating the personnel disparities in terms of education, rank and age that
have accumulated over ten years in the development of the defence system is
one of the priority tasks in the coming years. This situation will be dealt with
by 2010. In 2004 a comprehensive personnel and career development plan
and a basic concept for enlistment and manning in the SAF with career and
contractual members will be drawn up. Particular attention will also be devoted
to changes and adjustments to the system of exercising, training and education
in the SAF, which has to be brought into line with the change in the manning
method and the changed forces structure of the SAF. In the administrative
section of the MoD a more appropriate awareness also needs to be developed
of the need for continuing education and training and a more rational use of
available human resources. In the period 2004-2006 we will redirect attention
towards personnel retention in the military service and the issue of personnel
leaving the military service, and pay particular attention to the question of
professionalisation. In the period 2006-2015 it will become increasingly
difficult to secure a sufficient number of appropriate quality personnel for
work in the armed forces.


-----

Finance

Slovenia’s defence spending is projected to rise as a share of GDP from 1.52%
in 2003 to 2% in 2008. Until 2015 defence spending is then planned to remain
at 2% of GDP.

Achieving the anticipated growth in spending on defence requirements as a
percentage of GDP and maintaining the level after 2008 is key to enabling all
the reform and development projects to be carried out with the necessary and
planned scope and dynamics. If the agreed and planned funds are not actually
made available it will not be possible to carry out the planned changes in the
defence system.

The target structure of defence spending is made up of spending on personnel
(approx. 50%), operations and maintenance (approx. 30%) and procurement,
construction and development (approx. 20%). Financing of unplanned
operations will require additional funds to be secured.

After 2007, when the law regulating the securing of funds for basic
development programmes expires, all the required funds will be secured
through the regular defence budget. The structure of the defence budget and
the system of planning and implementing the defence budget will need to be
adapted in line with the new programming structure. Graph 1 shows Slovenian
defence expenditure as a proportion of GDP from 1992 to 2015.

Graph 1: Slovenian defence expenditure as a proportion of GDP
from 1992 to 2015


-----

For the purpose of carrying out the tasks involved in the implementation of
the mission of the defence system the defence resources are combined into
capabilities. Five key operational capabilities will be developed for carrying
out tasks in the defence system:
– Command and control includes the ability to collect, analyse and exchange
information, planning and coordination of operations and to ensure the
capabilities necessary for directing forces towards fulfilment of allocated
tasks. The tasks are to ensure a system of command, communication and
intelligence and to provide information.
– Conduct of operations includes the capacity to use the military capabilities
necessary for fulfilment of allocated tasks. The tasks are control of the
national territory, airspace and sea, search and rescue, providing
humanitarian assistance at home and abroad, evacuation of Slovenian
citizens, providing support to other governmental agencies, participation
in peace support operations, national defence and participation in collective
defence.
– Operational support includes the capability to repair and maintain
equipment, accommodation, ensuring the operation of personnel and
providing the infrastructure and capabilities necessary to support military
operations. The tasks are personnel support, maintenance of equipment
and weapons, operations support and installation and maintenance of
infrastructure.
– Force development comprises the ability to acquire and train personnel,
carry out research, test and procure military equipment and weapons and to
form the force structure necessary for ensuring multipurpose combat-capable
military forces. The tasks are the provision of personnel, equipment and
weapons, the formulation of doctrine and force structure, the implementation
of mobilisation and the conduct of defence research.
– Implementation of policy and strategy comprises the ability to formulate
and implement defence policy and strategy for achieving wider national
goals, manage the activities of the ministry and secure appropriate defence
advice. The tasks are to provide defence advice for the executive and
legislative authorities, development of defence policy and planning,
implementation of international agreements in the defence field,
management of the defence system, formation of the defence culture,
provision of public information and promoting and developing Slovenian
values in the defence field.

As far as the planning of capabilities is concerned the following aspects need
to be taken into consideration:
– they must be within the framework of available budgetary resources and
formed in accordance with set priorities;
– they must be based on achieving interoperability with NATO Allies in terms
of both equipment and technology as well as doctrine, tactics and
communications;


-----

– they must be based on modern technology capable of operating together
with Allies and which will be combat capable over the long term;
– they must be multipurpose, capable of operating in a wide range of potential
conflicts, in peacetime and wartime, and units must be capable of carrying
out multiple tasks;
– they must be combat capable, with sufficient firepower, sufficient selfprotection and sufficient survivability;
– they must be capable of rapid deployment, with sufficient mobility and
flexibility and suitable access to operational and strategic transport;
– they must have an optimal relationship between the combat part and support,
with appropriate reserves for personnel rotation and appropriate stocks of
consumable stores.

By 2015 the capabilities of the SAF will be based on the ability to form two
combined tactical defence units and the ability to set up a mobilisation base
for formation of an appropriate number of tactical defence units.

By the end of 2012 the SAF must be capable of forming a battalion combat
group with a high level of readiness for operational use and able to be deployed
in international operations with a permanent rotation capability.


-----

**5 SLOVENIAN ARMED FORCES**

**5.1 Purpose of the SAF**

The purpose of the defence system, including the SAF as part of it, is to deter
an attack on the state and to defend the independence, inviolability and integrity
of the state and its national interests. This purpose is being realised partly
through the Slovenia’s inclusion and active cooperation in international
security integrations based on international treaties.

From the purpose of the SAF we can derive its missions as follows:
– prevention of all forms of aggression and responding appropriately in the
event of aggression;
– contributing militarily to international peace and stability;
– assisting other governmental agencies and public institutions in ensuring
the security and well-being of Slovenia’s citizens.

**5.2 Tasks of the SAF**

The missions of the SAF are the basis for its main tasks which are further
divided into derived tasks:
– Prevention of any aggression and adequate response in case it should occur:

-  National military defence operations: monitoring, control and protection
of land, sea and air space and defence of national territory.

-  Participation in international organisations’ operations: collective
defence (Article 5 of the Washington Treaty), fight against international
terrorism and other threats to peace.
– Military contribution to international peace, security and stability:

-  Defence diplomacy: bilateral and multilateral co-operation.

-  Building security and trust, supervision of armaments and prevention
of the spread of weapons of mass destruction: armaments supervision
and disarmament, inspection of other nations’ military units at their
location, verification activities.

-  Crisis response operations: preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention
and peacekeeping, peace enforcement, peace building, humanitarian
assistance in the frame of bilateral and multilateral co-operation,
assistance to government organisations and non-governmental
organisations in providing humanitarian assistance, and struggle against
international terrorism and other threats to peace.
– Support to other state agencies and organisations and to the protection and
rescue system in ensuring the safety and prosperity of the citizens of
Slovenia.

-  Participation in protection, rescue and relief tasks in natural and other
disasters: participation in protection of the property and citizens in
natural and other disasters, participation in the relief of the consequences


-----

of natural and other disasters, participation in extinguishing large-scale
fires, participation in the relief of the consequences of NBC
contamination, and participation in the evacuation and rescue operations
for the civilian population in natural and other disasters.

-  Co-operation with the police force in exercising the tasks in their field
of work: participation in the protection of the national border,
participation in the management of large and illegal migration flows
and participation in the prevention and combating of terrorism.

-  Search and rescue operations on land, sea and air.

-  Support to scientific research and technology development activities in
the defence area: participation in the planning, organisation and
management of national defence research and technologies, and support
to projects of relevant industries.

-  Evacuation of Slovenian citizens abroad in peace-time as well as in
crises and war-time.

The missions and tasks of the SAF determine their size and capabilities.

**5.3 Scale and structure of the SAF**

Slovenia will have an army whose scale and structure will enable it to carry
out its tasks. The system of military education and training, together with the
activities of units and commands in the structures of the Alliance, must ensure
understanding and the capability for inclusion in inter-service operations. Force
Command will be trained for operational planning at the combined level and,
as the operational command of the SAF, will be connected to the operational
commands of the Alliance.

The SAF will continue to be organised as a unified army not divided into
services. In view of the space and the need for coordinated planning of forces
and operations in the Alliance, the SAF will take account of the division of
forces within the Alliance for conducting land, air and sea tasks.

In cooperation with allies, the SAF will develop the necessary capabilities
for the implementation of the whole range of military ground force tasks.
The conduct of ground force operations requires forces that are deployable,
mobile, adequately protected, provided with fire support, well equipped and
well trained. For these purposes, the SAF will be composed of balanced and
structured units that will be able to conduct combined tactical combat
operations at the brigade level.

The SAF structure will provide for the autonomous deployment or employment
of two tactical groups at two different locations without the need for combat
support or combat service support from a higher level. The combined tactical
unit at the brigade level will be capable of conducting all ground force


-----

operations as part of a higher level unit and of receiving fire support from
allies. It will also be capable of employing combat multipliers of the command
and control (C2) system with added elements. The C2 system will be capable
of integration into the sophisticated allied systems thus providing for
information supremacy by combining sensors and war theatre systems as well
as supporting the commanders’ process of decision-making. The possibility
of integrating computer assisted training and operations at the brigade or higher
level of command will also be ensured.

The SAF structure will provide for the maintenance of the out-of-area tactical
group in rotation, for which a minimum of three battalions is required. In
addition, the SAF will make available for Alliance requirements the Nuclear
Biological and Chemical (NBC) battalion and other minor capabilities to be
deployed in an agreed time frame. Combat service support units will be
established and equipped for combat manoeuvre and will be adequately
protected for the evacuation of specific elements of the tactical group. Higher
level combat materiel maintenance will be provided in particular by combat
service support units. All other ground force units will also be manned by
means of the reserve structure and will be organised in a modular manner.
They will be trained to the same standards in flank protection, movement, the
protection of key facilities, host nation support for allied units, recovery of
losses and the reinforcement of units in combat operations. In addition, to
free up the capabilities of the manoeuvre forces, these units will be the main
support component for the civil emergency planning system or the component
which cooperates with other governmental and public administration agencies.

In cooperation with allies, the SAF will provide the necessary capabilities for
effective operation in the air space. In view of the possible threats from the
air, the force structure will ensure the necessary conditions for the rapid
implementation of decisions made at the political-military level, regardless
of the implementation modalities. The system elements will be compatible
and will therefore directly support the gradual integration into the integrated
air defence system of the Alliance. An airbase will be provided with suitable
host nation support for Alliance requirements and will conduct the air traffic
control of the Republic of Slovenia. Tactical vertical manoeuvre, as well as
tactical group combat support and combat service support will be provided
on Slovenian territory. The capability of the tactical vertical manoeuvre will
permit the tactical movement of an infantry company in one sortie.

In cooperation with allies, the SAF will develop the necessary capabilities
for operations on and under the sea. The SAF will provide for the defence and
protection of territorial waters. The SAF will also ensure safe access and
protection of the maritime waterways and the port of Koper. Together with
the Alliance, these capabilities will form a coordination point for defensive
activities to protect maritime supply lines and a maritime entry acceptance


-----

point for allied forces in transit or operating on Slovenian territory. The defence
of Slovenian territorial waters will also be conducted by means of multipurpose
ground combat systems with special emphasis on the rationalisation and
uniformity of combat systems. When required in peacetime, these forces will
cooperate with other governmental agencies with specific resources.

The SAF organisation will be divided into combat units, combat support units,
combat service support units and C2 support units.

By 2015 the organisational structure of the SAF will allow for the possible
modular formation of forces for carrying out tasks with the maximum possible
rationalisation of the command structure. The organisation of forces will
primarily take account of the principles of military expertise, efficiency and
cost-effectiveness.

**5.4 Key challenges**

Reorganisation of the SAF, integration into the Alliance and the
professionalisation of the SAF will require a great deal of effort and a high
degree of expertise. The challenges that the SAF will need to overcome will
to a very large degree be connected with ensuring there are sufficient suitable
personnel for the implementation of its tasks. The challenges in the personnel
field will relate to the skill levels and the psychophysical abilities of people
wishing to become professional soldiers, junior officers and officers, as well
as continuing education and individual and collective training. The military
expertise part of this training, which requires field conditions including combat
use of weapons, is another question which the SAF cannot resolve by itself.
The SAF will give priority to seeking resolutions to these challenges within
the Alliance.

Given the size and structure of the SAF, one of the major tasks will be offering
career paths to specialists and ensuring an appropriate number of highly trained
individuals in extremely specialised areas of activity. A related issue is the
organisation and implementation of highly specialised study programmes and
the organisation of training programmes at home and abroad.

The changed and expanded tasks of the SAF will require professional,
motivated individuals and units. Ensuring and maintaining motivation will
be a demanding task. This applies in particular to the question of the
relationship between material and other forms of motivation.

The size and structure of the future SAF will have to be such as to provide for
the implementation of all the required tasks. This also applies to tasks
connected with research, development, the military education system
(including training) and activities within alliances. The SAF will need to have
a relatively large number of highly trained personnel.


-----

The SAF will face challenges relating to development in areas in which as yet
it has not reached the level required by the Alliance in terms of either skills or
technologies. This applies in particular to areas representing systems
multipliers (use of modern technology in the entire area with emphasis on the
command and control system, the military intelligence system, air defence as
a whole and logistics). Force mobility and the capability for self-sufficient
operation outside national territory will be a demanding task.

**5.5 Development assumptions**

The scale of operations is important as far as development of capabilities is
concerned. Taking into account the size of the SAF and their planned key
capabilities and the forces for participation in international operations, the
scale of SAF contribution to operations could be as follows:
– small-scale with a platoon level unit;
– medium-scale with a company level unit;
– large-scale with a battalion tactical group;
– very large-scale with all the forces which Slovenia will have at its disposal
to prevent threats within the framework of national defence, or all the forces
which will be available for defence of the Alliance.

Concurrent operation and length of operations are important factors in planning
the force scale and structure. The capabilities will enable participation in:
– two simultaneous medium-scale operations for an extended period (one
year or more) or
–simultaneously in one large-scale operation for a limited period (6 months)
and in one medium-scale peacekeeping operation for an extended period or
– in one large-scale operation with rotation capability for an extended period.

**5.6 Key development principles and development of SAF capabilities**

Operational capabilities are the means to achieve the operational structure
and fulfil the various missions and tasks of the armed forces. Therefore we
must aim to improve those operational capabilities which support the main
tasks of the SAF. These capabilities must meet the needs for national and
collective defence and cooperation in other crisis response operations. The
key operational capabilities are the basis for planning the force organisation
and structure in the SAF necessary for fulfilling the mission and tasks. The
key operational capabilities are units equipped and trained to carry out
dedicated tasks in a specific time period set out in the medium-term defence
programme or systems which enable such an operational status to be achieved
(including the education and training system). These are:
_Deployability is the capability to deploy forces from peacetime location to_
an area of operations.
_Mobility is the capability to transfer commands and units within the bounds_
of an area of operations.


-----

_Sustainability of forces is the maintenance of the required level of combat_
power for as long as necessary to achieve the goal.
_Availability of forces is the capacity and readiness of forces to carry out_
tasks under certain conditions in a specific time frame and with the necessary
resources being secured.
_Survivability and protection of forces will be ensured with the development_
of an early warning system, with sufficient active and passive protection of
people, equipment and infrastructure, with mobility and with effective air
defence.
_Combat effectiveness will be ensured through modernisation of combat_
and non-combat systems and use of new technologies which will be
introduced in line with adopted priorities. Capability for effective
engagement in the battlefield will continue to be maintained in the future.
Weapon effectiveness will be improved with the procurement of new, modern
basic weapons and higher capacity and more precise portable and selfpropelled systems for combat and combat support.
An efficient system of command and control and communications enables
adequate planning and use of forces, is compatible with Allies, has a high
degree of survivability, high speed and capability of operation and is
appropriately structured and organised.
_Effective intelligence support is based on an organisation which will act in_
accordance with contemporary doctrine, satisfy national requirements and
ensure a national contribution to the Alliance.
_Interoperability and compatibility will be ensured by the introduction of_
NATO standards in the area of organisation, work methods and compatibility
of equipment.

**5.7 Long-term SAF capabilities 2015**

In the long term, the SAF will have capabilities allowing it to effectively
perform all tasks of national and collective defence within the Alliance. The
capabilities will correspond to Slovenia’s potential and be harmonised within
the Alliance. The operational development of capabilities will be aligned with
the Alliance and presented cyclically (every two years) in the mid-term defence
programme.

To provide an appropriate C2 organisation and structure, the command
capabilities will be organised in commands at strategic (General Staff),
operational (division) and tactical (brigade) levels. In addition, the SAF will
develop capabilities to work within the commands and bodies of the Alliance,
corresponding in size to an extended brigade command.

Development, education and training capabilities of the SAF will be provided
by the Doctrine, Development, Education and Training Centre (DDETC).


-----

The SAF will have up to 14,000 personnel, of which a minimum of 8,500 will
be professionals. The C2 organisation and structure will be adapted to the
manning and equipment and, in particular, to the actual required operational
readiness. The SAF will develop three classic motorised battalions and one
light mountain battalion. These units will be the core of the SAF for missions
within national borders, as well as in Alliance operations.

Combat support and partial combat service support to these battalions will
be provided through capabilities of designated SAF battalions: the artillery
battalion, the engineer battalion, the air-defence battalion, the NBC battalion
and the military police battalion.

Combat service support capabilities for the entire SAF will be organised in a
regiment-level logistics centre, and also in the mobile logistics battalion,
military medical unit, the air-base, Military Territorial Commands (MTCs)
and the helicopter battalion of the SAF. Sea capabilities will be provided
through the SAF maritime unit. Other capabilities for support of operations at
sea will be integrated in the above mentioned combat support units or combat
service support units.

Command support capabilities will be provided through the capabilities of a
communications battalion, air-space control battalion, and intelligence and
reconnaissance battalion. These capabilities will be in direct operational
contact with comparable capabilities in the Alliance.
Figure 1 shows the SAF capabilities in 2015.

Figure 1: SAF capabilities in 2015.


-----

**5.8 Capabilities and envisaged structure of the SAF in 2010**

By 2010 the SAF will develop most of the capabilities planned for the period
until 2015. They will be organised under the leadership of the General Staff
of the SAF within the Force Command. The DDETC will be directly
subordinate to the General Staff. The General Staff, Force Command and the
DDETC will have appropriate support units for their own operations.

Schools and other institutions will be set up within the DDETC to carry out
all types of military education and training, from basic training to general
staff and specialist training, for soldiers, junior officers, officers and military
officials and civilians employed in the SAF. In addition, the DDETC will
also incorporate a Basic Training Centre, a Combat Training Centre and a
SAF Sports Unit. Training of branches and specialisations will generally be
carried out in the training units of the branches, located as a rule with the
branch units of the SAF.

The following units will be subordinated to the Force Command: autonomous
intelligence and reconnaissance units, autonomous units for air traffic and
control of air space, communications and information technology units with
corresponding linkages to the Alliance. All these units will be of battalion
level.

The logistics centre will combine the capabilities of a non-deployable heavy
logistics SAF battalion, MTCs and units, the military medical service and the
air base.

Medical care will be carried out by the SAF medical unit. In addition to
employment medicine and the medical care of SAF personnel, the medical
service will provide for the professional development and functioning of
medical and veterinary care, in particular ROLE 1 in battalions and ROLE 2
for the whole SAF structure.

The SAF air base will serve as the national military airport for SAF needs
and, if so decided, for the Alliance. Airport services and capabilities will be
provided to enable the airport to operate in all weather conditions.

MTCs will perform the following tasks: territorial control, partial protection
of vital infrastructure, territorial logistics and the functioning of the majority
of the SAF military infrastructure except for the central training site. In
addition, the MTCs will partly serve as contact points between the SAF and
civil defence components. They will develop concept of building up SAF
capabilities (the third circle) which represent the specific manning structure
that can be included in the wartime structure, in accordance with the law. An
important task of the MTCs will be the comprehensive care of SAF personnel
and their families.


-----

**5.9 Modernisation of military capabilities**

The key capabilities of the SAF, such as deployability, mobility, sustainability,
timely availability of forces, survivability and protection, combat effectiveness,
an effective system of command and control and communications, effective
intelligence support, and interoperability and compatibility, can be achieved
with rational and comprehensively financed equipping and modernisation
programmes. In the development of the SAF, a balance must be secured
between rushing to embrace the technology of the future and improving
existing technology. Slovenian soldiers must be equipped and trained to fight
with state-of-the art weapons systems. Modernisation programmes are directed
towards upgrading the existing weapons and equipment of the SAF and towards
developing modern technology that will enable the SAF to carry out its tasks
successfully. For this purpose the following programmes will be developed:
– Individual combatant
– Combat manoeuvre
– Fire support
– Air defence
– NBC defence
– Command and control support systems
– Intelligence support and electronic warfare
– Transport
– Logistics
– Combat medical care and medical evacuation
– Training

**5.10 Key development challenges and priorities**

The key challenges for achieving the planned capabilities of the SAF will be
linked to real and timely preparation and implementation of adopted plans.
At the same time we will have to stick very precisely to the priorities and if
the circumstance or available resources change then we must only retain and
develop high-priority capabilities and suspend or even cancel development
of lower-priority capabilities. Accurate monitoring of the realisation of goals
will therefore be required, with corrective decisions taken where necessary,
and at least twice a year. Extraordinary activities will need to be cut back and
unplanned tasks prevented, especially within the agreed medium-term period.
Monitoring the development of priority capabilities must be the most important
task of top military management.

The realisation of planned capabilities will require full use being made of the
Allies’ experience so as to rationalise and shorten the time needed to develop
capabilities. In addition, special attention will need to be paid to group training,
including combat use of weapons systems.


-----

The principle of development of an individual capability must be based on a
“package approach” with which we will also ensure realisation of all indirect
and related capabilities. With the achievement of final operational capability,
for example of an SAF motorised infantry battalion, it will be necessary to
ensure implementation of all the equipment and weapons programmes in the
area of combat systems, individual and collective protection, communications
and information, logistics and so on, as well as non-material capabilities too.
Synchronisation of all the procedures will be a tremendous challenge for the
SAF and the MoD.

The organisational structure of the SAF will need to ensure an adequate C2
structure in specific fields (air operations) so as to guarantee the required
level of operability of the national system and its interoperability and
functioning within the Allied system.

The aforementioned critical areas represent at the same time the biggest
challenges in terms of both organisation and expertise. Training and motivation
remains one of the most important areas.

Sticking to priorities means rationalisation. Priorities will be determined within
planning cycles. Highest priority in the reform plans will be given to tasks
(and units) connected with the following areas:

1. Top priority:
– operations in alliances and collective defence (with particular emphasis
on development of a motorised battalion, a battalion combat group, an
NBC defence battalion and the capability to operate within the Alliance’s
air defence system);
– providing individual and group military education training systems (with
particular emphasis on group combat exercises).
2. High priority:
– providing appropriate logistical and health (including medical) care;
– command support systems;
– maintaining the internal division of resources at a ratio of 50–30–20
(personnel–operations–main equipment, infrastructure and R&D).


-----

**6 CIVIL** **DEFENCE** **AND** **CRISIS** **MANAGEMENT**

**6.1 Purpose**

**_6.1.1 Civil defence_**

In Slovenia we are developing civil defence together with military defence as
part of the defence system. The purpose of civil defence is to provide a rapid,
flexible and effective counter to various forms of threat to national security in
the fields of politics, economics, media information and values in an
emergency, war or crisis.

Slovenia understands the term civil defence to mean the entirety of measures
and activities by governmental agencies, local authorities, commercial
undertakings, institutes, other organisations and citizens which, with nonmilitary means and methods, support and supplement the military defence of
the state, ensure the functioning of authority in time of war and ensure the
supply, protection and survival of the population. Civil defence is intended
not only for operation in a state of emergency or war but also in crisis situations.
With Slovenia joining the EU and NATO the tasks of civil defence will be
expanded (e.g. Host Nation Support for cooperation in crisis relief operations).

**_6.1.2 Crisis management_**

Slovenia has not yet developed a comprehensive crisis management system;
it is relatively well developed in individual subsystems of the national security
system but limited to a large extent either to natural and other disasters, internal
security or to a state of emergency or war. In this sense fairly well elaborated
solutions are contained in the defence plans and the civil protection and disaster
relief plans, which can also be applied in the case of asymmetric threats.

The foundations for the formation of a comprehensive crisis management
system were only laid down with the national security strategy and defence
strategy, and for the area of civil defence also with the civil defence doctrine.
The national security strategy stipulates that Slovenia will connect the elements
of the national security system into an effective crisis management system
which will be capable of operating in the security efforts of our country and
the international community to resolve complex modern crises.

A crisis management handbook will define in detail the purpose, tasks,
responsible bodies and the procedures of crisis management. Certain
regulatory, organisational and other solutions will also need to be
supplemented.


-----

**6.2 Tasks**

The tasks of civil defence are:
– to complement and support the military defence of the state and SAF
participation in peace support operations;
– to preserve the functioning of authority;
– to preserve the functioning of economic and other activities of importance
for defence and people’s vital interests and work;
– to provide information to the public at home and abroad and to encourage
motivation to carry out national defence at the same time as carrying out
psychological defence measures.

Civil defence contributes to the safeguarding of vital and strategic interests
and the goals of Slovenia’s national security policy by planning and carrying
out measures to preserve the continuity of authority, measures to ensure the
functional capability of the Slovenian economy and psychological defence
measures in the event of a war or state of emergency or a crisis situation.
Given that one of the key goals of national security is to preserve peace and
stability, a significant part of the tasks of Slovenia’s civil defence is linked to
the participation of civil defence in international efforts to preserve peace
and stability.

Armed attack will remain the most important starting point for the planning
of civil defence in the future, but in addition to the tasks connected with
membership of the EU and NATO civil defence is also taking on new tasks.
These tasks are expressed in the demand for society as a whole to strengthen
its ability to prevent and manage various crises at all levels which could lead
to an emergency if they were to deteriorate. But this requires greater knowledge
and experience of how to act in such circumstances, which means that
specialists in administration, science, economics and other areas will need to
be included in these activities.

**_6.2.1 Civil defence_**

Civil defence in the Republic of Slovenia, unlike the SAF, civil protection
and the police force, is not comprised of separately organised forces but
involves a range of tasks and activities by governmental agencies and certain
companies and institutions.

The Slovenian government has the central role in the preparation,
administration and management of civil defence. Within the scope of their
competencies the ministries are responsible for the level of preparations and
for the activities of companies and other organisations in a state of emergency
or war and in crisis situations. The six most important government services
and 11 companies and institutions whose activities the government considers


-----

to be of particular importance for defence are also included in the civil defence
preparations (Figure 2). In accordance with the law the National Assembly
may also impose certain tasks on the police during a state of emergency.

Figure 2: Organisation of the civil defence of the Republic of Slovenia

**_6.2.2 Crisis management_**

As it prepares to join international security and defence integrations, Slovenia
is rapidly redirecting its civil defence towards crisis management, in line with
the established practice in the member states of the EU and NATO.

In the event of a crisis, the governmental agencies act in accordance with
their peacetime organisation and competencies. In certain areas crisis
management agencies have already been set up, or their establishment is
envisaged at the first symptoms of a crisis (e.g. in the areas of internal affairs
and military defence). The setting up of such agencies at government level, in
ministries, in the area of psychological defence and possibly also in other
bodies, is also envisaged in the civil defence doctrine.


-----

Figure 3: Organisation of crisis management in the Republic of Slovenia

For the purpose of ensuring that effective action is taken in the event of a
crisis, a National Crisis Management Centre (NCMC) has been set up to
ensure the spatial, organisational, technical and other conditions for the
government to act rapidly and effectively, for the related coordination of work
between the various bodies and organisations participating in crisis
management and for the rapid, reliable and safe flow of information and
support for management at the strategic level.

The role of the National Security Council (NSC), the highest consultative
and coordinating body of the government, in preventing the emergence of
crisis situations and acting effectively in the event that a crisis arises will be
further strengthened. The organisational and other conditions for the work of
the NSC will need to be improved.

**6.3 Planning assumptions**

The organisation of civil defence and crisis management in Slovenia is
influenced by a number of important factors, in particular the level of
development already achieved, membership of NATO and the EU, the
reorganisation of the public sector and local government, the transformation
and professionalisation of the SAF, the changes in the requirements of its
logistics, and changes in the legislation relating to particular commercial and
other activities.


-----

The purpose and tasks in this area will not change, but emphasis will be
given to redirecting the focus of civil defence tasks towards crisis control and
its integration into a comprehensive crisis management system.

The area of crisis management is not systemically or comprehensively
regulated because the regulations in force only lay down tasks relating to a
state of emergency or war. Amendments to the regulations will lay down the
obligation of the bodies responsible for preparing civil defence to set out
crisis management measures in their defence plans. In this process the
solutions will derive partly from the crisis management procedures and
mechanisms and civil crisis planning in force within NATO and the EU. The
concept of a crisis will be limited to phenomena caused, as a rule, by man
and which if they were to spread could lead to a state of emergency.

**6.4 Key development principles**

The national security strategy, the defence strategy and the civil defence
doctrine determine that the civil defence tasks are planned for operation in a
state of emergency, war or crisis. This provides the guidelines for expanding
the tasks and competencies of civil defence to crisis management, which will
need to be laid down operationally in regulations.

The following basic principles will be followed in planning the preparation
and implementation of civil defence and crisis management measures:
– the principle of accountability, which means that the same agency or
organisation is responsible for planning the preparation and implementation
of measures in a state of emergency, war or crisis as in peacetime;
– the principle of equal organisation, which means that an agency or
organisation will in principle be organised in the same way in a state of
emergency, war or crisis as in peacetime;
– the principle of flexibility, which ensures that the system of civil defence
and crisis management will adapt rapidly and operate effectively in all
circumstance regardless of the extent of the situation.

Civil defence cooperation in international operations and in peace support
operations will be developed in line with the following principles:
– the principle of coordination, which means that preparations and the
implementation of these activities must be coordinated between the agencies
responsible for carrying out the tasks;
– the principle of proportionality, which means that the scale of civil defence
engagement must be proportionate to the circumstances, the contingents of
other countries and the capacity of the Republic of Slovenia to offer
assistance;
– the principle of permanence and continuity, which means that preparations


-----

in this area must enable continuous implementation of tasks over an extended
period of time;
– the principle of adaptability, which means that the implementation of
activities must be planned in such a way that they can rapidly be adapted to
changes in circumstances;
– the principle of efficiency, which means that activities must proceed in
such a way that as many planned tasks as possible are carried out at the
lowest possible cost;
– the contract principle, which means that the engagement of civil defence
capabilities in these types of activities, with the exception of governmental
agencies, is carried out as a rule by means of the concluding of appropriate
contracts;
– the principle of interoperability, which means that the preparation and
implementation of tasks in this field must be carried out in such a way that
successful cooperation with the civil defence capabilities of other countries
participating in international peacekeeping activities can be ensured.

The strategic development vision of civil defence and crisis management is
to form a system that will be capable of responding to the challenges of the
future. This period will be characterised by a growing complexity of social
systems and increasing vulnerability and sensitivity. Although the military
threat will decline further, other dangers will increase. These include terrorism,
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, environmental destruction
and the potential for economic or financial disturbances. This will demand
continuous assessment of the strategic environment and enhanced international
cooperation. The emphasis here will be on preventive measures and unified
activities within the international community. The programme to establish
the civil defence doctrine will be implemented by 2010. Civil defence, together
with the SAF, the system of protection against natural and other disasters and
the security system, will be connected in a functional sense to the crisis
management system at the national level, which will not change the functional
operation of these systems.

**6.5 Modernisation**

The achievement of the key development goals is linked to modernisation.
This relates primarily to the area of information technology and administrative
communications, which will need to be technologically modernised, and the
development of appropriate software to facilitate the work and enable faster
decision-making, thereby contributing to improved efficiency.

**6.6 Key development challenges**

The development of civil defence and crisis management may be limited by
the fact that the concepts of crisis and crisis management are not defined in


-----

the constitution or law. Therefore only situations which could lead to a state
of emergency if they were to expand or deteriorate should be defined as a
crisis. The development of an effective crisis management system also requires
a system of comprehensive and ongoing assessment of national security threats
to be put in place as soon as possible and to include the area of military and
asymmetric threats.


-----

**7 INTELLIGENCE** **AND** **SECURITY** **ACTIVITIES**

**7.1 Purpose**

Intelligence, counterintelligence and security tasks in the defence field are
carried out by the Intelligence and Security Service (ISS) of the Ministry of
Defence. Information gathered in carrying out intelligence, counterintelligence
and security tasks provides the basis for analytical and operational
assessments, staff security tasks in the armed forces, production of plans for
the use of the armed forces, implementation of other defence preparations
and for planning defence measures. In these tasks the ISS participates within
its competence with all the other parts of the national security system and, on
the basis of mutual interest, also with foreign military or defence intelligence
and security services. With inclusion in NATO and the EU the ISS will take
on new tasks and responsibilities in the area of intelligence, counterintelligence
and security activities for defence requirements in the system of collective
defence and the common foreign and security policy.

**7.2 Tasks**

Intelligence and counterintelligence tasks comprise gathering, documenting
and analysing information of importance for national defence interests or for
safeguarding such information, and in particular:
– assessing and evaluating the military and political security situation and
military capabilities outside the country which are of particular importance
for national security;
– gathering and evaluating information about conditions in areas where
members of the SAF or representatives of the MoD (civil defence and others)
are operating as part of the fulfilment of obligations assumed in international
organisations or during military service;
– detecting and preventing activities by intelligence services of military
organisations and other agencies and organisations which threaten the
defence interests of the state, the MoD or the SAF.

The security tasks in the defence field are:
– detecting, investigating and preventing threats to the security of certain
individuals, work places, buildings and areas used by the MoD and the
SAF in or outside the country and information on the development or
production of certain military weapons or equipment;
– investigating criminal activity in accordance with the law;
– studying and proposing physical and technical security solutions;
– operational protection of certain individuals, work places, buildings and
areas of particular importance for defence;
– security checks on individuals in accordance with regulations;
– directing the work of the military police in the performance of certain
security tasks.


-----

**7.3 Planning assumptions**

The multi-layered and multi-dimensional security challenges, risks and threats
in the region, in Europe and around the world give rise to many uncertainties
as far as guaranteeing national and international security is concerned. Timely
planning and implementation of measures to preserve and strengthen both
national and international security require an effective system of early detection
and warning of potential risks and threats to be set up. Therefore the
organisational, personnel and material foundations will be put in place for
cooperation and for the exchange of intelligence and security information at
the national level (and institutionalised where necessary) as part of bilateral
cooperation and within the framework of alliances.

**7.4 Key development principles**

Development will be based on the following principles:
– consolidating the irreplaceable role of intelligence and security activities
through timely, professional and high-quality performance of tasks;
– continuous development to ensure flexibility and adaptability to new
requirements and tasks;
– continuing specialist training in intelligence, counterintelligence and security
work as a basis for high-quality performance of tasks;
– use of modern work methods and the latest technologies;
– providing a friendly working environment for employees to encourage
independence, creativity and responsibility.

**7.5 Modernisation**

The modernisation of intelligence and security activities will be directed
towards:
– a permanent focus on improving the processes of intelligence and security
work;
– procurement of modern technical equipment for data gathering, analysis,
evaluation, storage, protection and dissemination as and when required.

The two areas are linked and to a large degree mutually dependent. The
ultimate goal is to maximise digitalisation of the work process and achieve
the highest possible level of security of the work. Ensuring suitable premises
for the requirements of the ISS is an urgent matter. Particular attention will be
paid to selection, training and responsibilities of employees in the intelligence
and security field.

**7.6 Key development challenges**

Joining NATO and the EU, the transition to a professional army with
contractual reserves and the setting up of a national crisis management system


-----

also represent important substantive changes for the intelligence,
counterintelligence and security activities of the defence system. In the new
circumstances their integration into a transparent and effective element of the
defence subsystem within Slovenia’s national security system is a key
challenge.

Intelligence activities for identifying processes which could threaten national
defence interests will become increasingly important, particularly for small
countries with limited resources such as Slovenia. Therefore they must enable
timely and accurate forecasting of the occurrence and development of
phenomena and processes related to security and appropriate measures to be
taken, in particular with the aim of preventing or restricting such phenomena
and processes.


-----

**8 LOGISTICS**

**8.1 Purpose**

The basic purpose of logistics is to ensure the availability (and operation) of
military capabilities (force movement and maintenance). Logistics is an
autonomous, dynamic and open subsystem which is strongly linked to its
environment and to the other subsystems of the defence system.

From the point of view of resources, logistics can be viewed as one of the
foundations of the defence system because efficient management of resources
enables the basic functions and mission of the defence system to be carried
out. And from the point of view of cohesion with the other subsystems of the
defence system, the logistics situation is always also a result of, and a response
to, the state of development (structure, organisation and processes) of the
other subsystems. This means that through strategic planning and
implementation of tasks in logistics we can substantially improve the efficiency
of the overall defence system.

**8.2 Tasks**

The logistics system must ensure comprehensive and effective implementation
of logistical functions:
– management of technical materiel over the whole life cycle (development,
procurement, use, maintenance, write-off and decommissioning);
– supply (food, ammunition, fuel, other materiel) and warehousing;
– maintenance of technical materiel and infrastructure;
– providing general services (administrative support, cleaning, etc.);
– management of movements and transport of units and other military
capabilities;
– ensuring and managing infrastructure capabilities;
– providing health care;
– procurement in the strict sense – carrying out procurement procedures,
concluding contracts and monitoring their fulfilment;
– budget management and implementation of financial functions.

**8.3 Key challenges**

The logistics system operates within the wider security and political
environment (NATO, EU) as well as in the internal environment of the defence
system of the Republic of Slovenia (organisation of processes, development
of the SAF). As Slovenia enters the Euro-Atlantic integrations the structure,
scale and mission of the armed forces are changing, and so too are the decisionmaking processes within the defence planning system.


-----

Logistical solutions need to be formulated in connection with the current
solutions and development orientations of the other subsystems of the defence
system. The challenge for the logistics system is therefore to develop alternative
approaches and strategies for forming (or transforming) the logistics system
with regard to the proposed changes in the other subsystems of the defence
system. Such alternative approaches and strategies will enable intermediate
system models to be set up that will allow logistics to operate in a stable and
efficient manner at a given level of development.

**8.4 Planning assumptions and key development principles**

The starting point for the transformation of the logistics system will be the
defining of a strategy for managing the transformation of the system, but not
the final ideal system model. Two generic approaches (or strategies) are
proposed as alternatives:
– an integrated systemic-procedural approach (Life Cycle Management), the
essence of which is that the defence system adopts the concept and principles
of “life cycle management” and establishes it as the basic concept for the
organisation and operation of the logistics system. The basic goal here is to
form an integrated, effective and user-oriented comprehensive logistical
process;
– a functional-structural approach of “defining and dividing the key logistical
functions”, the basis of which is to divide logistics into so-called production
logistics (acquisition logistics) and consumer logistics (operational logistics)
(NATO Logistics Handbook). In this case the defence system decides on
the division of the logistics system into a production logistics (acquisition
logistics) subsystem and a consumer logistics (operational logistics)
subsystem.

A possible alternative and a transitional strategy could be a combined approach
based on a traditional division of the logistics system into a production logistics
subsystem and a consumer logistics subsystem.


-----

**9 COMMUNICATIONS** **AND INFORMATION SYSTEM**

**9.1 Purpose**

The Communications and Information System of the MoD ensures
communications and information services on a priority basis to two large
user groups – the administrative section of the MoD and the SAF. It ensures
the operational functioning of information services and sufficient
communications capacities at the same level of service in peacetime, a state
of emergency or war, although substantial changes in the intensity of activities
will occur in a state of emergency or war. Increasingly apparent is the need
for protection of the Communications and Information System against the
active operation of various factors which, with integration into the NATO
system, are becoming much more important. For the Communications and
Information System to meet these requirements it must, at the planning stage
already, be designed so as to be safe, strong and reliable, with high availability,
expandability and upgradeability, standardised and interoperable. The
management of the system must be logically centralised and multi-layered
but physically distributed.

To an appropriate extent the Communications and Information System of the
MoD is connected to the subsystem for the requirements of civil protection
and disaster relief for which the Civil Protection and Disaster Relief
Administration of the Republic of Slovenia is responsible.

**9.2 Tasks**

The Communications and Information System of the MoD and the SAF must
provide information services for all the key defence and military functions,
and in particular NATO-comparable information support for planning and
implementation of military operations. One of the key information subsystems
for planning and implementation of military operations is the C3I subsystem.

**9.3 Key development challenges and goals**

The administrative section of the MoD and the SAF have different development
dynamics, range of information service requirements and methods of using
them. In order for the planning, introduction, use and maintenance of
communications and information services and the associated infrastructure
to be congruent and cost effective the principles of interoperability at the
national defence system level must be taken into account when key decisions
are made, including interoperability with international integrations, not just
at the level of an individual office, sector, constituent body or command.
Although care is taken to treat the key communications and information
services in a balanced manner, in places there are noticeable differences
between the administrative section of the MoD and the SAF in as much as the


-----

first group of users has a wide range of applied solutions at its disposal and
weak mobility, while the SAF already has mobility among certain key groups
of users, but with a severely limited range of NATO-comparable applied
solutions.

The key challenges are:
– introducing new technologies, especially web technologies;
– testing of the information environment to achieve internal and external
interoperability;
– formulating an internal set of standards which define the technological
framework;
– management of data sources and information subsystems;
– protection of data sources and information subsystems;
– use of commercially attainable applied solutions;
– use of open-code solutions.

Despite the mass of regulatory documents and recommendations, management
of information projects is still unconnected, administratively demanding and
also labour intensive because of the low level of automation.

NATO is moving towards the procurement and use of technical systems that
are available on the open market because such equipment is easier and cheaper
to upgrade and has a longer operational use. Therefore communications and
information systems for NATO are one of the typical and priority areas. This
equipment requires better basic training on the part of our own personnel as
well as broader and longer-term cooperation with commercial organisations
providing supplementary know-how and services.

The MoD has at its disposal some of the key know-how in this field and some
experience of long-term cooperation with commercial organisations, and it
wishes to continue this practice on a larger scale. The know-how and
experience that the MoD has gathered during this time is partly comparable
with that of NATO members because the equipment and know-how are
available in the marketplace. However, we lack experience of intensive and
reliable use of such equipment in war conditions. In order for our defence
system to strengthen contact with technologically advanced and
organisationally efficient defence systems it makes sense for the MoD to
establish permanent and intensive cooperation with the relevant NATO
committees and commissions operating in the area of communications and
information systems. The MoD should cooperate with NATO in the area of
communications and information systems on a priority and permanent basis
and this can later serve as a reference model for cooperation with NATO in
other areas too.


-----

Information support to SAF operations comprises the development of
management, command and control systems, i.e. a communications and
information system which combines a connected set of information and
communications capabilities, associated processes and the personnel who
manage and provide information on request to combatants, commanders and
support staff. The system increases the combat capability of units by
substantially increasing awareness of the battlefield situation, shortening the
required decision-making time and improving use of available capabilities.

The requirements in terms of substantive, time-related, procedural and
functional coordination of data generated or required by individual groups of
communications and information services and applications in the defence
systems are so great that they can only rationally be provided with powerful
communications and information technology. As a rule these capabilities are
redundant, but they are concentrated only in pairs of locations which are
extremely well protected and maintained. Although smaller and relatively
autonomous communications and information subsystems would ensure
greater strength in the overall system, the coordination and replication of data
between such subsystems would require such a lot of time that near real time
processing would be impossible.

Users such as military units are mobile users needing a highly diverse range
of communications and information services and applications. Together with
other users of these communications and information services they provide
the input data. A major advantage of this type of organisation is that units
share data and so in a very short time can set up a high level of interoperability,
while commanders have an overall view of the battlefield and the possibility
to react in near real time. Even the smallest military units need communications
and information services which for their operation use high performance
communications and information technology. If these units were to attempt
to achieve self-sufficiency, the quantity and price of this information equipment
would grow beyond all reasonable bounds, and coordination between
communications and information services would become an almost unsolvable
problem. Because even the smallest units need excellent communications and
information support, a rational solution is to centralise the communications
and information equipment for applied processing, which is generally
stationary, and to have a high level of distributiveness, mobility and redundancy
of communications capacities for access to these services.

A functional C3I subsystem is required with all the associated communications
(in particular the mobile component), information and organisational
infrastructure meeting all the key requirements of the SAF for national defence
as well as the NATO criteria of interoperability for cooperation in the system
of collective defence and in peacekeeping operations. The system must enable


-----

multiple redundant use of civil communications capacities (including
international and satellite capacities), but which for the subsystem managers
are transparent and enable dynamic and flexible allocation of capacities and
information services to individual groups of users depending on their current
requirements or tasks.

The subsystem must enable a transition to a situation where it becomes the
main management and control system of all the key communications capacities
in the national defence system. The communications subsystems thus included
in the national defence system are technologically hybrid but compatible with
NATO and international standards. The C3I subsystem is still only partly
intended for provision of information services for SAF requirements; the
remaining part serves the integration and management of communications
subsystems which in peacetime generally operate independently within
ministries, government services, large companies and so on.


-----

**10 HUMAN** **RESOURCE** **MANAGEMENT**

**10.1 Purpose**

The basic goal of human resource management is to ensure the development
and implementation of individual career development, raise the level of
specialist education and training and ensure employee loyalty and
responsibility to the national security system and, in particular, the defence
system.

**10.2 Scale and structure of human resources**

As at 31 December 2003 a total of 7,950 people were employed in the MoD,
of which 6,376 (80%) were in the SAF, 324 (4%) in the Civil Protection and
Disaster Relief Administration of the Republic of Slovenia, 67 (1%) in the
Inspectorate of the Republic of Slovenia for Protection Against Natural and
Other Disasters, and 1,183 (15%) in the organisational units of the ministry.

The active component of the SAF, numbering 6,376 employees, comprises
1,557 (24.4%) officers, 2,074 (32.5%) junior officers, 1,968 (30.9%)
professional soldiers and 777 (13.2%) civilian personnel.

In accordance with the Slovenian government decision, the Ministry of
Defence (not including the SAF) has a permitted quota of 1,621 employees in
2004 and 1,606 in 2005. In the SAF the number of employees will increase to
6,950 in 2004 and to 7,350 in 2005. This means an increase of almost 600 in
the number of employees in the SAF in 2004 and a further 400 in 2005. The
growth in the number of employees in the SAF is part of the implementation
of the project to professionalise the army.

The ratio of officers, junior officers and soldiers in the SAF is inappropriate,
and there are also personnel disparities in terms of education, age and rank.
There are too few soldiers and too many officers compared to the wartime
strength target structure. The inappropriate ratio of the numbers of officers,
junior officers and soldiers results from the reduction in the size of the reserve
force of the SAF in recent years and the ending of the conscript system. The
target ratio can be achieved by 2010 on the basis of the following measures:
– seeking suitable positions for employees through the internal labour market
in the bodies of the national administration;
– amendments to the Defence Act;
– appropriate personnel policy in the area of employment;
– measures determined in accordance with the strategy for the further
development of the Slovenian public sector.

For the purpose of finding possibilities for the transfer of employees from the
MoD, a special working group was set up with the Ministry of the Interior


-----

which is intensively studying the possibility of staff transfers from the MoD
to the police. Discussions are also in progress to find other solutions involving
cooperation and staff transfers between agencies.

The MoD has 1,592 employees who do not have the appropriate level of
education, of whom 1,247 are in the SAF. Of the total of 1,592, some 334
have signed contracts with the ministry for obtaining the appropriate level.
According to unofficial figures, a further 150 people are also taking courses
to obtain the required level of education but have not signed education contracts
with the ministry. For a certain number of employees the regulations allow
the lack of appropriate education level to be overlooked (e.g. 289 military
personnel pursuant to the 1995 Defence Act).

A planned personnel policy has been in place since 2002 which envisages
employment only of soldiers and students with grants who we are obliged to
take on at the end of a period of study in accordance with their contracts. In
this way we achieved a change in the overall structure in the period between
31 December 2002 and 31 October 2003, with the share of soldiers rising by
6.5% and the share of officers falling by 4.5%.

**10.3 Human resource development**

The development vision in the area of human resources is to create a
comprehensive, modern, integrated, transparent, successful and effective
system which will be strategically designed in line with human resource and
human capital management and will enable the right people to be allocated to
the right jobs at the right time.

**10.4 Establishing a modern personnel function**

The main advantages of the existing personnel function of the MoD are the
system and procedural stability of the individual sub-functions, enabling the
personnel function to be effectively upgraded and further developed.

The main weaknesses in the ministry’s existing personnel function lie in an
excessive administrative orientation and an inadequate professional,
developmental, research, scientific, coordinating and, above all, strategic
orientation. The personnel function itself is oriented strictly towards narrow
staffing but there is no systematic and comprehensive personnel development.

The personnel function must gradually be transformed into part of the human
resource and human capital management process. The basic principles
underlying this process are intensive reorganisation and restructuring of
personnel.


-----

The danger is that the modernisation of the personnel function will be too
slow, which would increase the inefficiency and lack of transparency in the
staffing system. And this could have long-term consequences, particularly in
terms of a negative impact on staff motivation.

The existing, traditional organisation of the personnel function will be
transformed by the end of 2004. A system of strategic planning for human
resource management will be established and a personnel policy defined which
will enable a transparent personnel development model to be comprehensively
established. The focus will be on ensuring and setting out clear guidelines
and methodological and (substantive) expert solutions for all organisational
units of the MoD and the constituent bodies within the ministry. Priority will
be given to establishing a professional army and rationalising the functioning
of the system as a whole.

Effective strategic personnel planning will require a combining of the
operational and tactical levels of the personnel function which are carried out
in individual segments. In this context personnel activities need to be
homogenised and integrated between the Organisation and Personnel Office,
the Defence Policy Office and the SAF.

**10.5 Overall development of human resources and human capital**

Within the human resource management model, a system of individual career
development will be introduced in the MoD by the end of 2004 in accordance
with the needs and capacities of the system on the one hand and the need for
substantive and methodological know-how and experience on the other. As a
link between the actual capacities and needs of the system, the individual
will influence career development on the basis of annual appraisal interviews
and evaluations.

By the end of 2004 the following measures will be undertaken for all
organisational units in the MoD and the constituent bodies within the ministry:
– a system of performance evaluation and individual career planning will be
introduced for all employees in the MoD and the constituent bodies within
the ministry;
– a project will be elaborated for development of senior personnel and
management staff in the area of defence and crisis management;
– a system of annual appraisal interviews, systematic encouragement of
innovation, an evaluation system using the 360ş method, e-education,
individual annual work plans, education, promotion and the concept of a
“learning system” will all be introduced;
– the rewards and motivation system will be improved with the development
of standardised criteria for all employees, and mechanisms to measure
productivity will be introduced;


-----

– the key concepts of the CAF excellence model and the IP personnel standard
will be introduced in the area of personnel development;
– comprehensive upgrading of the competencies of all employees (knowhow, skills, experience, abilities, value, loyalty, responsibility, satisfaction,
responsiveness to change and so on) with regard to the current and envisaged
needs of the ministry;
– methodological orientations and tools will be prepared to support the
personnel development efforts of the organisational units of the MoD and
the constituent bodies within the ministry;
– management and measurement of the organisational culture of all the
organisational units of the MoD and the constituent bodies within the
ministry will be introduced.


-----

**11 ORGANISATIONAL** **STRUCTURE** **OF** **THE MOD**

**11.1 Characteristics**

The current organisational structure of the administrative section of the MoD
is based on three directorates and a Secretariat of the Secretary General:

1. Secretariat of the Secretary General with the following organisational
units:
– Organisation and Personnel Office
– Legal Office
– General Affairs Office
– Publications Office
2. Defence Policy Directorate with the following organisational units:
– Defence Planning Sector
– International Cooperation Sector
– NATO/EU Central Register
3. Defence Affairs Directorate with the following organisational units:
– Civil Defence Sector
– Military Affairs Sector
– Information and Communications Sector
– National Crisis Management Centre
– Defence Administrations
4. Logistics Directorate with the following organisational units:
– Equipment Sector
– Public Procurement Service
– Standardisation and Codification Service
– Finance Sector
– Accounts Sector
– Property Management Service

Directly subordinate to the Minister of Defence are:
– Intelligence and Security Service
– Internal Auditing Service
– Minister’s Office

Pursuant to the Defence Act and the State Administration Act the following
operate as constituent bodies within the ministry:
– General Staff of the SAF
– Defence Inspectorate of the Republic of Slovenia
– Administration of the Republic of Slovenia for Civil Protection and
Disaster Relief, and branch offices
– Inspectorate of the Republic of Slovenia for Protection Against Natural
and Other Disasters, and branch offices.


-----

Regulations introduced in 2003 relating to the public sector require the relevant
bodies to prepare new acts on internal organisation and job classification,
which in substance involve merely a harmonisation with the provisions of the
new legislation. Under the new acts the main processes in the ministry are
carried out within directorates which have replaced the existing offices. New
offices will not be set up in the ministry during the transitional period. There
is a possibility of them being introduced in the next phase of reorganisation
after 2004. An analysis of processes and requirements will determine the
new organisational structure of the ministry and its constituent bodies. The
success of the new organisational solutions will depend primarily on the
division of work between the constituent bodies, the administrative section
of the MoD and the SAF. The analysis will also influence decisions in
connection with the changed competencies relating to the implementation of
integration tasks now arising in an identical form, decentralised or repeatedly,
at different organisational levels and in different organisational units of the
ministry.

**11.2 Future**

Depending on how appropriate the organisational structure is, it can be used
to accelerate or hinder the implementation of strategic and operational goals.
The organisational structure must ensure optimum organisation of activities,
the shortest possible hierarchical management scale, mission fulfilment,
appropriate control and education and training for future tasks. A characteristic
feature of modern organisational structures is that they are becoming less and
less permanent (and increasingly flexible), and operating in unaltered form
for relatively short periods of time. Changes in the organisational structure
therefore enable faster and more effective adjustment to new requirements
and new environments.

The transformation of the security environment and Slovenia’s joining of
international security-defence and economic integrations also dictate the need
for changes in the organisational structure of the MoD and the SAF. The key
reasons are:
– a reduction in the military threat and the consequent abandonment of the
concept of total defence;
– a reduction in the number of agencies involved and hence in the scale of
defence preparations;
– a reduction in the size of the wartime strength of the SAF;
– changes to the manning method in the SAF;
– inclusion in NATO and the EU;
– intensification of the process of introducing information technology in the
defence field.


-----

Intensive changes in the scale and structure of the SAF and its missions and
tasks consequently require a change in the organisational structure of the
MoD. This is still almost identical to the basic organisational structure of the
MoD in the 1990s, which is becoming increasingly less effective and
increasingly oriented towards serving its own purposes. Thus the basic goal
underlying the changing of the MoD’s organisational structure is to increase
the efficiency and cost effectiveness of its activities.

The scale and design of the existing organisation and classification of positions
within the MoD need to be gradually adapted, particularly because with
Slovenia joining the EU and NATO in 2004 there are still too many unknowns
in terms of the required future organisation of the MoD. Solutions from abroad
cannot simply be transferred into our system, some of whose individual
solutions are in themselves quite unique. A gradual process of reorganisation
means a sequence of changes in the organisational structure of the MoD and
the SAF in accordance with predetermined priorities, with priority given to
processes, or implementers of processes and sub-processes, which ensure
the implementation of key tasks or which require minimum intervention in
the existing structure while achieving substantial and immediate effects.

Gradually by 2015 the MoD needs to put in place the optimum organisational
structure which will derive from its mission and be based on functions and
(business) processes defined in detail. This process must take account of the
availability of human and financial resources, which in all likelihood also
means combining certain individual functions, especially business functions.

The Republic of Slovenia is planning to establish an integrated structure of
defence administration which will be rational, transparent, comparable to other
NATO member countries and suitable to the size of SAF. This defence goal
is divided into further tasks:
– to complete the reform of the defence administration and integration of all
administrative tasks, professional tasks and business functions in MoD and
SAF by 2008;
– to establish integrated civil-military structures in the fields of intelligence
and security, communications and information, protocol and public relations
by 2006.

**11.3 Administrative territorial organisation**

For the purpose of carrying out defence-related administrative and specialist
tasks in certain urban and geographically linked regions the MoD has set up
defence administrations which, until recently, carried out tasks related to the
defence system and the system of protection against natural and other disasters,
and headed administrative procedures connected with the exercise of the rights
and duties of citizens concerning the implementation of military, work and
material duties and duties in connection with civil protection and disaster relief.
A total of 13 defence administrations and 58 defence branches were set up.


-----

In early 2002 phase 1 of the transformation of the administrative territorial
organisation of the MoD was carried out, the purpose of which was to
strengthen the area of civil protection and disaster relief within the unified
departments at the level of the defence administration, to reduce the role of
the defence branch with the transfer of certain areas of work to the defence
administration level and to reduce the number of jobs, particularly in the
technical and administrative fields.

In 2002 the activities to transform the administrative territorial organisation
of the MoD continued with the following essential conditions having been
met: firstly, with organisational, technical and personnel preparations having
been carried out the conditions were in place for removing the area of civil
protection and disaster relief from the responsibility of the defence
administrations and making it directly subordinate at the regional level to the
Administration of the Republic of Slovenia for Civil Protection and Disaster
Relief; and secondly, the introduction of the defence and protection duties
information system enabled processing of data in records of military, work
and material duty and civil protection and disaster relief duties regardless of
location. The reorganisation, which came into force on 1 January 2003,
included a reduction in the number of defence administrations from 13 to 8
and in the number of defence branches from 58 to 24. Before the reorganisation
the defence administrations had a total of 396 employees, compared with 308
on 30 November 2003. A substantial rationalisation of staff numbers has
therefore taken place, along with a reduction in the funds, premises and other
material and technical means required for the work of the defence
administrations.

With the change to the manning system in the SAF and the gradual
abandonment of individual elements of military duty in peacetime, as well as
the impending membership of NATO, appropriate organisational and personnel
measures also had to be taken in the defence administrations in order to adapt
to the new circumstances. Previously the main task of the defence
administrations in the area of civil defence was to direct and coordinate the
work with the bodies responsible for defence planning. However, when
Slovenia joins NATO the emphasis will be on carrying out Host Nation Support
tasks. In the area of information technology and communications a
reorganisation of administrative communications is underway which, through
technological modernisation and a clear definition of requirements in the area
of administrative communications in the transitional period, will enable tasks
to be carried out on a more rational basis. An important part of the development
of e-administration is the introduction of electronic operations, which will
enable public access to the web environment (internet) and improved
performance of a wider range of services with a smaller number of
organisational units.


-----

The main changes in the work of the defence administrations took place in
the area of military affairs. In accordance with the newly adopted regulations
their tasks are oriented primarily towards cooperation in SAF recruitment
procedures. They have begun identifying candidates for contractual military
service in the reserve force of the SAF and for voluntary military service.
Until further notice they will also carry out tasks connected with the
compulsory reserve, with the reduction in the wartime strength of the SAF
and management of administrative procedures related to defence duties.

The new tasks require permanent monitoring of the implementation and
ongoing adaptation of the organisational structure and staff occupancy in the
defence administrations. Taking into account the age and education structure
of the employees in the defence administrations we will devote particular
attention to lowering the average age and improving the education structure
of employees and to their continuing training for carrying out specific tasks.


-----

**12 CONCLUSIONS**

1. The Republic of Slovenia is setting up a responsive national security
system, and within it a defence system, which will be able to adapt
effectively to frequent and intensive changes in the strategic environment,
ensure an appropriate level of national security and contribute to reducing
the possibility of crises occurring.

2. Progress is evident in the professionalisation of the SAF and the
rationalisation of the command structure. The long-term force structure
has been determined and a number of important steps have been taken
towards achieving the target structure. The tasks of the SAF are clear,
and they need to be implemented. The other part of the defence system,
under the responsibility of the MoD, will ensure full support to the SAF
in achieving the final capabilities of units and commands.

3. Civil emergency planning and crisis management will be comprehensively
regulated and the key elements of this system will be established and
connected at the national level.

4. We will thoroughly analyse the processes and functions in the defence
system and set up an organisational structure of the MoD modelled on
modern defence systems which will enable a rationalisation and
optimisation of the implementation of processes and functions.

5. We will formalise defence planning, which will link the goals and tasks
with defence resources.

6. We will rationalise the personnel structure and put in place an effective
career system. We will gradually resolve the problem of excess staff and
insufficiently qualified employees.

7. We will develop a comprehensive system of military education and training,
including appropriate changes in the area of training SAF units for
integration into higher Allied formations. Decisions will be made on
partnership with Allies for higher-level exercises.

8. We will improve the training of civilian personnel, particularly with a
view to acquiring the appropriate expertise and capabilities in the area of
command and control.

9. Modernisation and equipment programmes and research and technological
development programmes will be fully in line with the long-term plan
and the medium-term development programme of the defence system.


-----

10. Over the long term there will be improvements in the organisational and
other solutions in the security system and the system of protection against
natural and other disasters insofar as they link to and supplement the
defence system.


-----

