-----

REPUBLIKA SLOVENIJA
**MINISTRSTVO ZA OBRAMBO**

# ANNUAL REPORT of the Ministry of Defence for 2011
## (for general / external public)

Ljubljana, 2012

Number: 0100-152/2011-44
Date: 13 August 2012


-----

ISSN 1617-6958

Editor and Publisher: Republic of Slovenia

Ministry of Defence

Technical Realisation: Strategic Communication Service

Multimedia Production and Support

Section


-----

### TABLE OF CONTENTS

**Introduction..........................................................................................5**
1 Minister Address......................................................................5

2 Introduction.............................................................................9
**Military Defence.................................................................................11**
1 Scope and Structure of the SAF............................................11

2 SAF Military Training and Exercises......................................12

3 Development and Building of SAF Capabilities......................16

4 Maintaining the Level of Readiness.......................................18

5 Key Projects of SAF Modernisation.......................................19

6 SAF Operation in Support of the System of Protection

Against Natural and Other Disasters......................................21

7 SAF Contribution to International Peace, Security

and Stability............................................................................24
**Protection Against Natural and Other Disasters............................31**
1 Prevention Activities...............................................................31

2 Preparedness of the System of Protection Against Natural

and Other Disasters, and Protection, Rescue and

Relief Forces..........................................................................33

3 Disaster Response and Damage Assessment.......................44

4 Education and Training..........................................................46

5 International Cooperation.......................................................57

6 Inspection in the Area of Protection Against Natural and

Other Disasters......................................................................60
**Defence System and Crisis Management.......................................62**
1 Defence Policy.......................................................................62

2 Slovenia's Crisis Preparations and Response Measures.......73

3 Development of Civilian Capabilities......................................76

4 Intelligence and Security Operations.....................................79

5 Equipping, Real Estate Management, Standardisation and
Codification............................................................................80

6 Communications And Information System (CIS)....................85


-----

7 Inspections in the Area of Defence and Investigations of

Aircraft Accidents and Military Aircraft Incidents....................87

8 Strategic Communication.......................................................89

9 Normative Acts.......................................................................91
**Research and Technological Projects.............................................96**
1 Research And Technological Projects....................................96
**Implementation of Resource Plans.................................................99**
1 Financial Plan Implementation...............................................99

2 Personnel Plan Implementation...........................................106

3 Implementation of the Plan for the Acquisition of Physical

Assets..................................................................................113

4 Implementation of the Revenue and Expenditure Plan for the

Sale of State Property..........................................................117

5 Implementation of the Education, Training and Advanced

Training Plan........................................................................119

6 Implementation Of The Research And Development

(R&D) Plan...........................................................................121


-----

_Aleš Hojs, Minister of Defence_

### INTRODUCTION

#### 1 Minister Address

This Annual Report of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) refers to the year 2011
when I have not yet started my term in office my office at the MoD. I may
stress that, despite a decrease in financial resources, progress has been
made both in the area of defence and the area of protection against natural
and other disasters.

The financial crisis and the consequent reduction in investments resulted in
significantly reduced equipping of the Slovenian Armed Forces (SAF) with
the main equipment. Attention was primarily devoted to the completion of
open projects. Several capabilities were introduced into operational use, of
which I would like to mention the Motorised Company of the 74th Motorised
Battalion, the Mobile Analytical Laboratory with a Biological, Chemical and
Radiological Laboratory, the Helicopter Medical Evacuation Capability, the
Special Operations Forces Task Unit, the Multinational Centre of Excellence
for Mountain Warfare, and the Communications and Information Systems
(CIS).


-----

SAF operation in international operations and missions (IOM) was conducted
harmoniously and without any major deviations. In the planning of the SAF's
operation in IOM and in the preparation and deployment of contingents,
realistic SAF capabilities were taken into account, along with the Alliance
agreed requirements and lessons learned from participation in previous IOM.
The tasks planned were carried out in full, which means that the SAF has met
the required obligations. It participates in the Allied operations agreed upon
together with the Allies. Moreover, the SAF also withdraws from operations
in agreement and together with the Allies. The SAF participated in NATO, EU
and UN operations with the average annual contribution of 442 members.
The number of SAF members in IOM will decrease, but the decline will not
be significant as long as approximately 300 SAF members remain present
in Kosovo.

Within NATO, participation of Slovenian military and civilian capabilities
focused on the Western Balkans, as stability in this region remains in the
strategic interest of the Republic of Slovenia. Constant presence of SAF
members in KFOR was assured and completed with SAF's participation in
Kosovo's defence reforms. The SAF played an active role in the area of civilmilitary cooperation, which is an important element in the building of trust with
the local population. This was also evident in the operation in Afghanistan in
which the SAF enhanced its role in the stabilisation and reconstruction of the
country.

The year 2011 was marked by a number of international events which
influenced the wider environment and the integrations that include the
Republic of Slovenia. The main NATO topics were the operation in Libya,
the progress of transition in Afghanistan and NATO’s role in the country after
2014, NATO’s reforms, and multinational capability development.

Over 1,400 SAF members participated in 26 international exercises and
training courses abroad. Thirteen planned exercises and training courses
were conducted in Slovenia, aimed at maintaining the level of readiness and
the building of capabilities. Among the participants, there were over 1,500
SAF members and over 100 members of other Allied forces. Of particular
importance was the training of the 72nd Brigade Artillery Battalion, as it was
the first long-range live-fire training with artillery weapons.

In the context of protection against natural and other disasters, proper
functioning of protection, rescue and relief (PRR) forces was ensured. With


-----

relation to the organisation, the focus was on adapting the organisation
of various emergency services and units to the actual needs. Emphasis
was also placed on the operational part of the system, based on voluntary
rescue services and other groups organised by societies and other nongovernmental organisations (NGOs).

The main event in the context of protection against natural and other
disasters in 2011 was the 4th Protection and Rescue Days in Koper that
were visited by over 15,000 people. Presentations included different PRR
forces whose competence was tested in several exercises, one of which was
the national exercise Morje (Sea) 2011, the aim of which was to test solutions
from the emergency response plans in the event of major disasters at sea.
A multi-day international exercise IPA SI – QUAKE 2011 was conducted,
the basis of which was the assumption that, in the event of a catastrophic
earthquake in central Slovenia, the Government of the Republic of Slovenia
(the Government) requests international assistance for the search and
rescue of victims from debris. Exercise preparations were carried out by an
international group of experts in cooperation with the European Commission.
The exercise was funded by the EU. Its importance also stems from the
number of units and support groups involved, as it was the most extensive
international exercise conducted in the independent Slovenia.

Despite the reduction in funds, the Training Centre for Civil Protection and
Disaster Relief of the Republic of Slovenia and its training units in Pekre,
Logatec and Sežana carried out various forms of education and training
as well as other activities for 28,683 members of PRR forces. An important
addition to the education of fire-fighters was the Centre’s training unit in
Sežana which was introduced into operational use in September 2011. It
provides for additional 1,800 m2 of training area.

Within budget options, national material reserves were supplemented
by equipment for mass disasters, wildfires, floods, major hailstorms and
infectious diseases.

This and the following year, and perhaps another year later, Slovenia
will need to economise. This, however, should not be based solely on
government officials, but on all who do business with the state. Reserves
will also be found in the reduction of costs within the defence sector. There
will be a reduction in funds for the co-funding of activities of rescue services
and organisations operating within the System of Protection against Natural


-----

and Other Disasters. Consequences of these measures, however, should
not be reflected in the operational functioning in the event of natural and
other disasters. The SAF will need to consider the organisation of military
formations and their relevance for Slovenia’s participation in NATO, and the
changed geostrategic situation in Slovenia’s close and distant neighbourhood.
Moreover, it will need to consider potential development of more specialised
units.

For many years, the operation of the SAF and the System of Protection
against Natural and Other Disasters has ranked highest on the scale of
public confidence. The future should therefore be focused on developing
and upgrading both the area of defence and the area of protection and
rescue in the direction that will further enhance and consolidate the trust and
confidence of Slovenian citizens.

#### Aleš Hojs
  Minister


-----

#### 2 Introduction

The MoD Annual Report informs the public of the tasks performed and
progress made in 2011 in various areas of work, namely the areas of defence
and protection against natural and other disasters. Tasks were performed in
line with the objectives and guidelines defined in the 2011 MoD Business
Plan, and in line with the amendments following the MoD supplementary
budget in September 2011.

The year 2011 saw the first-time implementation of the financial plan
prepared in line with the programme planning. This means that the MoD
had planned financial resources in the context of policies, development
programmes, development sub-programmes and projects or actions, and
that the effectiveness of attaining the set objectives was measured on the
basis of the attained values of indicators. The Annual Report follows the
above-mentioned programme structure.

The chapter on Military Defence presents the scope and structure of the
SAF. In the description of SAF military training and exercises, important
training courses of SAF members and units are highlighted. Progress is
also stressed in the area of development and building of SAF capabilities.
In comparison to 2010, assessment and readiness of SAF commands and
units improved by a good percentage. The Report lists the key projects of
SAF modernisation. The SAF supports the System of Protection against
Natural and Other Disasters, and cooperates with the civil environment. The
Report also presents the contribution of Slovenian military and non-military
capabilities to international peace, security and stability.

The chapter on Protection against Natural and Other Disasters presents
prevention activities in the areas of protection against fire and drowning,
preparedness of the System of Protection against Natural and Other
Disasters, and progress of PRR forces in successful protection, rescue and
relief operations in the event of disasters. Furthermore, education, training,
competence tests, exercises, international cooperation, inspection activities,
and the normative area are presented.

The chapter on Defence System and Crisis Management addresses
achievements in the area of the defence policy, Slovenia’s preparations
and response measures in the event of a crisis, the development of civilian
capabilities, intelligence and security operations, equipping, real estate
management, standardisation and codification, the communications and


-----

information system (CIS), inspections in the area of defence, investigation of
aircraft accidents and military aircraft incidents, and strategic communication.

A separate chapter lists Research and Technology Projects and international
activities in the EU and NATO.

The chapter on the Implementation of Resource Plans deals with the areas of
defence and protection against natural disasters in light of the implementation
of resources according to individual resource plans.


-----

### MILITARY DEFENCE

#### 1 Scope and Structure of the SAF

**1.1 Professionalization of the SAF**

Professionalization of SAF active component members was carried out in
accordance with the SAF Personnel Plan which was fully realised on 31
December 2011 and was consistent with the adopted objectives. The status
structure ratio between officers, non-commissioned officers and soldiers was
improved to 1 : 1.75 : 4.06. This includes both active component and contract
reserve members. The SAF is thus approaching the target ratio of 1 : 2 : 5.

The manning of commands and units was conducted in accordance with
the competency model. Compliance with military and general competencies
was determined for each SAF member separately. The introduction of
competency approach to the SAF's manning affected the job content and
human resource management processes.

In 2011, a total of 518 candidates applied for employment in the SAF, 300 of
whom successfully completed the admission process.

**1.2 Military Service in the SAF Contract Reserve**

On 31 December 2011 there were 1,621 contract reserve members employed
in the SAF contract reserve component. Pursuant to the SAF Personnel Plan,
SAF units maintained their numbers through contract reserve members.

Interest of candidates to enter the contract reserve component is greater
than the SAF needs. Thus, in 2011, 300 new applications were received for
inclusion in the contract reserve. The number of applications is satisfactory,
given that the possibility for the conclusion of new contracts was rather
limited due to the availability of free posts. Contracts were concluded with 46
candidates. Records of the Commission for the Selection of Contract Reserve
Candidates list another 623 candidates who meet the formal conditions for
the conclusion of contracts for serving in the SAF contract reserve.


-----

#### 2 SAF Military Training and Exercises

SAF commands and units trained for the performance of mission essential
tasks. The focus was on the training of SAF members for the provision of
national defence and their operation in the System of Protection against
Natural and Other Disasters as well as on dedicated training of units for their
operation in the Alliance. The SAF ensured constant readiness and training
of high-readiness forces and of forces operating in the System of Protection
against Natural and Other Disasters.

Over 1,400 SAF members attended 26 international exercises and training
courses abroad, in Italy, Germany, Austria, Hungary, Slovakia, the USA,
Romania, Macedonia, Montenegro and Ukraine.

Thirteen planned exercises and training courses were carried out in Slovenia,
aimed at maintaining the level of readiness and the building of capabilities.
Participants included over 1,500 SAF members and more than 100 members
of other Allied forces.

Training of individuals focused on military occupational speciality (MOS)
training, which enabled unit members to acquire the knowledge and skills
necessary for the performance of their formation duties. SAF members
underwent regular training and testing according to the prescribed general
individual military skills. Moreover, they trained and practiced marksmanship
skills in line with the catalogue of individual military skills, following the
methods and criteria for the assessment of individuals’ competence.

_Training of Military Police members_


-----

Training was mainly carried out in Slovenia, in SAF firing ranges and training
areas. For reasons of limitations in the SAF firing ranges and training areas,
the use of air defence weapons, large-unit exercises to test full operational
capabilities, and final preparations of units for operating in peacekeeping
missions were conducted abroad.

**2.1 Overview of Major Training Corses for SAF Members and Units**

The most important training course in 2011 was the SAF management
multi-stage defence and protection exercise Pomlad (Spring) 2011. This
exercise was a continuation of final activities of the planned NATO Crisis
Management Exercise CMX 11, in which the Republic of Slovenia practiced
consultations with the Allies in accordance with Articles 4 and 5 of the North
Atlantic Treaty. The exercise was the main SAF event on the occasion of
the 20th anniversary of the War for Slovenia. The purpose of the exercise
was to test the training level and skills of the SAF General Staff (GS SAF)
and subordinate commands regarding the planning, organisation and
implementation of command and staff exercises as well as the organisation
and operation of the SAF within the Alliance in the event of a crisis in the
Republic of Slovenia.

An important exercise abroad was the exercise Challenge 2011 which took
place at the Krivolak training area in Macedonia. SAF air defence and aviation
units, together with members of the Macedonian Armed Forces, conducted
live-fire training with the IGLA light mobile missile systems. The SAF aviation
used Pilatus PC-9M aircraft to bomb land targets, while helicopter crews
practiced medical evacuation and air transportation in an unfamiliar terrain
during day and night flying conditions. Moreover, the exercise tested the
ability for the repositioning of forces outside the national territory and the
ability of air command and control in the host nation.

In the context of the NATO Response Force (NRF) exercises, members of the
mobile CBRN Analytical Laboratory and the Light Decontamination Company
trained at the CBRN Training and Testing Centre Zemianske Kostolany in
the Slovak Republic. Members attended the exercise Salamander 2011, in
which the Mobile Radiological Laboratory was certified.

SAF members trained at the Joint Multinational Training Centre in Hohenfels,
Germany, where they participated in a three-week international military
exercise. There, future KFOR contingent members were trained in staff and


-----

tactical procedures for the achievement of full operational capability in order
to operate in international operations as part of the Allied forces.

In September 2011, the SAF 1st Brigade organised and conducted the
exercise Premik (Movement) 11. This exercise tested the operation of
systems, tactical procedures and the Brigade movement capabilities as well
as the establishment of units’ logistics supply. Moreover, the exercise tested
the operation of the SAF 1st Brigade at high levels of readiness.

The Federal Republic of Germany hosted the international exercise for Allied
forces, called Silver Shield 2011, which was attended by about 650 SAF
members with over 100 combat and non-combat vehicles. The exercise
tested full operational capability of the Motorised Battalion (MOTB) which, in
2012, will be the main unit of the SAF Light Battalion Battle Group and the
EU Battle Group.

The 460th Artillery Battalion (ARTB) of the 72nd Brigade conducted military
live-fire training in the Federal Republic of Germany. The training had special
significance for the above-mentioned Battalion as it was the first live-fire
training with artillery weapons in the history of the SAF at such a long range
and beyond the borders of Slovenia. Active component and contract reserve
members fired at a distance of 14 kilometres, which is three times greater
than the distance at which the Artillery Battalion had ever fired before in
Slovenia.

**2.2 Training of Aviation Units**

Training of members of aviation units focused on the training of helicopter
crews and airworthiness units. The Air Defence Brigade members trained for
high-intensity operations and the provision of air support.

The aircraft interception exercise took place in the Slovenian airspace,
and was conducted together with the Italian Air Force aircraft assigned to
NATO to perform air policing in the airspace of the Republic of Italy and the
Republic of Slovenia. The exercise was held in the context of regular training
to ensure a high level of competence and responsiveness of units involved
in the NATO Integrated Air Defence System (NATINADS).

The European Defence Agency (EDA), in cooperation with the Helicopter
Initiative (HTF), planned and carried out the multinational tactical exercise of
helicopter units, Italian Call 2011, held in Italy in May. The SAF participated


-----

with Air Defence and Aviation Brigade members and two AS 532 Cougar
helicopters with crews. It was also attended by members of the Military
Medical Unit with doctors and two teams for the implementation of medical
evacuation tasks (MEDEVAC), which contributed significantly to raising the
training level of crews for the performance of emergency medical tasks.

**2.3 Major Training Events of the Naval Unit**

The La Spezia Naval Base in Italy held the exercise Minex 2011 which was
attended by members of the 430th Naval Division. The exercise was aimed
at training naval mine and bomb disposal units in the search and removal of
unexploded ordnance (UXO) and improvised explosive devices (IED) at sea,
on vessels, in ports and in harbour infrastructure.

The international naval exercise Adrion 2011 took place in the Montenegro
territorial waters. The exercise was hosted by the Montenegrin Navy. The
exercise included the navies of Albania, Montenegro, Greece, Croatia, Italy
and Slovenia. The purpose of this exercise was to enhance regional maritime
cooperation which is the basis for further understanding and implementation
of the naval doctrine and procedures among the participating navies.
At the exercise, commanders and their staffs trained in the planning and
implementation of multinational naval operations. Moreover, the exercise
helped enhance interoperability between the participating navies through
learning about the equipment and the possibilities of use of different types
of vessels.

**2.4 Contract Reserve Training**

The planning and organisation of training were based on the training of units
additionally manned with contract reserve members, which, in the future,
will constitute modules of the Battalion Battle Group (BBG) and, together
with contract reserve members, man Slovenian contingents in international
operations and missions (IOM). Participating contract reserve members
under the command of the 23rd and 24th Slovenian KFOR Contingents
were equipped, trained and armed in the same way as active component
members and operated in IOM under equal conditions.

The SAF had planned 357 training days, but conducted a total of 300 days,
accounting for 84 percent of training. Training was attended by 1,527 contract
reserve members.


-----

**2.5 Military Camp**

In 2011, military camp was attended by 67 university and secondary school
students from 21 different faculties and 10 different secondary schools.
Military Practice I to IV was attended by 83 participants, while the MoD and
Youth Camp was attended by 56 participants.

Together with the International Award for Young People’s Association
(MEPI), the SAF participated in the preparation and implementation of MEPI
expeditions which were attended by 69 young people.

#### 3 Development and Building of SAF Capabilities

Taking into account the Resolution on General Long-Term Development
and Equipping Programme of the Slovenian Armed Forces up to 2025
(ReSDPRO SV 2025), endorsed in 2010, the SAF produced packages of
Planned Formations and Development Maps of SAF commands and units
for 2011-2016. These documents set out the target organisational structure,
mission, tasks and available human resources. Moreover, these planning
documents reflect the priority capability development and equipping with new
weapons and military equipment. They also indicate trends in the movement
of personnel in SAF commands and units up to 2016, both for 7,600 active
component members and for 1,500 contract reserve members.

Expert articles for the Doctrine on the Creation and Operation of a Military
Strategic Reserve were collected and prepared. The Doctrine, once it is
completed and finalised, will be a joint product of the MoD organisational
units. In line with the ReSDPRO SV 2025, additional military capabilities of
the military strategic reserve would be established in the event of substantial
deterioration of the security situation in the Republic of Slovenia, in the extent
of up to 25,000 members.

In 2011, the following capabilities were introduced into operational use:

– Mobile Analytical Laboratory with a Biological, Chemical and Radiological
Laboratory.
– Helicopter Medical Evacuation (MEDEVAC).
– Special Operations Forces Task Units (SOF-TU).
– Motorised Company of the 74th MOTB (medium 8 x 8 wheeled armoured
vehicle – MWAV 8 x 8).
– Multinational Centre of Excellence for Mountain Warfare.


-----

– Command and Control Information System (CCIS).
– Command and Control system, in accordance with the new organisational
structure, including the Joint Operations Centre (JOC).
– Satellite links (SHF/X).

_Special Operations Forces Task Unit_

The SAF continued with the introduction of the military multi-purpose patrol
boat Triglav-11 into operational use.


-----

#### 4 Maintaining the Level of Readiness

SAF readiness for 2011 was planned in accordance with the requirements
defined by the objectives and plans for the achievement of operational
capabilities.

By maintaining the planned level of readiness, the SAF successfully provided
and maintained combat capabilities in the implementation of military defence.
Moreover, it actively supported the System of Protection against Natural and
Other Disasters, assisted public authorities and organisations, participated
in IOM, and carried out other Alliance obligations.

Despite the constraints resulting from the unattained operational capabilities,
the SAF, in cooperation with the Allies, is able to deter military aggression
against the Republic of Slovenia and contribute to international peace and
stability.

Through the process of establishing the readiness level of SAF commands
and units, readiness of all SAF units was established in the 2011 assessment
period. In the majority of units, readiness was established in accordance with
the national concept. In the MOTB, however, readiness was established in
accordance with the NATO concept, using the NATO Combat Readiness
Evaluation (CREVAL) document.

Based on a comprehensive analysis of the results obtained in the process
of readiness evaluation, the SAF determined that its commands and units
maintained the attained level of readiness in 2011 and are properly prepared
and capable of performing their tasks. In comparison to 2010, the overall
assessment of the readiness of SAF commands and units improved by a
good percentage.


-----

#### 5 Key Projects of SAF Modernisation

In 2011, the SAF completed the introductions and gave proposals for the
issue of orders on the use of important capabilities and assets:

– Air medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) – capability of the AS-532 Cougar
helicopter.
– Motorised MWAV 8 x 8 Company.
– Tactical SHF-X satellite terminals.
– Marking, sighting, surveillance and radio devices and systems.
– CCIS and C4I.
– Simulation equipment and ammunition system (Simunition).
– Double-lock multi-digit hyperbaric chamber DRAEGER TDS FB 2200.

The following projects were realised as part of the SAF modernisation
(equipping):

– In the context of the systems mobility project, units were equipped with
12 light 4 x 4 wheeled vehicles (LWV) and nine tactical trailers.
– In the framework of the medium 8 x 8 wheeled armoured vehicle (MWAV)
project, the SAF acquired and introduced into use two MWAV 8 x 8.
There are currently 30 MWAV 8 x 8 Svarun in the operational use.
– As part of the long-range radar project, two radars were set up and are
currently being introduced into operational use. Project completed.
– Within the project of upgrading Cougar transport helicopters, the SAF
completed upgrading four helicopters with the systems of protection
against guided missiles. The SAF also began upgrading the first helicopter
with the systems for communication, navigation, protection, and air entry
and exit points to minimise thermal images in the Eurocopter in France.
– In the framework of the Cerklje airfield project, works on the municipal

airfield infrastructure were carried out and the lighting and navigation
systems were provided.
– In the context of the Škrilj firing range and training area project, works on

the firing range and the training area were finished, and the firing range
technology was installed and introduced into use.


-----

_Medium 8 x 8 wheeled armoured vehicle (MWAV 8 x 8) Svarun_

For other key projects (equipment of teams for terminal attack control, EOD
capability, the Cerklje airfield fire service vehicles and the integration of
launching devices Strelec (Shooter) with alternative vehicles), the required
project investment documentation was prepared.


-----

#### 6 SAF Operation in Support of the System of Protection 
 Against Natural and Other Disasters

The SAF provides training for the operation of commands and units and the
System of Protection against Natural and Other Disasters. Training takes
place throughout the year so that knowledge is constantly upgraded and
new SAF protection, rescue and relief capabilities are introduced. Thus, in
February, SAF divers participated in the clean-up and control operation of
the Slovenian port water area, together with divers of the Special Police Unit
and two divers of the Koper Fire Brigade.

_SAF diver_


-----

By conducting the Bumble Bee 2011 exercise, the SAF performed
decontamination of the contaminated Cerklje ob Krki military airfield. Naval
Division members, together with contract members of the Civil Protection
of the Republic of Slovenia (RS CP) and employees in the ACPDR
(Administration of the Republic of Slovenia for Civil Protection and Disaster
Relief) branch office in Koper, carried out a two-day training and exercise
to ensure and improve capabilities in the event of environmental and other
disasters at sea. Moreover, they tested the use of the military boat Triglav in
protection and rescue operations.

In June, Maribor held the national ACPDR exercise Starošince 2011, the
aim of which was to test the readiness of the veterinary service and PRR
forces in the event of an outbreak of particularly dangerous animal diseases
in the Republic of Slovenia. A total of 26 members of the SAF AVIN (avian
influenza) team took part in this exercise.

The MEDEVAC team participated in the 17th regional national examination
of the training level of CP and Red Cross first aid teams, called Competence
Testing for the Event of Work Accidents and Natural Disasters.

The SAF, together with the Mountain Rescue Service (MRS) and the ACPDR,
participated in the exercises Završnica, Breza, Letalo (Aeroplane) 2011 and
Sava 2011. The purpose of these exercises was to demonstrate helicopter
rescue.

In September, SAF engineers participated in the Sava 2011 exercise,
together with the Regional CP Headquarters for Zasavje.

A team of SAF seamen with a vessel participated in the main exercise in the
context of the CP Days, Morje (Sea) 2011, assisting in the installation and
anchoring of water barriers.

Members of the CBRN Defence Battalion, using the radiological laboratory
and two light Cobra reconnaissance vehicles, participated in the Inex 4
exercise. This exercise was led by the ACPDR, its purpose being the testing
of readiness, integration, reporting and direction of PRR forces in the event
of a radiological emergency and its consequences.

The Support Command, together with its subordinate units, conducted the
tactical exercise Poplave (Floods) 2011, the purpose of which was training


-----

_Mobile Analytical Laboratory_

for high-quality and fast realisation of mission-specific tasks in the provision
of PRR forces and resources. The key element of the exercise was teamwork
in the movement of vehicles, assets and teams to the locations “at risk”,
which is the most realistic element in assessing unit competence.

A fire rescue exercise Letalo (Aeroplane) 2011 was conducted at the Gaj
training range at the Cerklje ob Krki Barracks. Exercise participants included
the Cerklje ob Krki airfield Fire Rescue Service, the neighbouring voluntary
fire-fighting societies from Kostanjevica ob Krki, Malo Mraševo, Podlog
and Podbočje, the Military Police, and the Brežice Notification Centre. The
purpose of the exercise, organised by the Air Base, was to standardise the
fire-fighting and rescue procedures, and to assess the competence and
equipment suitability of the participating rescue workers.

The SAF duty crew of the Bell 412 helicopter carried out 166 rescue operations
and reached a total of 214 flying hours. Rescue operations amounted to a
total of EUR 559,784. A total of 14,150 kilograms of medical equipment, 164
injured and diseased persons, and 458 rescue workers were transported.

Over the summer months, the water purification unit provided drinking water
to the people of Loška dolina.

The SAF capabilities contributed significantly to disaster relief and the
provision of normal living conditions to the citizens of the Republic of Slovenia.


-----

#### 7 SAF Contribution to International Peace, Security and Stability

The SAF is involved in the commitments assumed in international organisations
or through international treaties, outside Slovenia in international operations
and missions (IOM), and in other forms of the national crisis response. The
SAF participated in NATO, EU and UN operations within the planned scope
of average annual contribution of 442 members.

**Total No. of**
**IOM** **Avg. annual contribution**
**deployed***
KFOR 314 621
HQ Balkans (MLO
7 13
Bg, HQ Sk, HQ Sa)

ISAF 89 201
ALTHEA 14 31
ATALANTA 1 3
UNTSO 3 3
UNIFIL 14 28
**_TOTAL_** **442** **880**

- Deployment of all Slovenian contingents and short-term deployments.

The SAF participated in the NATO Air Policing operation and provided a
helicopter with 25 members in constant readiness for search and rescue in
the territory of the Republic of Slovenia.

**Overview of SAF Participation in IOM between 1997 and 2011 for**
**each IOM***
Year 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
**No. of**
**55** **70** **195** **199** **171** **141** **329** **423**
**Members**

Year 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
**No. of**
**478** **552** **1,027** **924** **1,058** **974** **875**
**Members**

- Data up to 2010 is calculated on the basis of the number of members in
IOM and may differ slightly from the number of those deployed by orders or
decisions.

|IOM|Avg. annual contribution|Total No. of deployed*|
|---|---|---|
|KFOR|314|621|
|HQ Balkans (MLO Bg, HQ Sk, HQ Sa)|7|13|
|ISAF|89|201|
|ALTHEA|14|31|
|ATALANTA|1|3|
|UNTSO|3|3|
|UNIFIL|14|28|
|TOTAL|442|880|

|Overview of SAF Participation in IOM between 1997 and 2011 for each IOM*|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Year|1997|1998|1999|2000|2001|2002|2003|2004|
|No. of Members|55|70|195|199|171|141|329|423|
|Year|2005|2006|2007|2008|2009|2010|2011||
|No. of Members|478|552|1,027|924|1,058|974|875||


-----

The SAF participation in IOM and individual operations was conducted
in a coordinated manner, with no major discrepancies. In the planning of
the SAF participation in IOM as well as in the preparation and deployment
of contingents, real SAF capabilities were taken into account, along with
the Alliance agreed requirements and experience gained from previous
participation in IOM. The planned tasks were fully implemented.

SAF participation in IOM signifies an additional contribution to the development
and quality growth. With the introduction of new assets into operational use,
the SAF gained additional experience of operating in remote areas and in
difficult operational and climatic conditions.

_Participation in the ISAF operation_

The MoD complied with the principles of the Cooperation Strategy of
the Republic of Slovenia in International Operations and Missions. In
the Strategy’s implementation, it strived for enhanced inter-ministerial
cooperation, intense public diplomacy, appropriate adjustment of
management and work processes, and transparent operation in relation
to the public. Regular consultations and strategic-level decision-making
regarding the IOM contributed to a more integrated defence policy in relation
to this issue, in close cooperation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA).
In line with the Strategy, the MoD participated in the preparation of the
Second Annual Government Report on Slovenian participation in IOM for


-----

the National Assembly. At the end of 2011, the MoD issued the Minister of
Defence’s guidance on the plan of participation in IOM for 2012-2013.

**7.1 NATO Operations**

**_KFOR_**

In line with the Slovenian strategic interests, the majority of SAF members
participating in international operations and missions in 2011 performed their
tasks in the Western Balkans. Emphasis was on the Allied Force Operation
in Kosovo (KFOR) which included 300 to 330 SAF members, along with
a civilian functional expert (CFE). Under the KFOR mandate, Slovenian
members maintained a secure and stable environment, provided freedom
of movement, created conditions for the transfer of responsibilities to civil
authorities in the area of defence and security, protected special importance
facilities, and provided assistance and support in the establishment of the
Kosovo Security Force and, through the CFE, in defence reforms. Due to
the escalation of the situation and unrest in northern Kosovo in the second
half of 2011, the MoD, in the context of NATO, argued that the issue of the
planned reduction of KFOR in Kosovo should be approached deliberately
and gradually, taking into account the security situation development on the
ground and all the relevant circumstances and conditions.

The SAF provided the capabilities of two manoeuvre companies and manned
the positions in the KFOR command structure. It cooperated with five liaison
and control groups, and contributed to the improvement of the situation and
calming of developments in the Kosovo municipalities. In September, the
Slovenian contingent was reduced by 20 members but kept the majority
of duties that it had performed until then (protection of important religious
facilities, reconnaissance and participation in the KFOR Reaction Force).

The SAF ensured the operation in the Joint Operational Area in the Balkans
by providing personnel to NATO HQs and thus contributed significantly to the
defence reforms in the countries of this region. This was achieved particularly
by managing the NATO HQ in Skopje; a task that the SAF completed in
January 2011. In the NATO HQ in Sarajevo, the SAF managed the Support
Division, while, in the NATO Office in Belgrade, it managed the Partnership
for Peace Division.


-----

**_NATO HQs in Skopje and Sarajevo_**

In January 2011, the SAF successfully completed an almost year-long
command of the NATO HQ in Skopje and prepared the ground for its
permanent closure or conversion to a civilian structure. For the first time
in its history, the SAF commanded a NATO HQ and thus gained a lot of
experience. In addition, SAF members maintained their presence in the
NATO HQ in Sarajevo and in the NATO Military Liaison Office in Belgrade.
By integrating Slovenian members in the Allied structures in the Western
Balkans, the SAF continues to actively support host nations in their defence
reforms, partner programmes and other collaborative activities, while
strengthening the implementation of national interests as well as Slovenia’s
visibility and reputation in the region.

**_ISAF_**

Another priority task was SAF’s participation in the ISAF operation, whereby
the SAF, in line with the commitments of the international community,
continued to contribute to the stabilisation and reconstruction of Afghanistan
with military and civilian capabilities. Moreover, it helped in the preparation
of the key Allied documents, defining the role of NATO in Afghanistan until
2014 and beyond.

In accordance with the general efforts for more extensive and high-quality
training of the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF), the SAF continued
training and mentoring the Afghan National Army (ANA) in the framework
of the infantry Operational Mentor and Liaison Team (OMLT), managed by
the SAF, in the Regional Command West. Moreover, the SAF continued to
participate in the Italian-led OMLT for combat support in the NATO Training
Mission – Afghanistan (NTM-A). It also continued the implementation of
civil development projects, increasing the CFE participation from one to
four. At the end of 2011, Slovenian civilian functional experts operated in
two locations in Afghanistan, namely the PRTs in Herat and Farah. Both
segments, military and civilian, form the basis of successful completion of
the transfer of responsibility for security to the ANSF by the end of 2014.


-----

_The SAF participates in the ISAF operation in the framework of the OMLT_

The complexity and vulnerability of the ISAF operation revealed the need for
wider political and in-depth reflection on the future cooperation of the Republic
of Slovenia. To this end, the MoD, in cooperation with the MFA, prepared
the Strategy of Operation of the Republic of Slovenia in the international
community’s efforts to stabilise Afghanistan. The Strategy was prepared in
January. In October, the MoD prepared the evaluation or analysis of Slovenia’s
past contribution to Afghanistan, together with the recommendations on how
to proceed and which conclusions would form the basis for the Government’s
decision on Slovenia’s further steps following October 2012.

**_NATO Response Force_**

In the first half of 2011, the SAF, for the first time, participated in the NATO
Response Force (NRF) with a battalion-sized unit, namely the Chemical,
Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) Defence Battalion, as part of
the Immediate Response Force (IRF). Together with additional units of the
Command and Logistics Battalion, the Military Medical Unit, the Logistics
Battalion and the Signal Battalion as well as units of the Polish, Hungarian
and US armed forces, Slovenia, as the lead nation, commanded the highreadiness International CBRN Defence Battalion. In the second half of 2011,
the SAF contributed a transport company to a wider low-readiness Response
Force Pool (RFP). The MoD seeks to contribute various higher-level units
to the NRF, as such participation signifies one of the most effective tools for
the SAF transformation in the direction of greater efficiency, capability and
interoperability.


-----

_Operation of the CBRN Defence Battalion_

**7.2 UN Operations**

The SAF maintained its participation in UN operations. Through participation
of a reconnaissance squad in the UNIFIL operation, it contributed to the
maintenance of peace in southern Lebanon. Within the UNTSO mission,
through participation of three military observers, the Republic of Slovenia
participates in the UNTSO Middle East Peacekeeping Operation in the
border area between Israel, Syria and Lebanon.

**7.3 EU Operations**

**_Althea_**

In 2011, the Republic of Slovenia participated in the EUFOR operation Althea
in Bosnia and Herzegovina with 15 SAF members. Slovenia thus continued
to contribute to the strengthening of peace and security in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as well as to the joint efforts in the establishment of properly
trained, professional and efficient armed forces in this country. At the political
level, the MoD argued that the EUFOR operation Althea should in the future
maintain its executive mandate and rely more on reserve forces and EU
battle groups. Based on this, the MoD, at the end of 2011, prepared an outline
proposal to increase the availability, flexibility and usability of reserve forces
and the EU battle group established on the basis of the Multinational Land


-----

Force (MLF), and submitted the proposal for consideration to the partner
countries.

In the context of the executive functions in the operation, the SAF ensured
participation of its members in the EUFOR command structure. The
Intelligence Support Group operated under the EUFOR command. The
SAF contingent's operation was further supported by the National Support
Element and the National Intelligence Cell.

**_Atalanta_**

The MoD, with two SAF officers, contributed to the stabilisation of the Horn
of Africa, whereby the Republic of Slovenia demonstrated its status as a
maritime state and contributed to the international fight against piracy which
poses a serious threat to the safe movement of people and goods along one
of the most important international sea routes.

A SAF officer performed his tasks in the EU NAVFOR Operational Command
in the UK. For six months, another SAF member operated as part of the crew
of a German warship which operated in the EU NAVFOR operational area
in East Africa.

_SAF participation in Operation Atalanta_


-----

### PROTECTION AGAINST NATURAL AND OTHER DISASTERS

#### 1 Prevention Activities

One of the fundamental approaches of prevention activities is the regulation
of individual areas at the system level. This signifies the implementation of
individual activities in line with the normative acts for a broad spectrum of
professional and lay public.

The area of fire protection specified detailed requirements regarding fire
protection training. Details were provided for the equipment of evacuation
and emergency routes, particularly those in shops and shopping passages
of major shopping centres. For reasons of fire-fighter safety, there was a
requirement to produce fire escape plans for facilities equipped with solar
power stations connected to the public electricity (distribution) network.

In the area of protection against drowning, the following elements were
defined anew: physical and mental abilities required by the water rescue
personnel and persons wanting to become water rescuers; types of water
rescue training programmes; method and extent of the water rescue aptitude
test; and conditions for the acquisition of powers for the implementation of
training programmes.

With regard to the public interest of fire protection and protection against
natural and other disasters, 97 authorisations were issued for fire protection
training, inspection and testing of installed active fire protection systems, fire
extinguisher maintenance, inspections and testing of hydrant networks, and
fire protection. A total of 187 guidelines and 152 opinions on spatial planning
documents were issued in the areas of fire protection and protection against
natural and other disasters. Moreover, 166 design conditions and 211
approvals of Fire Safety Studies were issued for those facilities for which, in
accordance with the regulations, such studies must be made.

Particular emphasis was placed on continuous training of the expert public
and on raising awareness of the population in the areas of fire protection and
protection against drowning.

In the area of fire protection, the ACPDR organised and conducted two
consultations whose purpose was to present novelties in the normative
field of fire protection to those responsible for the implementation of fire


-----

protection measures. Special emphasis was on photovoltaics. A consultation
was organised for the expert public, particularly for technical examiners of
the installed active fire protection systems, producers of studies and fire
protection concepts, and others. Emphasis was on reports on the conducted
inspections and tests of the installed active fire protection systems, and on
the maintenance and servicing of these systems.

”Have you ensured a safe home?” was the slogan of the project October – Fire
Safety Month 2011. The purpose of the project was to warn people that there
are many dangers in the safety of a home and its immediate surroundings
that might cause a fire. A “house” web application was developed to warn of
dangers which might cause a fire in a home, and point out proper preventive
action to prevent a fire as well as proper action in the event of a fire. The
“house” web application combines all instructions and material on this topic,
provided by the ACPDR in recent years and available at http://www.sos112.
si/.

In 2011, the ACPDR also engaged in other activities to raise awareness of the
population. The Ciciban and Zmajček magazines published topics related to
fire protection and protection against natural and other disasters for children.
In September, the “arithmetic and algebra” publication acquainted sixthgrade elementary school students with topics related to fire protection and
protection against drowning. In addition, the elective subject on protection
against natural and other disasters was presented. Secondary school
students listened to topics focused on evacuation. In December, all fourth
year secondary school students received the publication FAX Vpisnik with
a supplement presenting topics focusing on the evacuation of buildings. On
the first day of school, the entire population of first-year university students
received the publication Priročnik za bruce (A Guide for Freshers), containing
topics related to university students and fire safety.

Activities related to chimney fires were held in the first half of December and
in January, and were aimed at the widest group of people. In the second half
of December, activities focused on December festivities and fire protection.
In December, the national radio and other media warned people of possible
dangers due to improper decoration, candle burning, use of pyrotechnics
and the like. Emphasis was on preventive action at the time of December
festivities.


-----

#### 2 Preparedness of the System of Protection Against Natural  and Other Disasters, and Protection, Rescue and Relief Forces

**2.1 Operational Planning and Preparedness**

In 2011, it was necessary to prepare several professional bases for reporting
to the EU which, in 2011, issued guidelines for the elaboration of threat
assessments. The mentioned guidelines must be followed in the preparation
of guidelines for the elaboration of national-level threat assessments.

The ACPDR developed a Protection and Rescue Plan application (NZIR
application), intended for the planning personnel at all levels. The application
is still being tested. It will include threat assessments and protection and
rescue plans with all the annexes and appendices at all levels of planning.

The ACPDR modified threat assessments in the event of earthquakes and
updated threat assessments in the event of massive outbreaks of contagious
animal diseases. Alongside the updating of threat assessments in the event
of massive outbreaks of contagious animal diseases, the ACPDR updated
and harmonised the National Emergency Response Plan in the Event of
Massive Outbreaks of Contagious Animal Diseases.

In 2011, the ACPDR updated the National Emergency Response Plan for
Nuclear and Radiological Accidents, and actively participated in the interministerial group for the monitoring of this Plan.

Moreover, the National Emergency Response Plan in the Event of
Earthquakes is in the process of being updated.

**2.2 Monitoring, Notification and Warning**

Operational and communications tasks regarding monitoring, notification
and warning are carried out 24 hours a day and 365 days a year by the
National Notification Centre (NNC) and 13 regional notification centres
(RNC), responding to the emergency call number 112. In 2011, the ACPDR
measured response times of operators in regional notification centres. On
average, these amounted to less than nine seconds for 90 percent of all
calls. Response time for the majority of calls was 3.5 seconds.

There are 135 operators employed in the RNCs. Due to the employment
limitations, eight positions are still not filled. In 2011, the majority of calls, on


-----

average 568 per day, were received in the RNC Ljubljana. This was followed
by the RNC in Maribor with 234 calls per day, the RNC in Celje with 210 calls
per day and the RNC in Kranj with 170 calls per day.

In 2011, the regional centres received 1,729 calls from foreigners. The
majority, 393, came from Italian citizens, 241 from Romanian, 169 from
German, 156 from Austrian and 142 from the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and others.

In 2011, the total number of events was 12,571, which is 1,347 more than
in 2010. Most of the events were fires and explosions, amounting to a total
of 4,861. These were followed by 2,053 traffic accidents. There were a total
of 16,919 interventions. Most interventions were conducted by voluntary
territorial fire-fighting societies, namely 9,265, while professional fire brigades
conducted 6,986 interventions. In the field of mountain rescue, the Mountain
Rescue Service carried out 523 interventions.

**2.3 Communications and Information Systems (CIS)**

In 2011, the MoD planned to purchase three SiPod emergency response
management systems for notification centres. The purpose of these systems is
to shorten the response times and enable automatic exchange of information
gained from the call between all rescue services. The systems, however,
could not be bought for financial reasons. Thus, the MoD is currently only
using the first three purchased in 2009.

All necessary steps were taken to introduce into use two new emergency
call services, namely the SMS112 application for receiving text emergency
calls and the video112 application for receiving video emergency calls. The
SMS112 application will upgrade the existing, Europe's award-winning,
WAP112 text emergency call application which was primarily intended for
the deaf and hard-of-hearing. The SMS112 application became operational
in February 2012 in the Telekom Slovenije network.

The 3D geographic information system (GIS) Ujme (Disasters) started to
replace the existing scalar layers with geographically positioned vector
layers.

In 2011, major updates of the paging system were made. Due to the lack of
funds, the MoD could not set up a remote pager triggering server, leaving
this task for 2012. It was, however, successful in continuing the replacement


-----

of worn telecommunications and other equipment, switchboards, recording
devices and similar in regional notification centres.

The MoD developed the SPIN application for emergency response and
disaster reporting. Moreover, modules were developed for real-time display
of statistical data on individual types of accidents and disasters, along with
a module for the display of data using the RSS technology. Through better
organisation, real-time data processing was ensured.

The 112 caller location display system now includes all important telephone
operators, thus meeting all the EU requirements in this field. The E-CALL
upgrade will be completed in 2012.

In 2011, the StatKlic application was developed and introduced for a trial
period. The application will ensure continuous monitoring of the quality of
112 emergency call service.

The MoD participated in the inter-ministerial group for the introduction of a
unified digital radio network of public authorities according to the TETRA
standard and in the project group controlling the designer selected through
a public tender procedure for the Construction of a Unified Digital Radio
Network of Public Authorities project – TETRA – Project implementation. The
project should have been completed and undertaken in November; however,
due to a number of justified comments on the project documentation, the
deadline for the project's completion was extended until the end of January
2012.

**2.4 Protection, Rescue and Relief Forces**

The focus in the organisational field was on adapting the organisation of
various emergency services and units to the real needs as well as on the
Regulation on the Organisation, Equipment and Training of Protection,
Rescue and Aid Forces (Uradni list RS (Official Gazette of the RS), Nos.
92/07, 54/09 and 23/11).

In line with the new normative regulation and organisation of CP units,
services and bodies, and in line with the Rules on Registration, Allocation
and Calling-Up of Members of Civil Protection Service and Other Protection,
Rescue and Relief Forces (Official Gazette of the RS, No. 40/09), the MoD
continued developing the new “Evidenca CZ” (CP Records) application
designed for keeping the records of persons included in the PRR forces.


-----

In accordance with the Decree on Service in Civil Protection (Official Gazette
of the RS, Nos. 1/08 and 99/08), ten additional contracts for CP service were
concluded with members of units designed to perform specialised protection,
rescue and relief tasks in the event of natural and other disasters throughout
the country. The performance of these tasks requires special expertise and
qualifications and is also intended for assistance to other countries. The
ACPDR concluded a total of 84 contracts for CP service for the most critical
duties, which, however, is far from covering all the needs. Faster contract
conclusion and filling of positions are prevented due to the MoD budgetary
constraints.

_CP Contract Members, December 2011_

**Unit** **No.**
National Rapid Response Unit – Technical Diving Unit 12
National Rapid Response Unit – IT Support Team 4
National Rapid Response Unit – Transport Unit 5
Support Service – Psychological Support Team 3
Unit for the Installation and Maintenance of the Mobile Medical
4
Unit

Notification Centre – Notification Centre Manning Team 30
Technical Rescue Team with Special Working Machines and
11
Devices

Regional Logistics Centre 1
Support and Implementation Service for Special PRR Tasks in
14
the Event of Environmental and Other Disasters at Sea

The ACPDR adopted a decision on the designation of national and regional
CP units, services and bodies which are primarily manned by CP contract
members (No. 833-16/2011-1 of 30 May 2011). In addition, it adopted the
2011 CP contract members’ annual training plan (No. 833-30/2011-1 of 20
December 2011).

At the end of the year, the CP records listed a total of 43,675 members of
PRR forces, of which there were 25,560 members of duty units and 18,115
volunteers. National PRR forces consisted of 840 professional members,
1,200 volunteer members and 1,476 members of duty units.

|Unit|No.|
|---|---|
|National Rapid Response Unit – Technical Diving Unit|12|
|National Rapid Response Unit – IT Support Team|4|
|National Rapid Response Unit – Transport Unit|5|
|Support Service – Psychological Support Team|3|
|Unit for the Installation and Maintenance of the Mobile Medical Unit|4|
|Notification Centre – Notification Centre Manning Team|30|
|Technical Rescue Team with Special Working Machines and Devices|11|
|Regional Logistics Centre|1|
|Support and Implementation Service for Special PRR Tasks in the Event of Environmental and Other Disasters at Sea|14|


-----

**_Protection from Unexploded Ordnance (UXO)_**

In the area of protection from UXO, administrative, organisational and
operational measures were adopted to ensure professional and safe
implementation of protection from UXO. With the reorganisation which took
effect in 2011, the ACPDR established a Protection from UXO Department.
Protection from UXO is organised as a single measure throughout Slovenia
and is divided into training (Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster
Relief), operational activities related to the National Unit for Protection from
UXO (hereinafter referred to as UXO NU), and temporary storage and
destruction of UXO. Destruction of UXO is centralised and carried out at the
Poligon 208 training range. With regard to training, a new introductory and
basic training programme was prepared for members of the UXO NU.

In 2011, the UXO NU carried out 381 interventions. Three regular UXO
destructions were carried out at the Poligon 208 training range, followed
by six emergency destructions of air bombs. A total of 4,441 pieces of UXO
were destroyed in 2011, amounting to 8,547.032 kg of total weight, whereby
550 kg of TNT, 80 kg of PEP (plastic explosives) and 237.5 kg of the Ergodyn
commercial explosive were used. For each destruction, a treatise and a
summary report were produced.

**_Provision of Conditions for the Operation of Protection, Rescue and_**
**_Relief Forces_**

The operational part of the System of Protection against Natural and Other
Disasters is primarily based on voluntary rescue services and other structures
organised by associations and NGOs. The subsidy provided by the ACPDR
(which, despite the reduction in integral funds in this area remained the
same in 2011) represents over 75 percent of the total funds required for
the operation of individual units. Such operation includes continuous training
of unit members, members’ medical examinations and insurance policies,
payment of salaries and reimbursements for loss of income to employers,
purchase and maintenance of collective and personal protection and rescue
equipment, and material costs of interventions.

**_Co-Funding of Rescue Services, Associations and Other Organisations_**

In 2011, on the basis of the established criteria, provided funds, reports for
2010 and work programmes for 2011, subsidies were provided to rescue
services, associations and other organisations through annexes to multiannual contracts.


-----

Annexes to contracts were concluded with the Mountain Rescue Association
of Slovenia, the Cave Rescue Service of the Speleological Association of
Slovenia, the Slovenian Kennel Club, the Slovenian Diving Federation, the
Slovenian Red Cross, the Slovenian Catholic Girl Guides and Boy Scouts
Association, the Scout Association of Slovenia, the National Institute of
Biology, the Institute of Occupational Safety, the Faculty of Medicine –
the Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, the Faculty of Medicine
– the Forensic Identification Unit, the Veterinary Faculty – the Institute of
Microbiology and Parasitology, the Jožef Stefan Institute, the Velenje Coal
Mine, the TKI Hrastnik (chemical products factory), the Institute of Public
Health Maribor, the Slovenian Professional Fire-Fighter Association, the
Association of Societies and Clubs of Rescue Dog Handlers of Slovenia, the
Association of Radio Amateurs of Slovenia, and the following flying clubs:
Josip Križaj Ajdovščina, Postojna, Tolmin, Zagorje ob Savi, Coastal Flying
Centre Portorož, Aerodrom Slovenj Gradec, and the Kras Flying Centre
Divača.

**_Co-Funding of the Fire-Fighting Association of Slovenia_**

Based on the annual programme of activities and tasks of the Fire-Fighting
Association of Slovenia, such as organisational activities, prevention
activities, fire-fighter training, and publication of professional literature in
accordance with the Fire Service Act and the Fire Protection Act, an annex
was concluded with the Fire-Fighting Association of Slovenia in the amount
of EUR 540,000. To cover the costs of participation in the Protection and
Rescue Days in Koper, an additional annex was concluded in the amount of
EUR 47,700. All funds were fully utilised.

In addition, the ACPDR allocated EUR 65,500 for anniversaries of voluntary
fire-fighting societies, and EUR 85,500 to assist fire-fighting units in the
purchase of protection and rescue equipment.

**_Programme for Co-Funding Fire-Fighting Units of General Importance_**
**_(GEŠP)_**

In 2011, a new unit was added to the GEŠP (the Slovenj Gradec voluntary
fire-fighting society (PGD Slovenj Gradec)), increasing the total number of
included units to 45. The programme was fully implemented – the completion
of authorisations for tunnels (PGD Gornja Radgona, PGD Murska Sobota,
the Novo mesto Fire and Rescue Centre), the updating and completion of
data on influence factors in operational areas (new roads, tunnels etc.), and


-----

the modernisation and completion of GEŠP dual activation areas, taking into
account double-overlap areas. Plans for 2011 and reports on the utilisation
of funds for 2010 were evaluated. Moreover, 90 annexes to contracts and 2
additional annexes for preparedness for the Cenkova tunnel were prepared.

The GEŠP was co-funded in the amount of EUR 2,742,001. Of this amount,
EUR 134,053 was allocated for the amortisation of seven special fire engines
for tunnel rescue. The rest of the funds were divided among units, in line with
the criteria for the allocation of funds.

**_Emergency Rescue in Long Road and Motorway Tunnels_**

On the basis of contracts for the performance of operational tasks in the
event of road tunnel accidents, concluded between the Motorway Company
of the Republic of Slovenia (MCRS), the MoD and individual fire-fighting
units (the Jesenice Fire and Rescue Service (GARS Jesenice), the Domžale
Fire Safety Centre (CPV Domžale) and the Celje Professional Fire Brigade
(PGE Celje)), a total of EUR 49,283 was paid to co-finance the maintenance
and restoration of personal protective equipment, insurances and transport
costs of tunnel fire-fighters.

Given the extension of powers for rescue operations in the Cenkova tunnel,
an annex was prepared (in addition to two permanent annexes) for each
unit (PGD Gornja Radgona and PGD Murska Sobota). On the basis of this
annex, additional funds, in accordance with the criteria, were paid for the
preparedness of each unit in the amount of EUR 53,079.

Five contracts for financing the self-contained breathing apparatuses with
prolonged operation time (SCBA) were concluded with the fire-fighting units
authorised for emergency rescue in long road and motorway tunnels. Funds
in the amount of EUR 693,320 were provided from the fire tax (2010 plan).

Criteria for the organisation, training and equipment of portal fire-fighters were
proposed. Contracts were concluded for funding the collective equipment in
the amount of EUR 147,100 with the fire-fighting associations (Jesenice,
Kamnik, Lukovica, Tržič and Postojna) organising operational teams.

**_Co-Funding of Fire-Fighting Protection and Rescue Equipment_**

The modernisation of protection and rescue equipment of fire-fighting units
in voluntary fire-fighting societies, and thus the provision of harmonious


-----

development of these units, continued in 2011. A total of 501 applicants
responded to the tender notice. A total of 417 co-funding contracts in the
amount of EUR 1,690,200 were concluded.

**_Protection and Rescue at Sea_**

A contract was concluded with Adria Tow, towing services and assistance to
ships and vessels, for the co-funding of protection and rescue operations at
sea.

**_National Reserves for the Event of Natural and Other Disasters_**

In previous years, the Republic of Slovenia had already established national
material reserves. In recent years, these were complemented within the
budget options, particularly for the event of mass disasters, wildfires, floods,
major hailstorms, infectious diseases etc. The primary focus was on the
medical care equipment for the injured and wounded. To this end, the MoD
started purchasing mass casualty trailers with equipment for the medical
treatment of 20 injured persons. The ACPDR allocated EUR 911,526 for the
purchase of national reserves, equipment and tools for national units, and
for the maintenance of assets. Of this amount, EUR 544,467 was earmarked
for spare parts and the modernisation of mobile bridges, electric submersible
pumps, salt water pumps, a decontamination tent, mass casualty equipment
(trailers, tents, stretchers, spare SCBA cylinders and other equipment),
tables with benches, a pipe bridge, lighting for tents, and the modernisation
of the ACTROS trailer.

National units received various small tools and equipment in the amount of
EUR 280,328. Of this amount, EUR 86,730 was allocated for the maintenance
of DIA-AVS pumps, electric generator sets and radiological detectors. Other
maintenance (of containers, the mobile medical unit, and various pumps)
was cancelled due to the supplementary budget.

The supplementary budget also resulted in the cancellation of the purchase
of CP uniforms. As no uniforms have been in storage since 2010, new CP
professional and contract members could not be equipped with the relevant
personal equipment. Payment for an ECO vessel in the amount of EUR
306,569 was postponed until 2012 due to the extended delivery period,
which directly reduced the national reserve resources for 2012.


-----

**_Commodity Reserves_**

The Agency of the Republic of Slovenia for Commodity Reserves cooperated
with the MoD in the preparation of the annual programme for the purchasing
of protection and rescue equipment in the context of commodity reserves. The
programme proposal for the establishment of national commodity reserves
by means of personal and collective protection was prepared pursuant to the
provisions of Article 9 of the Decree on Minimum Personal and Collective
Protection Resources and Equipment in the Event of Natural and Other
Disasters and War (Official Gazette of the RS, No. 32/92), and in accordance
with the plans for the protection and rescue of people in the event of hazmat
accidents (accidents at the Krško Nuclear Power Plant (NPP), chlorine and
other hazmat accidents) and terrorist operations.

Personal and collective protection equipment, included in the commodity
reserve programme, was selected and designed to be used in the shortest
time possible, and suitable for mass use. For 2011, the Agency's board of
directors adopted a work programme and a financial plan for the purchase of
personal and collective protection equipment in the amount of EUR 800,000
(excl. VAT). A total of EUR 713,191 was spent for the purchase of gas
masks for children and youth, for protective gowns, dosimeters with readers,
decontamination assets, devices and tools, radiological detectors, mobile
medical unit equipment and other means of protection.

**_Delivery of Fire Fund Assets and Vehicles to Voluntary Fire-Fighting_**
**_Societies_**

In the area of logistics, pursuant to the Law on Physical Assets of the State,
Regions and Municipalities (Official Gazette of the RS, No. 86/10), due to
the implementation of the public interest in the area of protection against
natural and other disasters, older military and CP vehicles and boats were
in the past transferred to the transferees (current users). In 2011, in line with
the decision of the Committee for the Management of the Fire Fund Assets,
a total of 4,272 pieces of various fire-fighting equipment (4 vehicles, 2 boats
and 2 trailers), particularly communication resources, purchased through the
Fire Fund in the past, were transferred to the Fire-Fighting Association of
Slovenia.

**_Fire Tax_**

Eligible use of the fire tax funds is laid down in Article 59 of the Fire Protection
Act (Official Gazette of the RS, 3/07 – official consolidated text). The use of


-----

funds for wider social significance (30 percent of all funds) is in the hands of
the Committee for the Management of the Fire Funds Assets, in accordance
with the annual plan for the use of the fire tax inflow which amounted to EUR
7,837,078 in 2011. Of this amount, municipalities received EUR 5,495,558.

In 2011, the ACPDR carried out four high-value and several low-value public
procurement procedures for the purchase of:

– Communication resources in the amount of EUR 190,419.
– Self-contained breathing apparatuses in the amount of EUR 81,996.
– Barrier reels for the prevention of marine pollution in the amount of EUR
104,715.
– Equipment for the Kras Centre in the amount of EUR 15,305.
– Equipment for the elimination of consequences of major floods in the

amount of EUR 133,811.

A public call for the co-funding of fire engines in the Kras was made in the
amount of EUR 190,000. Five contracts were signed with the municipalities
of Ilirska Bistrica, Kobarid, Koper, Miren-Kostanjevica and Postojna.

The MoD co-funded the training of operational voluntary fire-fighters in the
amount of EUR 541,121. A total of EUR 14,000 was used for maintaining and
updating the Vulkan (Volcano) information system, while only EUR 86,938 of
the EUR 270,000 planned was spent on medical examinations of fire-fighters
before the SCBA training.

The Fire Fund assets in the amount of EUR 194,165 were used to purchase
equipment, prepare project documentation for the training range, and
regularly maintain equipment at the Training Centre for Civil Protection and
Disaster Relief in Ig and at the Sežana training unit.

**_Research and Development_**

In 2011, four research and development projects (RDP) in the area of
protection against natural and other disasters were carried out. They were
aimed at assessing the vulnerability of buildings after earthquakes, at
setting up an early warning system for the risk of landslides, at the efficient
use of protective water barriers in support of emergency response in the
event of disasters, and at an overview of earth and concrete water barriers.
Procedures for four RDPs were carried out, the projects aimed at assessing
fire risk in buildings, video surveillance of the sea, training of fire-fighters in a
firehouse, and psychosocial support to the population.


-----

Four RDPs were underway in the area of fire protection, in the context
of which a learning application for fire interventions, tactical operational
procedures, literature and slides for basic study programmes of voluntary
fire-fighters, and the Fire & Hazmat Training Programme were prepared.

On the proposal of the Commission for Research and Development Projects
at the Committee for the Management of the Fire Fund Assets, the Committee
approved six proposals for new RDPs for which a tender was announced
in December at the public procurement portal. The following projects were
tendered:

– Tyre fires – emergency response instructions.
– Preparation, implementation and analysis of evacuation from the school
premises – an interactive guide.
– Development of technological equipment for an operational fire engine

for the time monitoring of procedures and the use of equipment.
– Fires on solar power stations/photovoltaics – emergency response
instructions.
– Necessary conditions for the development of internal fires and practical

demonstrations in a real situation: impact of a water source on the
parameters in an internal fire.
– Fire construction products and materials after a real fire.


-----

#### 3 Disaster Response and Damage Assessment

**3.1 Disaster Response**

In 2011, members of PRR forces carried out 16,919 interventions. The
overview is shown in the table below.

_Overview of the Number of Interventions of PRR Forces in 2011_

**Type of unit** **A** **S**
Rescue Dog Units 69 450
Mountain Rescue Service 523 4,392
Cave Rescue Service 9 26
Voluntary Territorial Fire-Fighting Societies 9,265 70,010
Professional Fire Brigades 6,986 29,683
Voluntary Industrial Fire-Fighting Societies 49 210
Underwater Rescue Service 18 73
**TOTAL** **16,919** **104,844**

A – number of activated PRR units
S – number of participating PRR units

**3.2 Damage Assessment**

In 2011, the ACPDR participated in the following damage assessment in the
Republic of Slovenia:

**_Hailstorm of 11 July 2011_**

On 11 July 2011, hailstorms affected the municipalities of Brežice, Bistrica ob
Sotli, Kozje, Podčetrtek, Šentjur and Podlehnik. Assessed property damage
amounted to EUR 2,328,423. The estimated damage did not exceed the
threshold of 0.3 per mil for the allocation of state aid.

Damage to agricultural crops was also assessed. Data on the damaged crops
and areas were obtained from the regional commissions and entered into the
Ajda application. The ACPDR compared data from summary applications of
the Agency for Agricultural Markets and Rural Development. The resulting
damage totalled EUR 3,614,817 on 1,888 hectares of damaged land.

Under the agreement with the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food
(MAFF), damage caused to agricultural crops by the hailstorm was assessed,

|Type of unit|A|S|
|---|---|---|
|Rescue Dog Units|69|450|
|Mountain Rescue Service|523|4,392|
|Cave Rescue Service|9|26|
|Voluntary Territorial Fire-Fighting Societies|9,265|70,010|
|Professional Fire Brigades|6,986|29,683|
|Voluntary Industrial Fire-Fighting Societies|49|210|
|Underwater Rescue Service|18|73|
|TOTAL|16,919|104,844|


-----

although crops can be insured for hail damage. For this purpose, the Ajda
application was modified. The damage assessment was intended for the
MAFF for its agricultural policy measures.

**_Hailstorm of 23 July 2011_**

Assessment of damage to agricultural crops as a result of the hailstorm of
23 July 2011 was carried out in the area of the Vipava Valley and Goriška
Brda. The resulting damage totalled EUR 1,165,760 on 560.92 hectares of
damaged land.

**_Hailstorm of 1 and 2 September 2011_**

Assessment of damage to agricultural crops as a result of the hailstorm of 1
and 2 September 2011 was carried out in Goričko and Sevnica. The resulting
damage totalled EUR 2,286,454 on 262 hectares of damaged land.


-----

#### 4 Education and Training

In line with the annual education and training plan, education and training
took place at the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief of
the Republic of Slovenia in Ig and at the Centre's training units in Pekre,
Sežana and Logatec. Training was provided to members of various PRR
forces, government officials in the field of protection and rescue, and
training providers (lecturers, instructors and teachers of the elective subject
of protection against natural and other disasters in elementary schools).
Organised were training courses and conferences for the needs of the
European Union and international organisations. Based on the applications
and needs for additional training, unscheduled training was also carried out.
In addition to training conducted in the context of the Training Centre, training
organised by NGOs for rescue services and other operational structures was
also conducted.

A total of 28,683 participants attended various forms of education, training
and other activities (18,868 persons at the Training Centre for Civil Protection
and Disaster Relief in Ig, 7,302 persons at the Centre’s training unit in Pekre,
2,260 at the Logatec training unit and 253 at the Sežana training unit).

Training at the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief in Ig, and
particularly at the Pekre, Logatec and Sežana training units, had to constantly
adapt to the available human and material resources provided at these locations.

_Fire-fighter training_


-----

_Training in 2011_

**Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief**

**Število**

**in Ig**

**udeležencev**

**Target groups**

Training Programmes for CP Members 536
Fire Service and Qualification Programmes 292
Programmes for Emergency Response Workers 43
Programmes for Foreign Participants 181
Programmes of Societies – Fire-Fighters 5,535
Joint Programmes for Several Target Groups 1,084
Programmes for Other Target Groups (Elective Course
30
Lecturers)

Programmes of Societies – Dog Handlers 3,810
Programmes of Societies – Divers, Cave Rescuers, MRS 790
PROGRAMMES OF SOCIETIES – OTHERS 351
Other ACPDR Training and Activities 2,207
Other MoD and SAF Training and Activities 1,410
TRAINING OF EXTERNAL USERS IN THE AREA OF
2,599
PROTECTION AND RESCUE

**TOTAL AT THE TRAINING CENTRE FOR CIVIL PROTECTION AND**
**18,868**
**DISASTER RELIEF IN IG**

Pekre Training Unit 7,302
Logatec Training Unit 2,260
Sežana Training Unit 253
**_TOTAL_** **28,683**

In September 2011, the Centre's training unit in Sežana was officially
introduced into operational use. It encompasses approximately 1,800 m²
of usable area with lecture rooms, accommodation facilities, a kitchen, a
dining room and office space. Prior to opening, all necessary consents were
obtained and contracts concluded for the provision of services (electricity,
gas, water, waste, telephone etc.). The ACPDR participated in renting the
kitchen and dining room to external users, in the preparation and conclusion
of an industrial cleaning contract, in cooperation agreements with the Sežana
Fire-Fighting Institute, and in the management of all operational procedures
and purchases for the creation of conditions and commencement of work
at the unit. By the end of the year, operational conditions were established,

|Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief in Ig Target groups|Število udeležencev|
|---|---|
|Training Programmes for CP Members|536|
|Fire Service and Qualification Programmes|292|
|Programmes for Emergency Response Workers|43|
|Programmes for Foreign Participants|181|
|Programmes of Societies – Fire-Fighters|5,535|
|Joint Programmes for Several Target Groups|1,084|
|Programmes for Other Target Groups (Elective Course Lecturers)|30|
|Programmes of Societies – Dog Handlers|3,810|
|Programmes of Societies – Divers, Cave Rescuers, MRS|790|
|PROGRAMMES OF SOCIETIES – OTHERS|351|
|Other ACPDR Training and Activities|2,207|
|Other MoD and SAF Training and Activities|1,410|
|TRAINING OF EXTERNAL USERS IN THE AREA OF PROTECTION AND RESCUE|2,599|
|TOTAL AT THE TRAINING CENTRE FOR CIVIL PROTECTION AND DISASTER RELIEF IN IG|18,868|
|Pekre Training Unit|7,302|
|Logatec Training Unit|2,260|
|Sežana Training Unit|253|
|TOTAL|28,683|


-----

except for the protection of facilities and the provision of reception service.
By reorganising the ACPDR, positions of a senior protection and rescue
advisor and an administrator were filled.

The Pekre training unit only carried out essential operational activities
(emergency maintenance works and minimal fitting for the possibility of the
implementation of individual activities), while all planned investment projects
were transferred to 2012 and 2013. By reorganising the ACPDR, the position
of a protection and rescue advisor, who directs, coordinates and organises
unit activities, was filled.

Throughout the year, activities were held for the establishment and operation
of the Logatec training unit. The work mainly involved the management of
formal and legal issues with previous owners and operators of premises
and facilities (the Union of Veterans of the War for Slovenia (UVWS), the
UVWS Regional Association Logatec and premises operators), the creation
of operating conditions and information of all structures of the System of
Protection against Natural and Other Disasters on the possibilities of use of
unit facilities and terrain, and integration with the local community. Minimal
maintenance of facilities was ensured to prevent possible damage.

During the preparation and course of the regional practical exercise IPA
SI – QUAKE 2011, accommodation of all participating units with vehicles,
equipment and the majority of support staff was provided. At the time of
the exercise (that is in October), the Logatec training unit was turned into
a temporary operational base. The tent camp, set up by the international
unit, was equipped with all the necessary living facilities and infrastructure
(electric generators, heating, toilets, showers).

In 2011, the following programmes were either adopted anew or updated:
Supplementary Training Programme of Committee Members for the
Damage Assessment of Buildings, Basic Training Programme for Members
of First Aid Teams, Basic Training Programme for Stress Management,
and Supplementary Training Programme on Public Relations in the Event
of Disasters. The ACPDR cooperated with the Fire-Fighting Association
of Slovenia, mountain rescuers, divers, the Red Cross and other rescue
services and organisations in harmonising their training programmes with
the Methodology of Preparing Protection, Rescue and Relief Education
Programmes.


-----

With regard to the Fire-Fighting College, the Act Regulating the System of
Positions was adopted, on the basis of which the College will be organised
as a department within the Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster
Relief. Due to staff shortage, no other major activities were implemented.

A total of 42 elementary schools decided to hold the elective course on
protection against natural and other disasters in the 2011/2012 school
year. A total of 16 teachers underwent additional training for teaching the
elective subject. Over 30 head teachers and teachers of elementary schools
attended the conference on Protection against Natural and Other Disasters
– From Elementary School to the Way of Life, held in the context of the 2011
Protection and Rescue Days in Koper. The e-learning content and material
for individual areas of expertise was supplemented and completed.

The ACPDR continued activities for the establishment of a model of stress
prevention and psychological support in the field of protection against
natural and other disasters. The issue of psychosocial support after major
disasters in terms of social work was discussed at the round table in the
context of the Protection and Rescue Days. The purpose of the round table,
which was attended by representatives of social work centres, was to clarify
the operation of social work centres after major disasters and take a step
forward in establishing the model of psychosocial support for the population
after disasters. A model of psychological crisis intervention for emergency
responders was also established.

**_Assessment of Training Level and Exercises_**

Testing the competence of CP and Red Cross (RC) first aid teams at
the regional and national level is aimed at restoring practical knowledge,
maintaining skills and competence, operating in different situations, and
introducing and presenting activities to the widest range of people.

The national qualification of CP and RC first aid teams took place on 8
October 2011 in Brežice. A total of 13 first aid teams participated in the trial
(8 RC teams, 3 CP teams and 2 fire-fighting teams), namely those that did
best in the preliminary regional trials which were attended by 126 teams. Of
these, there were 57 CP teams of local communities, companies, institutions
and organisations, 46 RC teams, 12 fire-fighting teams and 11 teams from
the Mountain Rescue Service, the SAF, the Police and the neighbouring
countries (Austria, Croatia and Hungary).


-----

Approximately 2,000 members of units, services and organisations included
in the system participated in the preparation and implementation of the
13 regional trials. The preparation and implementation of the national
qualification, and the preparation of working and demonstration points
and workshops included 850 persons/members of 36 units, services,
organisations and societies as well as secondary schools. They were
tasked with the preparation and organisation of work sites, workshops
and demonstration points, and the performance of other tasks required for
successful implementation of the qualification.

The 25th First Aid Convention in Europe was, among others, attended by
the first aid CP team of the Municipality of Ptuj, which took sixth place in the
general classification.

**_IPA SI – QUAKE 2011 Exercise_**

The multi-day international exercise was conducted on the basis of the
assumption that, in the event of a catastrophic earthquake in central
Slovenia, the Government requests international assistance in the search
and rescue of victims from debris. The exercise was part of a wider EU
programme which, in collaboration with partners from Croatia, Germany
and Sweden, was led by the ACPDR. Exercise preparations were carried
out by an international group of experts in cooperation with the European
Commission. The exercise was fully funded by the EU.

In terms of planning, organisation, documentation, media coverage,
implementation, and protection of participants, spectators and media
representatives, the exercise was extremely demanding and well prepared.
Despite extremely challenging weather conditions (snow), the exercise
objectives were fully realised. The IPA SI-QUAKE 2011 exercise was
extraordinary regarding the number of units and support groups involved,
and was certainly the most extensive international exercise ever conducted
in the independent Republic of Slovenia.


-----

_IPA SI – QUAKE 2011 exercise_

**_Morje (Sea) 2011 Exercise_**

The aim of the national exercise Morje (Sea) 2011, which was the main
event of the 4th Protection and Rescue Days, was to test solutions from the
emergency response plans in the event of a major accident at sea as well
as to test the innovations in the equipment and organisation of forces in the
event of sea accidents. The exercise conducted in the waters of the Port of
Koper included the multi-purpose boat Triglav and all competent bodies and
services, intended to respond in the event of a sea accident, as provided in
the emergency response plans.


-----

Teams working with water barriers (CP contract members) and vessel
crews demonstrated a high level of competence, cooperation and mutual
understanding. There was therefore no misunderstanding in communication
and cooperation for the implementation of the task – the mitigation of pollution
and the cleaning of water surfaces.

_National exercise Morje (Sea) 2011_

**_Starošince 2011 Exercise_**

The national exercise Starošince 2011 was planned as a two-day, scheduled
and combined exercise. Its purpose was to test and improve the organisation,
readiness and competence of veterinary services and PRR forces in the
event of an outbreak of particularly dangerous animal diseases – avian
influenza – in the area of Ptuj.

Participants focused on the cooperation and coordination between different
bodies and services; on testing procedures for the activation and notification
of competent bodies and services; on the decision-making procedures and
methods for the implementation of protective measures and tasks; on the
managing of centres of particularly dangerous animal diseases; and on
the operational capability and equipment of PRR forces in the event of an
outbreak of particularly dangerous animal diseases for the implementation
of protective measures with emphasis on the decontamination of people and
material assets.


-----

**_Inex4 Exercise_**

The national exercise was based on a “dirty bomb” scenario – a strong
explosion at the stadium in Slovenske Konjice which held an athletic
competition of elementary schools with 1,500 participants. Activated was the
National Emergency Response Plan for Nuclear and Radiological Accidents
as well as the operational-structure commanders and headquarters of the
RS CP and the Zahodnoštajerska region. Activities were carried out in line
with the prepared scenario and the exercise implementation plan.

Responsible bodies, units and services completed the scheduled tasks in a
professional manner. All participants demonstrated adequate competence
for the implementation of tasks.

**_Požar – Mozirska planina (Fire – Mozirje Hills) 2011 Exercise_**

The purpose of the one-day, scheduled and combined regional exercise
was to test the concept efficiency of plans in the event of fires in a hardto-access natural environment by rescuing people at risk. In terms of
planning, organisation, documentation, commentaries, media coverage,
implementation, and protection of participants, spectators and media
representatives, the exercise was well prepared. All exercise objectives were
realised.

Preparations and the exercise itself demonstrated good cooperation of firefighters, the Police, CP members, health services and other responsible
bodies.

**_Letalo (Aeroplane) 2011 Exercise_**

The regional exercise tested response in the event of a smaller aircraft
accident in the border area of two regions (Koroška and Vzhodnoštajerska).
Emphasis was on the effectiveness of solutions from the regional emergency
response plan in the event of an aircraft accident, on the coordination,
implementation and support of search and rescue operations as well as on
the competence and equipment of PRR forces.

The exercise provided experience to both professional and voluntary
structures. The main conclusion was that both regions are well prepared
and equipped for the search operations of missing aircraft and for technical
rescue in the event of smaller aircraft accidents.


-----

**_Sava 2011 Exercise_**

Objectives of the one-day, scheduled and combined exercise on the Sava
River were to test the preparedness of forces to respond to a water course
accident and to verify the appropriateness and consistency of solutions from
the emergency response plans. In accordance with the plan for the activation
of water rescue, 15 rescue units participated in the exercise and successfully
completed all the planned tasks.

The exercise was well prepared, organised and conducted in a hard-toaccess terrain, presenting an additional challenge to the participants.

**_Ruševina (Ruin) 2011 Exercise_**

The exercise starting points were the search and rescue of a large number of
people from buildings demolished either due to an earthquake, an explosion,
errors in the static and construction of buildings, inadequate transformation
of buildings etc. The exercise was aimed at training different PRR forces,
gaining experience in the joint operation of units in debris rescue, using
technology in debris rescue, and managing and coordinating search and
rescue operations.

It included all PRR forces of the Municipality of Kranj which would engage
in debris rescue in the event of a real disaster. Additional assistance was
provided by regional CP units and some regional and national services,
bodies and NGOs.

**_Markovec 2011 Exercise_**

The exercise, aimed at a comprehensive assessment of PRR forces'
preparedness for the event of a work accident at the Markovec tunnel
worksite (fire inside and in front of the tunnel, ceiling collapse, missing
and injured workers), was a one-day, scheduled and combined exercise.
All responsible bodies, units, services and the Markovec tunnel contractor,
Alpina Bau GmbH, cooperated well among themselves, which was the main
exercise objective. Such cooperation will be extremely useful for future work
in the planning and preparation for disasters. It was confirmed that proper
approach to cooperation between different services and bodies is necessary
for the preparation of a plan and for exercise implementation.

The exercise was conducted in accordance with the emergency response
plan for the Markovec tunnel and the tunnel worksite, which is important for


-----

testing the competence, equipment and tactical procedures of rescue units
and services. All participants were able to gain indispensable experience of
operating in such accidents and cooperating with different units and services
of various structures.

**_Protection and Rescue Days in Koper_**

The main event in the field of protection against natural and other disasters
in 2011 in Slovenia was the 4th Protection and Rescue Days. They were
organised between 29 September and 1 October 2011 in Koper. Event coorganisers were the Municipality of Koper and the ACPDR.

_The 4th Protection and Rescue Days in Koper_

The main events were thematically focused on the target group of young
people (particularly pre-school and school children) and the professional
public (professional and voluntary rescue structures and services organised
by NGOs), the Civil Protection, the Police and the SAF. The core events were
organised in the central part of Koper, which enabled many residents of the
city and its surroundings to view individual activities.

Within three days, the exhibition grounds and worksites in the centre of
Koper witnessed the presentation of units and services participating in
protection and rescue operations in the event of environmental and other
disasters at sea, as well as the presentation of manufacturers and exhibitors
of protection and rescue equipment. The ACPDR presented its sea-related


-----

activities in a tent at the Carpaccio Square. Presented were also activities
of professional and voluntary organisations, associations and societies –
fire-fighters, mountain rescues, speleologists, divers, meteorologists, dog
handlers, amateur radio operators and others. The Protection and Rescue
Days were also attended by the SAF, the Police and CP members from Italy
and Croatia, who all presented their own activities.

_Presentation of protection and rescue activities_

The 4th Protection and Rescue Days also included expert consultations for
the mayors of the Slovenian municipalities, commanders of the Fire-Fighting
Association, social workers, psychologists, and elementary school head
teachers and teachers.

Tours were organised for school and pre-school children who learned about
the dangers of and measures taken in individual types of disasters. The
Protection and Rescue Days were visited by over 2,900 pre-school and
school children with their attendants.


-----

#### 5 International Cooperation

International activities in the field of protection against natural and other
disasters in 2011 focused on cooperation within the EU, on the strengthening
of regional and bilateral cooperation, and on the provision of an active role in
international organisations. Slovenia contributed its own share to international
assistance to the countries affected by major natural disasters abroad.

**5.1 Bilateral Cooperation**

In 2011, Slovenia strengthened its cooperation with the neighbouring
countries, particularly in the border area. It completed the planned activities of
the Permanent Mixed Commission for Protection against Disasters, together
with Croatia. In cooperation with Austria, Slovenia began implementing the
European project of strengthening operational cross-border cooperation
(GOAL). Special attention was devoted to the transfer of knowledge and
experience to the Western Balkan countries in the form of development
aid, which complements regional activities and EU projects. A bilateral
agreement on protection against natural and other disasters was signed with
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and an agreement was ratified with Montenegro.
Slovenia strengthened its project-oriented bilateral cooperation in the field of
education and training with France, Germany and Sweden, and established
cooperation with China.

**5.2 Regional Cooperation**

The ACPDR continued intensive work in the context of the key regional
Disaster Preparedness and Prevention Initiative for South Eastern Europe
(DPPI SEE). In addition to professional support in the development of
disaster management systems, provided to the Initiative members, and the
annual financial contribution for the functioning of the Initiative, three training
courses were organised in 2011: specialist hot fire training for fire-fighters,
cave rescue training and an English language course.

In February 2011, the third meeting of Directors General of competent
protection and rescue bodies of the Western Balkans was successfully
organised at Brdo.

In November 2011, the ACPDR attended the ministerial conference on the
strengthening of regional cooperation in disaster management in the process
of cooperation in South Eastern Europe. In the Adriatic-Ionian Initiative,
the ACPDR participated in the working table on forest fire protection and


-----

professionally contributed to disaster protection activities in the context of
the Alpine Convention.

**5.3 European Union**

In 2011, the Republic of Slovenia played an active role in all EU institutions
and elements of the EU Civil Protection Mechanism which is the main
instrument for the coordination of member states' assistance in the event of
major disasters. For the third year in succession, a seconded expert of the
ACPDR successfully operated in the Monitoring and Information Centre.

The ACPDR successfully completed the first part of the EU Programme for
the strengthening of cooperation with candidate and potential candidate
countries in the field of Civil Protection – exercise sub-programme. The
Programme aims to contribute to the development of Civil Protection
capabilities in the Western Balkans and Turkey, and to support these
countries in their accession to the EU. In October 2011, Slovenia hosted a
practical regional exercise IPA SI-QUAKE 2011 with an earthquake scenario.
The exercise was attended by ten countries.

Together with Germany and Croatia, Slovenia conducted four staff exercises
for members of the Civil Protection modules of the EU member states. A total
of 97 experts from 19 countries participated in the exercises. The ACPDR
also participated in other European projects (MONET, AlpSAR, MONITOR
II and Eself-help) and successfully applied for the organisation of training in
the context of the EU Civil Protection Mechanism in 2012 and 2013.

In the framework of the European TAIEX Instrument, the ACPDR accepted
representatives of Macedonia and Ukraine for the exchange of experts.

At the time of the earthquake in Turkey, the Republic of Slovenia, through
the ACPDR and within the EU Civil Protection Mechanism, sent material
assistance to the country. Moreover, it allocated financial assistance to
Japan when it was affected by the earthquake, the tsunami and the nuclear
accident.

**5.4 Multilateral Cooperation**

The ACPDR representatives participated in UN activities for the
implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015. In addition,
they attended the presentation of the interim progress report, the second


-----

session of the Global Platform and the second meeting of the European
Forum for Disaster Risk Reduction.

In the context of NATO, the ACPDR participated in competent working
bodies in the field of Civil Protection and Civil Emergency Planning, in
accordance with the 2011 work plan. An ACPDR representative attended the
Euro-Atlantic Disaster Response Coordination Centre’s (EADRCC) exercise
CODRI 2011 in Moldavia. Moreover, the ACPDR participated in the 2011
Crisis Management Exercise (CMX).


-----

### 6 Inspection in the Area of Protection Against Natural and  Other Disasters

In 2011, inspectors in the area of protection against natural and other
disasters carried out 4,834 inspections. Fire protection inspections were
carried out in buildings with a large number of people and in facilities in
which activities that may endanger workers and nearby residents take place.
Inspectors supervised the construction of buildings and exercised control
on the basis of reports. Control was enhanced during increased fire risk to
the natural environment. Moreover, inspectors participated in fire-fighting
interventions and in determining the causes of fires. Fire-fighting units were
primarily supervised with regard to meeting the prescribed medical fitness
standards for operational fire-fighters.

In the area of protection against drowning, inspections of swimming pools,
equipment lenders and water activity organisers were carried out.

In the field of protection and rescue, inspections of companies representing a
major source of environmental risk were carried out as well as inspections of
ski area and tunnel operators and hazardous material collectors. Moreover,
inspections were carried out in municipalities, schools and kindergartens.
Inspections were also conducted in some protection and rescue units and
services organised by the state.

On the basis of inspections, a total of 1,011 regulatory decisions were issued.
In addition to issuing regulatory decisions, inspectors largely used the legal
possibility of assigning corrective actions within reports on the completion of
inspections.

Based on the Minor Offences Act, the Inspectorate of the Republic of
Slovenia for Protection against Natural and Other Disasters (IRSPANOD)
carried out 1,408 inspections and issued 105 payment orders. Moreover, it
introduced 54 procedures for the issuing of offence decisions, and issued
four accusatory instruments and 1,254 offence warnings.

In order to ensure a uniform scope of inspections in the Republic of Slovenia
(which, within the competence of the Inspectorate, provides a uniform
standard of safety for the citizens of Slovenia in the area of protection
against natural and other disasters), the year 2011 saw the continued
implementation of uniform criteria for the performance of inspections in


-----

Slovenia. The Inspectorate also employed four government officials from
the administrative part of the MoD, which means that, at the time of the
retirement of two inspectors, the total number of inspectors increased.

In the field of administrative operations, due to the reduction in the number
of administrators in branch offices, internal transfers and reorganisation
ensured smooth functioning of branch offices and allowed inspectors to
perform their main tasks, namely inspections.

In accordance with the economy measures, the Inspectorate cancelled the
purchase of material and technical resources, the upgrade of ISPO and ISUP
computer programmes, and major maintenance of branch offices in Ljubljana
and Celje. Due to the economy measures, no new company cars were
purchased, although there was funding provided for this purpose. Currently
used vehicles are on average 7.6 years old, which results in increasingly
higher maintenance costs.

The Inspectorate has its main office premises in Ljubljana and at 13 locations
throughout Slovenia (branch offices). In 2011, the Trbovlje branch office was
moved to the premises operated by the MoD; moreover, government officials
of the Novo mesto branch office were given more appropriate premises. With
the realisation of all the planned relocations in the past years, the Inspectorate
is now able to operate in premises which do not require payment of rental
costs. In addition, all Inspectorate branch offices were ensured optimal
working conditions.


-----

### DEFENCE SYSTEM AND CRISIS MANAGEMENT

#### 1 Defence Policy

**1.1 Cooperation within NATO**

The MoD actively participated in formulating the policy of the Alliance and,
at the same time, effectively put forward the interests of the Republic of
Slovenia within the Alliance by laying down defence policy guidelines and
promoting them through the representatives of the Republic of Slovenia’s
Permanent Mission to NATO and representatives from the Capital during the
sessions of the NATO working bodies.

In March and October 2011, Defence Ministers held two informal meetings
in Brussels (from 10 to 11 March and from 5 to 6 October) and a formal
meeting from 8 to 9 June at the level of the North Atlantic Council, the
Nuclear Planning Group (NPG), the Operation Unified Protector (OUP) in
Libya, the ISAF operation in Afghanistan and the NATO-Russia Council
(NRC). The main topics at these events were the NATO operation in Libya,
the progress of transition in Afghanistan and NATO’s role in the country after
2014, NATO’s reforms, and the multinational capability development.

In Libya, NATO and its partner countries, through proper regional support,
successfully implemented the UN mandate. In Afghanistan, progress was
reflected in the expansion of security areas and further growth of the ANSF. In
March, Defence Ministers adopted NATO's policy guidelines and established
a framework for the review of the Alliance's deterrence and defence posture.
In the spring, for the first time after the adoption of the new NATO defence
planning process, Slovenia defended its defence plan review before the
Allies. The new Alliance capability-building objectives are expected in 2012,
while their approval at the level of the Ministers of Defence is expected in
2013.

The main achievement at the June meeting of Defence Ministers was the
completion of streamlining the NATO command structure. This process was
finally concluded with the agreement on a new distribution of commands.
In October, a framework Strategic Plan for Afghanistan was adopted,
determining the role of NATO after the period of transition, that is after 2014.

The discussions and decisions of NATO should be viewed in light of realising
the Lisbon decisions and preparing for the new NATO Summit which will


-----

be held in May 2012 in Chicago. The Summit will significantly mark the
future of the Alliance in terms of the implementation of commitments made
in Lisbon at the time of significant financial constraints and the setting of
new rules of engagement. In Chicago, the following objectives are to be
implemented: adoption of the new defence and deterrence posture of NATO;
a Strategic Plan for Afghanistan after 2014; a short list of key projects for
the multi-national development of capabilities which will best contribute to
the elimination of the existing shortcomings; the Declaration on the Middle
East and North Africa; and the initial operational capability of NATO's Ballistic
Missile Defence. The MoD supported the rationalisation of NATO structures
and, in cooperation with the MFA, prepared Slovenia’s views on NATO’s
defence and deterrence posture. Moreover, together with the NATO’s
Programme Group, it cooperated in creating a list of multi-national projects
which could also include the Republic of Slovenia.

In the area of the Alliance's partner and enlargement policy, and in line with
the Slovenian foreign policy guidelines, the MoD strongly supported the
Western Balkan countries in their efforts to join NATO. This support was also
seen in the provision of assistance for the implementation of their defence
reforms in the context of bilateral and multilateral projects.

**1.2 Common Security and Defence Policy of the European Union**

The MoD actively contributed to the development and implementation of the
EU Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) and, by providing specific
initiatives, represented the interests of the Republic of Slovenia in EU
institutions, bodies and working bodies. At the operational level, it prepared
views, reviews and articles on various topics in the field of the CSDP, which
were discussed during meetings of the Political and Security Committee
(PSC) and the Politico-Military Working Group (PMG).

The MoD leadership participated in the informal meeting of EU Defence
Ministers on 22 and 23 September in Wroclaw, Poland, and in meetings of
the Foreign Affairs Council (FAC) at the level of Defence Ministers on 23 May
and 30 November in Brussels. The Ministers discussed CSDP operations
and cooperation with international organisations, while special attention
was devoted to the future development of military capabilities in times of the
economic and financial crisis and defence budget reductions. They called
for a new impetus to the development of European military capabilities (also
through the introduction of innovative collaborative methods of capability
pooling and sharing), the elimination of current capability shortfalls and


-----

the provision of adequate capabilities for the planning and implementation
of operations within the CSDP. Accordingly, efforts continued for the
strengthening of the CSDP structures, capabilities and instruments, which
would contribute to a more efficient familiarisation of the EU with security
challenges in the context of the so-called Weimar Initiative. Discussions were
also focused on the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty and the establishment
of the European External Action Service (EEAS), at strengthening Defence
Ministers' meetings at the level of the FAC, and at the development of the EU
crisis management capabilities.

The Republic of Slovenia, in accordance with the principle of a single set
of forces, identified a set of potential capabilities that it could contribute
to the common set of EU capabilities for joint use within the multi-national
integrated structure (pooling), and capabilities that may be implemented
through cooperation with the interested EU countries (sharing). The key task
in the next period will be the realisation of projects or the selection of the
most promising ones from a large number of possible areas of cooperation
for the actual implementation of these projects.

In 2011, the MoD continued cooperating with the EDA. It was involved in the
work of steering committees at the level of capability directors, armament
directors, and research and technology directors. It also participated in
two joint investment programmes (Force Protection (FP) and Innovative
Technologies (ICET)), as such activities constitute business opportunities for
research, development, technological and industrial entities.

The MoD was actively involved in the work of the European Security
and Defence College (ESDC). In May 2011 in Brussels, it organised a
Familiarisation Course on the Common Security and Defence Policy; in
November 2011, it co-organised the Common Security and Defence Policy
Course for Press and Public Information Staff (CSDP PPI Course).

**1.3 Bilateral and Multilateral Cooperation**

**_Bilateral Cooperation_**

In 2011, Slovenia maintained intensive contacts with the neighbouring
countries and strategic partners within the Alliance and international
operations and missions in the area of bilateral defence and military
cooperation in the context of project-oriented activities. It also strengthened
cooperation with the Western Balkan countries and with the countries with


-----

rapidly growing economies (the Russian Federation, Brazil, and China).
Moreover, it signed a defence agreement with the Republic of Azerbaijan.
Also, it started procedures for the conclusion of umbrella defence agreements
with the Federative Republic of Brazil and with Argentina.

The former Minister of Defence concluded a series of bilateral meetings with
Defence Ministers of the Western Balkan countries. She hosted Defence
Ministers of the Republic of Serbia and Montenegro during their official return
visits to the Republic of Slovenia. The visit with the Montenegrin Minister
of Defence was part of a successful donation of a Montenegrin military
submarine, which is open for public viewing in the Park of Military History in
Pivka. During a visit to the SAF members participating in Operation KFOR in
Kosovo, she met the Minister of the Kosovo Security Forces of the Republic
of Kosovo for a short working meeting.

In accordance with the Joint Programme of Planned International Activities
of the President of Slovenia, the President of the National Assembly, the
President of the National Council, the Prime Minister, ministers and heads of
government departments for 2011, and on the basis of the invitations sent,
she hosted the Minister of Defence of the Republic of Hungary during an
official visit to the Republic of Slovenia. Especially high-profile and successful
were her official visits to the Republic of Azerbaijan, the People’s Republic of
China, the Federative Republic of Brazil and to Argentina.

_Official visit of the Minister of Defence to the People's Republic of China_


-----

To promote Slovenian foreign policy objectives, focusing on the areas of
defence and military, the Minister met with several foreign ambassadors
as well as defence and military attachés accredited to the Republic of
Slovenia. The prevailing discussion topics during demonstration, farewell
and working visits of ambassadors and defence and military attachés
included the strengthening of bilateral defence and military cooperation
as well as participation in IOM. Frequent emphasis was also on the EuroAtlantic perspective for the Western Balkans. In the context of regular
annual meetings, the Minister addressed the entire military-diplomatic corps
accredited to the Republic of Slovenia.

**_UN_**

In accordance with the UN defence policy implementation, the Government
adopted a decision in 2009 to increase the participation of SAF members in
the international UN mission at the Golan Heights. In addition, a memorandum
with the UN was concluded in 2010 on the participation of SAF members in
the UNIFIL operation. The MoD thus participates in international operations
and UN missions with SAF members and civilian experts.

Moreover, it participates in inter-ministerial activities in the areas of
development assistance, humanitarian law and law of war, protection of
cultural property, security and protection of women, children and the elderly,
the Red Cross, disarmament, arms control etc.

**_OSCE_**

Within the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
MoD's work is focused on the Organisation's political and military activities.
These are carried out both indirectly, through the MFA, and directly, in line
with the responsibilities of the MoD and the SAF Verification Centre (VERC).

Special attention in 2011 was devoted to the main OSCE activities and
regular reports on the implementation of international agreements adopted
by the Republic of Slovenia in the military and political areas. In line with
the policies and decisions of the OSCE Summit 2010, the MoD provided
professional support to political and diplomatic activities of the MFA in
multilateral negotiations on the modernisation of the Treaty on Conventional
Armed Forces in Europe (CFE), the Vienna Document 99, the enforcement
of other measures and instruments for the enhancement of trust and
cooperation, the preparation of international agreements in the fields of arms
control and disarmament, international agreements in the field of enforcement


-----

of the international humanitarian law and law of war, and in other areas in the
context of OSCE activities.

As a signatory to the Convention on Cluster Munitions (Dublin, May 2008),
the Republic of Slovenia introduced the Act Ratifying the Convention on
Cluster Munitions (Official Gazette of the RS, No. 14/2009). In addition to
fulfilling other obligations of the Republic of Slovenia under the jurisdiction
of the MoD, the MoD, in accordance with the provisions of Article 3 of the
above-mentioned Act, destroyed all stocks of cluster munitions. The SAF
therefore holds no more cluster munitions prohibited by the Convention on
Cluster Munitions.

**_Regional Initiatives in South Eastern Europe_**

In 2011, the MoD actively participated in the initiative for cooperation of
Defence Ministries of South Eastern European countries – SEDM (South
Eastern Europe Defence Ministerial). It participated in the regular annual
meeting of Defence Ministers and Deputy Chiefs of Staff, and in all meetings
of the Initiative's working bodies (CC and PMSC). In the context of SEDM,
the MoD supported the initiative to establish two new projects, namely the
Building Integrity Initiative and the Project on Women in Leadership Positions
in the security and defence sectors.

In the context of achieving defence policy objectives towards the Western
Balkans, Slovenia, as an associate member, actively participated in the
RACVIAC (Centre for Security Cooperation) bodies and events within this
organisation based in Rakitje, Zagreb, in Croatia. In 2011, the MoD coorganised an event in the area of the Cerklje ob Krki airfield, and posted
a civilian employee as Head of the Security Sector Reform Pillar in the
RACVIAC personnel structure.

Together with the US, the Republic of Slovenia co-chaired the SEEC Initiative
– Forum for Western Balkans Defence Cooperation – from the time of its
establishment in 2004 until mid-2011 (that year, co-chairing was taken over
by Macedonia and Norway). In the role of a co-chairing country, Slovenia
(the MoD) actively participated in the content preparation of the 11th SEEC
conference, hosted by Serbia. At the meeting of Defence Policy Directors for
the Western Balkans in October 2011 in Albania, a document was adopted
regarding the areas of operation of the SEEC-TOR initiative. On Slovenia’s
proposal, the document was also prepared by the US and Norway, its
objective being to improve the transfer of presidency and operation of the


-----

SEEC informal initiative. In addition, the document included a name change
from South Eastern Europe Clearinghouse (SEEC) to SEEC - Forum for
Western Balkans Defence Cooperation, which reflects the new reality of the
initiative. The MoD actively supported the initiative to establish three regional
centres in the Western Balkans: the Peace Support Operations Training
Centre in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Media Training Centre in Macedonia,
and the Radiological, Chemical and Biological Defence Centre in Serbia.

**_Multinational Land Force_**

In the context of the Multinational Land Force (MLF) operation, the Republic
of Slovenia supported the efforts of the Republic of Croatia to become a full
member, and proposed a change to the MLF umbrella agreement, which
would enable the admission of other potential new member states. Moreover,
it supported the proposal to renew and update all subordinate documents
relating to the operation of the MLF. The Republic of Slovenia supported the
MLF's participation in the ISAF operation in Afghanistan, and the process of
the MLF's accession to NATO's Rapid Reaction Corps Italy. It also confirmed
the MLF’s intention to participate in EU Battle Groups in the second half of
2012.

**_Defence Diplomacy_**

An MoD employee was temporarily assigned to the Ministry of Defence of
Montenegro, serving as a consultant in the fields of defence reform and
public diplomacy at the Ministry of Defence of Montenegro, the Slovenian
Diplomatic Mission to Montenegro (area of defence). Performance of the
above-mentioned duty is related to the assumption of the role of the NATO
Contact Point Embassy (CPE) in Montenegro for the period 2011/2012.

The MoD and the MFA concluded an Agreement on Work in Slovenian
Diplomatic Missions Abroad in the Area of Defence which governs the
relationship between the two ministries in relation to their work in the area of
defence in Slovenian diplomatic missions abroad. In addition, the Agreement
covers certain issues related to material and technical work conditions and to
the funding of material costs of employees in the area of defence who work
in diplomatic missions.

**1.4 Strategic Planning**

Work in the field of strategic planning was focused on the preparation of
development strategic and planning documents, analyses and reports


-----

related to defence policy, planning and reporting, on setting priority tasks
and directing the defence system development, on coordinating defence
resource projections, on managing and coordinating the defence planning,
and on directing activities and cooperation in the area of defence in the
international security environment.

**_Defence Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia_**

Further work with strategic national security documents after the adoption
of the Resolution on National Security Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia
(ReSNV) in 2010 focused on the preparation of a new Defence Strategy
of the Republic of Slovenia. This is an important document for further
development and transformation of the Slovenian defence system into
a modern, consistent and effective system, and for the coordination and
cohesion of the basic documents in the area of defence. The Strategy defines
the defence policy which sets the direction and goals for the development of
the defence system and all national capabilities participating in the defence
of the country and the implementation of its interests. With its adoption, the
Republic of Slovenia will ensure further development of its defence system
and the basis for the preparation and updating of other operational and
doctrinal documents in the area of defence. Moreover, the Strategy provides
the basis for the normative, organisational and substantive regulation of
defence issues. In May 2011, the MoD working group prepared a proposal
for a new Defence Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia and submitted the
text to the former Minister of Defence for further Government consideration
and adoption. The new Defence Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia was
adopted by the Government in December 2012.

**_Mid-Term Defence Programme_**

The key MoD mid-term planning document is the Mid-Term Defence
Programme which provides the basis for the development and
implementation of defence capability development programmes as well as
the mid-term organisation of the defence system. It also represents a link
between the national defence planning and NATO and EU planning (target
NATO capabilities, response to NATO’s Capability Survey (DPCS), main EU
objectives etc.).

Proposal for the Mid-Term Defence Programme 2011-2016 was started on
the basis of the ReSDPRO SV 2025 from 2010. It defines the objectives
and priority tasks of the defence system development in the medium term.


-----

The MoD was to submit the Proposal to the Government for consideration
and approval by the end of 2011; however, due to unresolved key issues,
this is still just a proposal. The main reason for this is the unclear mid-term
projection of financial resources and the open question of further decisions
regarding the implementation of the MWAV 8 x 8 contract, mainly due to the
uncertainty of the contract's implementation, the joint planning of financial
resources and compliance with the criteria for the establishment of a medium
battalion battle group (MBBG).

**_Participation in NATO’s Defence Planning Process_**

National defence planning is integrated in NATO's and the EU's defence
planning. The national defence planning process is harmonised with the
defence planning process of both organisations, which is verified by regular
defence inspections.

In the context of cooperation in NATO's Defence Review Process 2010/2011,
a trilateral meeting was organised in February 2011 in Ljubljana and a
multilateral DRC meeting in May 2011 in Brussels. NATO's Defence Planning
Capability Review 2010/2011 signifies the fifth stage in NATO's Defence
Planning Process (NDPP). It included trilateral and multilateral discussions
at the MoD and in Brussels on the progress realised in the field of defence
capabilities and resources in the past, and on future national plans. In this
context, member states and NATO's International Staff provided opinions,
assessments and recommendations for Slovenia, which will be taken into
consideration and reflected in the forthcoming mid-term planning cycle.

**_Rules on Defence Planning in the MoD_**

In line with the changes in the NATO and EU defence planning process, the
MoD began drafting new Rules on Defence Planning in 2010. The Rules
will introduce planning based on the planning of capabilities. The current
defence planning process will thus be upgraded, bringing together individual
planning areas and clearly delineating responsibilities between different
MoD organisational units which are crucial in defence planning. The text
proposal for the new Rules is being prepared by an MoD working group by
the decision of the former Minister of Defence. After coordination with all
constituent bodies and internal organisational units (IOU), the proposal will
be submitted for adoption to the current Minister of Defence, presumably in
2012.


-----

**_Pooling and Sharing of Capabilities_**

The MoD supports cooperation within the Multinational and Innovative
Approaches initiative which represents a possible solution for the
enhancement of cooperation in the field of development of military and nonmilitary capabilities, which is increasingly difficult to achieve in a tight fiscal
environment of individual countries. Participation in multinational projects
opens up many opportunities in Slovenia for the establishment of capabilities
and bridging the capability gap, achieving interoperability, gaining relevant
experience, and actively contributing to the joint efforts of the Alliance. Above
all, in times of shrinking the defence expenditure, multinational purchase
projects may offer opportunities for the acquisition of equipment at a lower
price.

Slovenia already contributes certain capabilities and participates in projects
and initiatives in the framework of NATO and the EU, which may be included
in the concept of “pooling and sharing of capabilities” (e.g. strategic airlift –
SAC and SALIS, land monitoring from the air – AGS, helicopter crew training
– EDA, and participation of a light battalion battle group (LBBG) in the MLF
and NATO Rapid Deployable Corps – Italy (NRDC-ITA)).

The MoD established a common set of projects which could result in greater
cost-efficiency for Slovenia, a higher level of interoperability, deployability
and operational efficiency as well as in enhanced mutual trust between the
member states. Initially, a wider pool of projects for the Republic of Slovenia's
participation included a total of 18 projects; however, on the basis of further
analysis, a total of nine projects were finally selected. In accordance with its
capabilities, development of military capabilities and development of pooling
and sharing in the context of international institutions and initiatives, Slovenia
will devote more attention to its participation in NATO’s project in the area of
CBRN defence capabilities and the EU/EDA project in the area of the ROLE2 medical capability.

**1.5 Provision and Implementation of Unified Operation of the NATO**
**Registry System in the Republic of Slovenia**

In the previous year, the NATO Central Registry/EU Sub-Registry ensured
successful operation of the NATO Registry System in the Republic of Slovenia
and the operation of NATO Sub-Registries and the EU Sub-Registry at the
MoD. All conditions for the receipt, traceability, sending and destruction of
classified and official NATO and EU data were provided in due course and


-----

in full. Transport and transfer of NATO as well as of classified and official
EU data in the Republic of Slovenia and abroad were successfully realised
for the needs of the MoD, and other ministries and public authorities in the
Republic of Slovenia. For this purpose, the NATO and EU courier network
and terminals in Europe were used.


-----

#### 2 Slovenia's Crisis Preparations and Response Measures

**_Preparations and Measures_**

In relation to the amendments made to the Defence Act and the civil defence
transformation, the MoD prepared a new regulation in the field of defence
planning. A draft amending the existing Decree on Defence Plans (Official
Gazette of the RS, No. 11/04) was prepared with the purpose of drafting a
new Regulation on the Preparations and Measures for the Defence of the
State and the Operation of the Defence System in Crisis Situations. The
Regulation shifts from classic defence planning to emergency planning,
limited to the area of defence, within which the participating entities have
defence-related tasks and responsibilities.

In connection to the planning and implementation of the MoD defence plan,
a new Decision on the Content and Managing Authority of the MoD Defence
Plan (MoD, No. 8011-15/2011-9 of 1 July 2011) was prepared, changing the
existing manner of planning at the MoD.

**_Critical Infrastructure Protection_**

In the field of critical infrastructure protection, the Government, on the
proposal of the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Group for the Coordination of
Preparations for Critical Infrastructure Protection in the republic of Slovenia,
led by the MoD, adopted the definition of critical infrastructure of national
importance in the Republic of Slovenia. Moreover, in May 2011, it also adopted
the Decree on European Critical Infrastructure (Official Gazette of the RS,
No. 35/11) which introduced the European Directive into the Slovenian legal
order. The MoD continued preparing sectoral and cross-sectoral criteria for
defining critical infrastructure in Slovenia.

**_Crisis Management Exercise POMLAD (SPRING) 11_**

The MoD conducted an internal crisis management exercise that was
substantially related to the CMX 11 and INEX 4 exercises. The exercise
tested solutions and possible response of Slovenia, particularly its defence
system, in the event of direct military threat and simultaneous occurrence of
natural and chemical disasters.

**_NATO Crisis Management Exercise CMX 11_**

In line with the Government guidelines and the Exercise Plan within the
Defence System and the System of Protection against Natural and Other


-----

Disasters in 2011 and 2012 (Government of the Republic of Slovenia, No.
83100-4/2010/6 of 9 December 2010), the MoD successfully conducted the
NATO Crisis Management Exercise (CMX 11). Its purpose was to test the
response of member states and the Alliance as a whole to direct threats
to the Alliance and the procedures of collective defence implementation.
Exercise implementation in Slovenia was coordinated by the MoD. The
exercise included all ministries and some government services.

**_EU Crisis Management Exercise CME 11_**

The European Union Crisis Management Exercise tested the mechanisms
of decision-making and coordination of military and civilian instruments in
the EU's response to crisis situations as well as the preparation of military
operations and civilian missions in crisis areas. The Government selected
exercise participants, while the MoD was responsible for the exercise
preparation and implementation in Slovenia.

Exercise analyses demonstrated successful solutions as well as weakness
in the planning, implementation and response of exercise participants.

**_International Cooperation_**

Task implementation followed the obligations accepted by Slovenia in
international organisations and through international treaties. Accordingly,
the MoD participated in the transformation of the Civil Emergency Planning
(CEP) in NATO and in plenary sessions of NATO’s Senior Civil Emergency
Planning Committee (SCEPC, now CEPC).

**_Commodity Reserves_**

The MoD addressed the five-year programme of national commodity
reserves which includes requirements of the SAF and the protection and
rescue system. Coordination and preparation of substantive requirements
were conducted in cooperation with the Ministry of the Economy (ME) and
the Agency of the Republic of Slovenia for Commodity Reserves.

**_Doctrine of Formation and Operation of the Military Strategic Reserve_**

In 2011, an internal MoD working group for the preparation of a Doctrine
of Formation and Operation of the Military Strategic Reserve became
operational. Preparation derives from the military doctrine and the Resolution
on National Security Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia.


-----

**_Defence System Tasks_**

In 2011, the MoD regularly modified and adapted the plans of nationalimportance facilities to the defence needs and supervised the construction
of such facilities.

It addressed applications of societies to obtain the status of public-interest
societies in the area of defence, and applications for the issuing of opinions
in the process of obtaining the status of the War for Slovenia veterans in the
area of civil defence.

**_National Crisis Management Centre_**

The National Crisis Management Centre (NCMC) established an
independent communications and information network (NCMC CIS) for the
implementation of all the required communications and information links. The
CIS network includes the NCMC DSS (Decision Support System) application
for fast, safe and effective communication and coordination of activities in
the decision-making process of the key crisis management entities. In 2011,
the DSS application was also used for the coordination of activities between
public authorities during the crisis in Libya. The NCMC, as the application
administrator, held training courses for all users and upgraded the application
in line with the experience gained in exercises.

In 2011, the final intended users were included in the NCMC CIS, which
resulted in further improvement of direct support to the national leadership in
responding to crises (facilities, CIS, analytical support etc.).

The MoD continued conducting training courses for working with the CIWIN
application (Critical Infrastructure Warning Information Network). Training
was attended by those involved in the protection of European and national
critical infrastructure.

The MoD adopted a new Decree on the Administrative Communications.
The Decree re-regulates the organisation and operation of administrative
communications organised by the MoD for the implementation of national
defence. These communications link public authorities, companies,
institutions and other organisations whose activity is of particular importance
for the defence, provides liaison with international organisation bodies in the
system of collective defence and security in line with the adopted international
obligations of Slovenia, cooperation between public authorities and the SAF,
and notification of self-governing local communities.


-----

#### 3 Development of Civilian Capabilities

In the development of civilian capabilities, the MoD prepared civilian
functional experts to participate in international operations and missions,
provided maps and took care of geospatial issues, supported host nations,
and ensured material and medical assistance.

**_Civilian Functional Experts in Afghanistan_**

In 2011, the MoD ensured the largest number of CFEs to participate in
IOM. In October 2011, in the framework of the ISAF mission in the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan, CFE operation strengthened, expanding from the
area of operation of the Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) Herat, run by
Italians, to the PRT Farah, run by the USA. Thus, starting on 9 October 2011,
as many as four CFEs participated in the ISAF mission, two in the PRT Herat
and two in the PRT Farah.

The major part of the CFE participation in the ISAF PRT Herat mission
was focused on the implementation of projects in support of strengthening
the capabilities of public administration institutions and promoting the
development of universities and other educational institutions and
programmes, particularly in the fields of veterinary medicine, agriculture,
animal husbandry, medicine, projects in support of humanitarian activities
and women's empowerment, the development of media through education
programmes, and projects in other areas. CFE participation in the PRT
Farah was focused on advising provincial authorities on the building of public
administration capabilities in the financial and legal fields.

_Humanitarian activities of civilian functional experts_


-----

**_Civilian Functional Experts in Kosovo_**

Two CFEs operated in Kosovo as part of the NATO Advisory Team (NAT) which
plays a key role in establishing and providing the maximum effectiveness of
operation of the system of security forces under the Ministry for the Kosovo
Security Force. At the end of January, the CFE who acted as a CIS advisor
ended his function in the NAT; in May, a CFE acting as a defence policy and
planning advisor was deployed to the NAT for a year.

**_CFE Recruitment and Training_**

The MoD continued recruiting and training a new generation of CFEs;
moreover, the Government adopted a decision authorising CFE deployment
to international operations and missions in the area of defence.

**_Mapping and Geospatial Affairs_**

In the area of mapping and geospatial affairs, the MoD continued the
development and maintenance of the mapping system coordinated with the
Slovenian and NATO standards and the NATO geospatial policy.

In cooperation with the Geodetic Institute of Slovenia, the MoD issued an
updated Military General Map of the Republic of Slovenia in the scale of 1 :
250,000 (MGM 250) in raster and vector format; moreover, eight sheets of
updated Military Topographic Maps of the Republic of Slovenia, issued in
2010, in the scale of 1 : 50,000 (MTM 50) for the southern part of Slovenia
were printed.

For the preparation of SAF members to participate in international operations
and missions in Afghanistan, NATO provided the MoD with the prescribed
maps, free of charge, on the basis of participation in the working group for
the standardisation of geospatial data (Geospatial Requirements Working
Group - GRWG) and in the mutual mapping of locations in Afghanistan. In
cooperation with the US Geospatial Intelligence Agency, which provided
data sources, and with the Geodetic Institute of Slovenia, the MoD produced
seven satellite street maps for the area of the Herat Province in Afghanistan.

In addition, the MoD continued adopting NATO Standards (STANAGs) in the
geospatial area for inclusion in the Slovenian Military Standards. A total of
three Standards were adopted and implemented.


-----

**_Host Nation Support_**

The MoD updated the Government host nation support plan in cooperation
with the SAF and the public authorities responsible for such support in
Slovenia. The computer-assisted database was upgraded with civilian
capabilities.


-----

#### 4 Intelligence and Security Operations

The MoD intelligence and security operations were carried out in line with
the Defence Act, the adopted action plan, objectives and tasks. The key
tasks and objectives were linked to the provision of adequate intelligence
and security support to SAF forces abroad and to other national security
entities. The priority intelligence task was the assessment of military, political
and security conditions in the Western Balkans, particularly in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Kosovo, and in Afghanistan. Intelligence and security
operations were also focused on crisis areas in Africa and the Middle East
(Lebanon), where SAF members participate in IOM. The MoD monitored the
indicators that might threaten defence interests of the Republic of Slovenia
or increase the degree of military threat.

One of the key priorities of the MoD intelligence and security operations
was providing efficient intelligence and security support to SAF members
participating in IOM. The MoD cooperated with all the relevant defence
system entities as well as with partner intelligence and security services
within the Slovenian national security system.

Cooperation with NATO and the EU continued and was, in certain areas,
further strengthened. The MoD continued operating in the framework of
national intelligence cells in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo, and in the
framework of intelligence and security services of international headquarters.
It also participated in other international events related to intelligence and
security. The focus of security-related tasks was on detecting, investigating
and preventing security threats to persons, work posts, facilities and areas
of special importance for defence in the Republic of Slovenia and abroad.

The Intelligence and Security Service also performed the tasks of detecting
and preventing the activities of intelligence services, military organisations,
and other bodies and organisations which pose a threat to the defence
interests of Slovenia, the SAF and the MoD.


-----

#### 5 Equipping, Real Estate Management, Standardisation and   Codification

**5.1 Equipping**

The financial crisis and the consequent reduction in investments resulted in
significantly reduced equipping of the SAF with the main equipment. Attention
was primarily devoted to the completion of open projects. Of the projects
under the Act on the Implementation of Basic Development Programmes of
the Slovenian Armed Forces in the Period between 2008 and 2015, the MoD
completed the purchase of Ground Master long-range radars.

Two vehicles were purchased as part of the medium armoured vehicles MWAV
8 x 8 project, the C4I validation was completed, and the information scientist
and communicator instructor C4I training was implemented. Negotiations
are currently underway regarding the possibility of contract reprogramming.

All other projects were suspended. Financial projections and estimates
suggest that only about 30 percent of the financial part of the Act on the
Implementation of Basic Development Programmes may be realised
between 2008 and 2015. Substantive realisation of the programme suggests
that, of the eight projects planned, only two can be realised in full, signifying
a mere 25 percent programme realisation.

The MoD completed two purchase projects arising from the clearing debt
with the Russian Federation, namely the purchase of short-range Igla missile
systems with Strelec launchers and the purchase of the multi-purpose
military boat Triglav.

The project of upgrading Cougar helicopters is still underway and is expected
to be completed in 2013. The delay is mainly the result of difficulties in
coordination with contractual partners. In 2011, 12 light wheeled armoured
vehicles 4 x 4 Hummer were purchased for the purpose of SAF participation
in operations.

Modernisation of the Cerklje ob Krki airfield was delayed due to difficulties in
securing funding from NATO and the national budget. Work is underway for
extending the runway and installing signal lights.

A new Decree on the Methodology for the Elaboration and Management of
the Investment Documentation in the Field of Defence was prepared.


-----

In August 2009, the European Parliament adopted the 2009/81/EC Directive
relating to public procurement in the areas of defence and security, and to
the provision of legal protection in public procurement procedures in the
mentioned areas. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance (MF) formed a
working group (with the MoD playing an active role in it) to introduce the
Directive contents into the Slovenian legal order. Thus far, the Directive has
been introduced and implemented in part, namely in relation to the provision
of legal protection in public procurement procedures in the areas of defence
and security. For the part of the Directive relating to procedures for the award
of public contracts in the areas of defence and security, the MoD prepared
an act proposal concerning the award of public and defence contracts.
The act has undergone inter-ministerial coordination and is prepared for
consideration by the Government.

Due to the establishment of the Public Procurement Agency, guidelines were
prepared to adapt the MoD public procurement system to the new legal
regulation.

In the area of public and defence procurement, the greatest focus in 2011
was on:

– Monitoring the operation of the multi-purpose patrol boat Triglav which
was purchased in late 2010. In 2011, latent defects had to be eliminated
and complaints resolved. The boat’s berth was contractually arranged
with the Port of Koper.
– The project of introducing new combat uniforms, in relation to which
contracts were awarded which were partially completed in 2011. Some
commitments were assumed for the following two years.
– Renovation and acquisition of the public warning system – a contract
was awarded for the system renovation, namely the purchase of public
warning sirens.
– Provision of MoD facility cleaning services.
– Conclusion of insurances for the MoD means of transport (passenger and
multi-purpose vehicles, cargo vehicles, other land means of transport,
aircraft and watercraft) and accident insurances for the MoD employees.
– Maintenance of military assets and other equipment.
– Conclusion of contracts for equipping the Cerklje ob Krki airfield with

visual and electronic navigation.
– Purchase of large fire engines and other vehicles required for the

certification of the Cerklje ob Krki airfield.


-----

– Purchase of computer, software and cryptographic equipment.
– Procurement of equipment for the development and research projects,
namely for the development of systems for the detection of mine and
explosive devices (development of technologies for the THz imaging
camera, development of artificial nose technologies, development of
technologies for the detection of nuclear quadrupole resonance) and
development of the technology of high-temperature fuel cells with
methanol reformer on silicon wafers.

**5.2 Real Estate Management**

In the provision of infrastructure for the needs of the SAF, works were carried
out on the basis of the plan for the acquisition of tangible assets. Especially in
the last two years, due to bankruptcies and liquidity problems of contractors,
works on some facilities have been falling behind schedule and financial
liabilities have been transferred to subsequent periods.

The Kadetnica facility and its general external arrangement was completed
and handed over to the user. In the modernisation of the Cerklje ob Krki airfield,
works were related to the reconstruction and extension of the runway and
to the preparatory phase of building a fire rescue service facility. Procedures
were underway for the purchase of land required for the establishment of
comprehensive airfield infrastructure. Construction of the Škrilj firing range
and training area was completed and handed over to the user. The branch
Training Centre for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief in Sežana was
renovated and upgraded. The realisation of these projects, however, was
delayed due to the bankruptcy of certain contractors. Works in the Kranj
sports centre were delayed due to the contractor’s liquidity problems.

Radar positions at Ledinekov Kogel and Ljubljanski Vrh were reconstructed.
In accordance with the plans, telecommunications wiring was installed in
barracks and other SAF facilities. Works were also carried out in relation
to the reconstruction of fences and technical security of facilities. Projects
and investment documentation were prepared for the implementation
of the planned construction. Major maintenance and repair included the
construction and adaptation of infrastructure for MWAV 8 x 8, the restoration
of roofs in SAF barracks and warehouses, and other maintenance works on
buildings and other infrastructure in use by the SAF.

A total of 38 MoD apartments were fully renovated for rent.


-----

The adopted Decree on National Spatial Plan for Comprehensive Spatial
Arrangement of the International Port in Koper includes spatial arrangements
for the needs of the defence. The draft National Spatial Plan for the Central
Firing Range and Training Area Postojna gained positive preliminary
opinion of the Minister of the Environment and Spatial Planning. Within
the procedures for the adoption of a detailed municipal spatial plan for the
Berek barracks, pre-investment assessment was prepared and certified.
Currently, investment documentation is being prepared for comprehensive
arrangement of the Pokljuka Training Centre.

The MoD concluded multi-annual contracts for the maintenance and
renovation of the housing fund, facilities and installed infrastructure of the
SAF and the administrative part of the MoD.

**5.3 Standardisation and Codification**

The adoption and implementation of Slovenian Military Standards (SVS) in
support of the construction and maintenance of SAF capabilities is one of the
cornerstones of achieving interoperability of the Slovenian defence system
with NATO and its member states. Codification contributes to transparency
and reduction in the costs of fitting. Slovenian Military Standards cover the
operational, material and administrative area.

With each year, the codification of supply items is more involved in the
equipping processes, from investment programmes to delivery orders and
introduction of equipment. The status of Slovenian industry is also being
strengthened, manufacturing products for the needs of NATO member states
and Partner Countries.

Quality assurance is based on the reciprocity of NATO member states in the
implementation of quality control of products purchased in other countries.
Initiated was the accreditation process of the national body for government
quality assurance.

The MoD standardisation plan, which includes the adoption of Slovenian
Military Standards, their entry into force, and implementation and certification
of NATO standards, was carried out in accordance with the expectations. In
2011, a total of 54 SVS STANAGs were adopted, resulting in 98 percent
realisation of the standardisation plan. Implementation decisions (orders)
were adopted for 37 SVSs. In the process of national certification of NATO
standards, only 59 national responses were signed, representing half of the


-----

required responses. In 2012, amendments to the Rules on the Implementation
of Standardisation were adopted, establishing a new NATO regulation in the
area of standardisation (AAP-3(J)).

In 2011, within the national jurisdiction, a total of 740 NATO Stock Numbers
(NSN) were allocated. As a result of the acquisition of material resources
abroad, the Republic of Slovenia was registered as the user of 8,687 NSNs.
The NATO Codification System registered 19 new Slovenian producers who
now total 181.

By introducing the logistics information system to the SAP software
environment, significant progress was achieved in the provision of quality
information for the identification of material resources. The aim is the
application of these resources in logistics processes, connection to the
codification, and regulation of all items opened since 1992. In 2011, a total of
3,400 new material resources were identified.

All claims of those NATO member states were carried out which purchased
products from Slovenian producers (AREX, KIK, PRIMAT) for the
implementation of the Government's quality assurance in line with the AQAP
standards.


-----

#### 6 Communications And Information System (CIS)

**6.1 Information Security**

The majority of resources were focused on the modernisation of the MoD
intranet network to ensure an appropriate level of security. The MoD
followed the process of modernising its communications infrastructure and
the transition to the IP network, and, by way of the technological solution,
supported the rationalisation of costs of reciprocal communication links
between individual remote locations of the administrative part of the MoD
and the SAF.

In the construction and implementation of cyber defence capabilities and
capabilities for responding to computer security incidents, the MoD, due
to limited personnel resources, combined the implementation of national
activities with the activities of implementing NATO’s cyber defence strategy.
Activities related to cyber defence will also take place in the following years,
as this is becoming an increasingly important area on which depend the
security and availability of national, defence and other communications and
information networks.

**6.2 Information Infrastructure**

The funds available were primarily allocated to the provision of operation of the
information infrastructure, allowing for the renovation of some technologically
outdated systems. These included the system for the production and storage
of backup systems and databases, and the replacement of obsolete HP
UNIX servers with newer blade servers. The number of data in databases is
continuously increasing, which is why the space of systems and databases
was upgraded with additional 20 TB.

The MoD started renovating the Computer Centre (CC) for the needs of the
MoD CIS. The renovated and adapted CC environment will correspond to
the level of protection against electromagnetic radiation – TEMPEST. In this
way, conditions for the establishment of a national CIS for the handling of
information classified as “SECRET”.

**6.3 Communications and Information Backbone**

The MoD continued replacing the leased CIS lines with more modern and
significantly cheaper VPN connections (IP VPN technology). The year 2011
witnessed constant growth of the MoD CIS which, as the MoD global network,


-----

enables the MoD’s operations and availability of services to users, SAF
members in the international environment and permanent representatives of
the Republic of Slovenia to NATO and military diplomatic missions. In 2011,
the MoD replaced some key obsolete and spent network equipment building
blocks for the MoD INTRANET, PUB and HKOM computer networks. The
replacement allowed for uninterrupted operational functioning of the MoD
CIS.

**6.4 IT Solutions**

Two major and very important IT solutions were introduced, namely the
IRDG (information system for paperless operations) and the ISLOG.CR
(SAP system) – a comprehensive logistics IT solution. By introducing the
IT solution for document management, the MoD became the first ministry
to operate with documents electronically. The result of the introduction is,
above all, altered work processes and cost reduction. The introduction of the
ISLOG.CR is progressing gradually, depending on the extent of functionality
of the system, the MoD organisational units, and SAF commands and units.


-----

#### 7 Inspections in the Area of Defence and Investigations of 
 Aircraft Accidents and Military Aircraft Incidents

**7.1 Inspections in the Area of Defence**

The Defence Inspectorate of the Republic of Slovenia (DIRS), as an MoD
body, performs, in line with the regulations, inspections of the implementation
of laws and other regulations as well as of command and control acts in
the area of defence. It reviews, identifies and evaluates the preparedness
and performance of military commands, units and institutions, the state of
defence preparations, the implementation of military education and training,
and the management of administrative and technical issues in the area of
defence.

In line with the statutory provisions, the Inspectorate performs inspections of
the implementation of the Act on the Protection of Classified Information at the
MoD and in the entire area of defence. It also inspects the MoD organisational
units in the implementation of their administrative and technical tasks, except
the tasks and activities of the ACPDR and the IRSPANOD.

Inspectors conduct procedures and decide on violations in accordance with
the Minor Offenses Act.

In 2011, the DIRS had the following key objectives:

– Provision of effective and impartial enforcement of regulations in the
area of defence through thematic and comprehensive inspections and
through monitoring the realisation of measures taken with regard to the
inspected entities.
– Notification of the Minister of Defence and the MoD leadership on the

condition of the inspected entities.
– Preparation of action proposals for the Minister, the MoD leadership, and
superior commands for the elimination of system deficiencies.
– Modernisation of inspections in the area of defence and the promotion of
good practice in this area.

To achieve the above objectives, the chief inspector devoted special attention
to planning and coordinating the work of the Inspectorate. Based on the
DIRS work plan for 2011, coordination was conducted through monthly and
weekly work plans.


-----

The DIRS carried out a total of 70 inspections. Of these, the Military
Defence Inspection Division carried out 22 inspections, while the Division
for the Inspection of Civil Defence, Administrative and Professional DefenceRelated Matters carried out 48 inspections. The ratio between the number
of inspections in each Division does not represent the value of work done in
an individual Division, as, out of a total of 70 inspections, 25 were so-called
collective inspections which typically included inspectors from both Divisions.

From a total of 70 inspections, 61 were regular scheduled inspections, 3
were special announced inspections, and 6 were re-scheduled inspections.
Inspectors conducted these 70 inspections in 452 inspection days. Based on
the findings, a total of 317 measures were issued.

Of all 317 measures imposed, the deadline for their execution in 2011 expired
in the case of 252 measures. Of these, 16 measures (6.3 percent) were
not executed, while the expiration deadline for 46 measures is in 2012. The
inspected entities lodged a complaint against 19 measures imposed; thus
far, the complaint resolution procedure in the second instance has not been
completed for any of the complaints filed.

**7.2 Investigation of Aircraft Accidents and Military Aircraft Incidents**

Timely implementation of measures affected the elimination and reduction
of the possibility for the loss of human lives and material damage to
military equipment and facilities on the ground. In 2011, a total of 67 safety
recommendations were issued for 18 incidents reported within the system of
reporting on aircraft accidents and incidents. This contributed to greater flight
safety and to the year 2011 ending with no military aircraft accidents.


-----

#### 8 Strategic Communication

Ensuring transparency and openness of operation and enhancing the
reputation of the MoD was the key task of strategic communication. A total
of 750 press releases and over 250 audio statements concerning the MoD's
area of work were published on websites of the MoD and the SAF. Much
attention was also devoted to the preparation of film and video recordings
of different events, which were published on YouTube. In this way, defence
topics were brought closer to the younger population. More than 140 video
summaries were published in 2011; in comparison to 2010, the MoD noted
twice as many viewings, amounting to approximately 135,000. Among the
most popular film recordings were a half-hour documentary about the visit of
the Slovenian delegation to the SAF members in Afghanistan, a film about
the Challenge 2011 exercise, and a video of the festival of military bands
in Stožice. Many people watch videos of SAF aeroplanes’ flights and the
film about the modernisation of the Cerklje ob Krki military airfield, titled
Srce letališča (The Heart of the Airport), which was broadcast on national
television in 2011.

In the desire for greater public visibility, the MoD prepared five thematic press
conferences on cooperation in international operations and missions, on the
operation of the System of Protection against Natural and Other Disasters,
and on the presentation of SAF tasks in the context of protection, rescue and
relief forces.

To make information on the MoD operations directly accessible to the general
public, the MoD was one of the first ministries to begin using the social
networks Twitter (180 short messages posted) and Facebook (210 posted
messages equipped with photographs). As part of research activities, the MoD
prepared a comparative analysis of the efficiency of online communication of
the MoD, the SAF and defence systems in selected countries in relation to
public support of international operations and missions. The analysis results
will, by taking into account good practices of online communication in other
countries, significantly contribute to establishing the strategy of successful
online presentation of the MoD.

In the area of filmmaking, in addition to the already mentioned preparation
of short films and recordings of current events, the MoD completed several
important major projects, such as the 15-minute educational film about the
18th CBRN Defence Battalion and the educational film about the operation
of the light air defence missile platoon. Moreover, preparations began for


-----

shooting a documentary titled Boji za severno mejo 1918-1919 (Fights for
the Northern Border 1918-1919). The Strategic Communication Service
was actively involved in collecting archival recordings for the preparation
of footages on events in the War for Slovenia. Otherwise, these footages
were prepared by national and other televisions on the occasion of the 20th
anniversary of Slovenia’s independence.

By reorganising the administrative part of the MoD in 2011, the Strategic
Communication Service assumed the tasks of publishing and proofreading
(a total of 5,030 pages were proofread), coordinating publishing activities
and developing joint plans for the publishing of professional military and other
literature for the civilian and military part of the MoD. The reduced number
of published publications in 2011 was also the result of a decrease in funds.

The MoD published all 19 of the planned issues of the Slovenska vojska
(Slovenian Armed Forces) magazine and its two supplements. In order
to rationalise the expenditure, the MoD reduced the number of copyright
agreements for articles with external providers. It took into account wishes of
the employees and redesigned the magazine in terms of its content, devoting
it primarily to individuals and their role in the system.


-----

#### 9 Normative Acts

In line with the Work Programme of the Government of the Republic of
Slovenia for 2011, adoption of 19 regulations on the area of work in the
MoD was planned (2 from the jurisdiction of the National Assembly, 11 from
the jurisdiction of the Government, and 6 from the jurisdiction of the MoD).
Nine implementing regulations were adopted and published in the Official
Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia; for one implementing regulation, only
approval for its adoption was submitted (to the Ministry of Health (MH) for
the amendment to the Rules on Establishing Health Ability of Operating
Firemen). In this period, the MoD prepared 15 regulations which, however,
were not included in the Government’s Work Programme for 2011, as the
need for their adoption only arose in the course of the year. Concerning the
Government’s Work Programme, ten regulations remained unrealised. This,
however, had no negative impact on the normative regulation of the areas
governed by them.

Most normative activities focused on further harmonisation of the implementing
regulations with previous regulatory changes, mostly from the working area
of the MoD and partly from other ministerial areas. Some changes were also
related to the introduction of the European Legal Order into the legal order of
the Republic of Slovenia.

Due to the latter, the Fire Protection Act and the Protection against Drowning
Act were revised in 2011. This was done to comply with the Directive 2006/123/
EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on
Services in the Internal Market. In this way, procedures were simplified for
those legal and natural persons wanting to perform activities in the Republic
of Slovenia governed by the above mentioned Acts (inspections, tests,
maintenance of fire protection systems and devices, water rescue etc.).

The Decree amending the Decree on the Compensation and Reimbursement
during the Protection, Rescue and Aid Duties properly regulated the status
of rescue workers and improved the relationships with employers in the
regulations within the competence of the Government. Employers are now
entitled to partial reimbursement for the loss of income due to the absence
of an employed Civil Protection member and to salary compensation for the
time of their temporary incapacity for work.

The Decree amending the Decree on the Organisation, Equipment and
Training of Protection, Rescue and Aid Forces improved solutions for the


-----

organisation of PRR forces in responding to traffic and hazmat accidents,
and certain provisions concerning responding to potential accidents in longer
railway tunnels. A uniform national unit was established for protection against
unexploded ordnance, which replaced previous regional units. Given the
organisational changes in the operation of the ACPDR Training Centre and
costs coverage for the implementation of education and training programmes,
some provisions relating to education and training were updated.

The Decree on the Use of Defence Capabilities for Support of State
Authorities, and Cooperation with Self-Governing Local Communities and
Non-Governmental Organisations regulated certain forms, types and methods
of the use of defence, and in particular military, capabilities in support of the
operation of public authorities, cooperation with local communities and NGOs,
and participation in events and activities ensuring the realisation of national
security, defence and SAF interests and contributing to the strengthening of
patriotism and preservation of military traditions.

The Decree amending the Decree on the Use of Additional Postal Stamp
during the Fire Safety Month redefined the nominal value of the additional
postal stamp.

With the Decree on European Critical Infrastructure, the Council Directive
114/2008/EC of 8 December 2008 on the identification and designation of
European critical infrastructures and the assessment of the need to improve
their protection was introduced into the Slovenian legal order. The Decree
defines the procedures for assessing and determining potential European
critical infrastructures in the Republic of Slovenia and the requirements for
their protection (operator’s security plans, liaison officers, procedures and
deadlines for reporting to the EU Commission etc.).

With the decision on the Civil Protection memorial plaque, the Government
established the form and content of the memorial plaque awarded to PRR
forces in 2011 for their participation in protection, rescue and relief operations
at the time of Slovenia's independence in 1991.

Due to the abolition of signal units, the Decree on the Administrative
Communications introduced new provisions relating to the organisation
and operation of administrative communications organised by the MoD for
the implementation of national defence. These communications link public
authorities, companies, institutions and other organisations whose activity is


-----

of particular importance for defence. The Decree also regulates cooperation
with international organisation bodies within the system of collective defence
and security, cooperation between public authorities and the SAF, and the
notification of self-governing local communities.

The introduction of the European legal order into the legal order of the
Republic of Slovenia is associated with the adoption of the new Regulation
on Production Consents and Trade Permits for Military Weapons and
Equipment, and on Preliminary Permits for Import, Export, Transit and
Transfer of Defence Products. The essential novelty of the Regulation is that
it, in line with the Directive 2009/43/EC of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 6 May 2009, introduced new provisions relating to (simplified)
transfer procedures for defence products between the EU member states
(general, global, individual licences) and the certification of those legal and
natural persons who receive defence products in the Republic of Slovenia
on the basis of a general licence issued in another EU member state. The
Regulation was revised in 2011 due to the changes in the aforementioned
Directive in relation to the list of defence products.

The Decree amending the Decree on Insignia in the Civil Protection of the
Republic of Slovenia introduced a new insignia of the support service in the
event of environmental and other disasters at sea. The key objective of the
adoption of the new Decree on the Methodology for the Elaboration and
Management of the Investment Documentation in the Area of Defence was
harmonisation with the general regulation in this area.

The Rules amending the Rules on the Awards of the Ministry of Defence
introduced some new awards in the area of defence and further established
criteria and conditions for the granting of certain MoD awards in the context
of the implementing regulations adopted by the MoD. The latter was also the
content of the second amendment to the Rules, adopted in October 2011.

The Rules amending the Rules on the Protection against Unexploded
Ordnance were adopted due to more appropriate regulation of the temporary
storage of unexploded ordnance. The Rules introduced the possibility
of extending temporary storage, which must be approved by the ACPDR
Director General. Added was also the restriction that explosive ordnance
may only be stored in such quantities as prescribed by the manufacturer or
an appropriate professional institution.


-----

The Rules amending the Rules on Official Passes in the Area of Defence
redefined the form, issuing procedures and use of ID cards for military
and civilian persons who, as members of the SAF medical and religious
personnel, are protected under international conventions.

The Rules on Training and Authority for Fire Protection Measures introduced
new provisions related to the type, manner and frequency of fire protection
training, conditions for the acquisition of authorisations for the implementation
of fire protection measures, and the professional examination in fire
protection.

In the area of fire protection, the Rules on Fire Rules were amended twice in
2011. The amendments mainly related to the equipment and designation of
intervention paths and areas for fire-fighters as well as of evacuation routes,
particularly those in self-service stores and shopping passages of major
shopping centres. In addition, the amendments established the obligation to
draw up fire plans for facilities equipped with solar power stations.

The amended Rules on Fire-Fighters Uniforms, Ranks, Insignia, Equipment
and ID Cards partially updated and amended the provisions on fire-fighting
uniforms and work clothes, rank and some other insignia, in line with the Fire
Service Rules adopted in 2010.

To comply with the Act of Rules in Road Transport and the Drivers Act, new
Rules on Military Vehicles Involved in Road Transport were adopted. These
fully regulated matters related to the movement of organised columns of
military vehicles, the manner of transport of people in military vehicles, and
the conditions to be fulfilled by drivers of military vehicles, in line with the
statutory powers.

Due to some confusion in the old Rules, and particularly the lack of precise
separation between the training programmes of water rescue personnel and
the training programmes of persons qualified in water rescue, new Rules
on Water Rescue Personnel were adopted. Changes relate particularly
to the requirement of demonstrating certain physical and mental fitness;
there is a detailed delineation and identification of types and contents of
individual training programmes and related aptitude tests. Certifications for
the implementation of approved programmes are now harmonised with the
certifications of the holders of other programmes in the area of protection
against natural and other disasters.


-----

The key novelty in the Rules amending the Rules on the Special Exams of
Professional Firemen was the introduction of professional examinations for
commanders, directors of operations and heads of fire-fighting units, and the
identification of programmes for these examinations.

The Rules amending the Rules on Military Personnel Evaluation partly
changed the terms of special assessment of the military personnel that have
not yet completed basic military professional training.


-----

### RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGICAL PROJECTS

#### 1 Research And Technological Projects

**1.1 Research Projects**

In 2011, there was a significant difference between the adopted and the
valid financial plan and their realisation, as the year, in addition to the
supplementary budget, was marked by economy measures and the resulting
restrictions.

Based on the approved research and development plan, the MoD prepared
tenders for development and research projects for 2011 and 2012. After these
invitations to tender, three new research projects in the area of defence and
security were launched in 2011.

**1.2 Technological Projects**

On the basis of the programme documents, the MoD supported development
and research activities, industrial research and technical feasibility studies.
Based on the capability analysis, the main purpose of investment was to
support the development of innovative technologies consistent with the
priorities identified in the framework of the EU and NATO. Due to the financial
constraints and economy measures, the realisation of assets in 2011 was
lower than planned.

To a smaller extent, the MoD continued its work in the field of applied
research, new technology development, development and testing of military
equipment, weapons and systems as well as development of protection,
rescue and relief equipment. Despite the unfavourable financial situation
and the consequent reduction in the scope of research and development,
the results contributed to somewhat better equipment of the SAF and PRR
forces.

Two achievements in the field of development and research are examples
of good practice:

– Results of the Artificial Nose project (which are the result of multidisciplinary

work of several research groups that managed to combine expert
knowledge and achievements in outstanding innovations related to the
detection of explosives) have great direct practical value, related to the


-----

protection of people, especially in the detection of improvised explosive
devices.
– In relation to the permanent funding of a certain development and
research environment in which new discoveries trigger technological
possibilities that are still non-existent in the world, the MoD highlights
achievements in the development of small fuel cells and completely new
fuel cell membranes.

**1.3 International Activities in the EU (EDA) and NATO (NATO RTO)**

In 2011, the MoD continued its development and research activities in
the framework of NATO. Cooperation was most intensive in the field of
NATO AC/323 RTO (Research & Technology Organisation), as national
representatives attended the spring and autumn plenary and executive
sessions (RTB, NC) and panel meetings (SET, HFM). In relation to the RTO
activity, representatives of the Republic of Slovenia in NATO participated in the
public presentation of knowledge in the area of NATO’s military perception. As
part of the symposium, Slovenian representatives presented four important
articles and thus raised the NATO RTO's awareness of innovative concepts
in the detection of hidden underground facilities with a mobile multisensor
system, of the alkaline sensor acting as a magnetometer in the low RF
spectrum for the detection of explosives, the THz sensor operating at room
temperature, and the detection of explosives using functionalised surfaces.

Seven cooperation agreements were concluded between the MoD and
external experts in the following fields: Content Based Information Security
(CBIS), Information Infrastructure Supporting Network Centric Warfare
(NCW) Communications, Machine Translation for Coalition Operations,
NATO Education and Training Network (NETN), Thermal Strain Management
for Health and Performance Sustainment, Optimal Use of Hyperbaric
Oxygen Therapy in Military Medical Facilities, Operational Analysis Support
to NATO Operations. The MoD completed cooperation in the fields of
improving the organisational effectiveness of coalition operations and THz
wave technology for stand-off detection of explosives and other military and
security applications.

On the basis of results, particularly in the development of key technologies,
operators started to participate in the international group RTO SET-124 –
THz Wave Technology for Stand-Off Detection of Explosives and Other
Military and Security Applications, and the RTO SET-173 – Fuel Cells and
Other Emerging Manportable Power Technologies for the NATO Warfighter.


-----

The Republic of Slovenia was able to join the RTO SET-161 group – Leading
Body for the Counter-IED Long Term Capability Requirement (LTCR). In this
way, development achievements were verified in the international context
and principal bases were set for cooperation in the international environment.
Continuation of such cooperation may provide Slovenian operators with new
business opportunities.

In the context of international cooperation coordinated by the EDA R&T
Directorate, Slovenian R&D entities continued their participation in the
international environment, namely in the Joint Investment Programme on
Force Protection (JIP-FP) and the Joint Investment Programme on Innovative
Concepts and Emerging Technologies (JIP-ICET).


-----

### IMPLEMENTATION OF RESOURCE PLANS

#### 1 Financial Plan Implementation

In 2011, the MoD spent EUR 448.3 million on the accomplishment of its
tasks, which makes up for 98.1 percent of the valid and 96.9 percent of the
adopted financial plan, following the supplementary budget.

_2011 Budgetary Resources (EUR)_

**Adopted**
**Amend-** **Valid**

**Adopted** **Suppl.**

**ments** **Financial** **Realisation**

**Financial** **Budget**

**to the** **Plan** **2011**

**Plan 2011** **2011**

**Financial** **2011**
**Plan 2011**

**(25 Nov** **(17 Nov** **(16 Sep** **(31 Dec** **(31 Dec**
**2009)** **2010)** **2011)** **2011)** **2011)**
Financial
562,489,143 482,906,806 462,424,141 456,814,708 448,287,727
Plan

Percentage of the
Adopted 122 104 100 98 97
Suppl.
Budget

Discrepancy after

100,065,002 20,482,665 0 -5,609,433 –14,136,414

Suppl.
Budget

**1.1 Adopted Financial Plans**

The National Assembly issued three rulings on the available MoD resources.
The first ruling was made in 2009 when the GDP forecast was the highest
in recent years (38 billion); the financial plan also considered the clearing
fund in the amount of EUR 10 million. The second ruling was made a year
later, on the basis of a significantly lower GDP forecast, which resulted
in EUR 80 million reduction in the available financial resources. The third
ruling was made when the supplementary budget was adopted in the period
of temporary suspension of the budget implementation, which resulted in
further reduction in the financial plan by additional EUR 20 million. Overall

|Col1|Adopted Financial Plan 2011|Adopted Amend- ments to the Financial Plan 2011|Suppl. Budget 2011|Valid Financial Plan 2011|Realisation 2011|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||(25 Nov 2009)|(17 Nov 2010)|(16 Sep 2011)|(31 Dec 2011)|(31 Dec 2011)|
|Financial Plan|562,489,143|482,906,806|462,424,141|456,814,708|448,287,727|
|Percent- age of the Adopted Suppl. Budget|122|104|100|98|97|
|Discrep- ancy after Suppl. Budget|100,065,002|20,482,665|0|-5,609,433|–14,136,414|


-----

reduction in the planned integral resources amounted to EUR 100 million –
40 percent in investments, three quarters in the research and development
funds, and a good 10 percent in salaries and current expenditures.

The valid financial plan of 31 December 2011 amounted to EUR 456,814,708.
The difference between the valid and the adopted financial plan following
the supplementary budget (hereinafter referred to as the adopted financial
plan), in the total amount of EUR 5.6 million, resulted from the reduction in
integral funds by EUR 9.9 million (Adria Airways recapitalisation, additional
liabilities of the Pension and Disability Insurance Institute of the Republic of
Slovenia (PDII), reallocation of salary funds due to the transfer of government
officials to other ministries and government departments) and large inflows
of appropriations in the amount of EUR 4.3 million.

The financial plan realisation in the amount of EUR 448,287,727 represents
4.8 percent of the national budget. In comparison to the valid financial
plan, the realisation of integral funds was 99.6 percent. The realisation
of appropriations was 72 percent, chiefly as a result of state property
management, for which the largest amount of unapplied funds will be
transferred to the next year. The MoD integral funds represent 96 percent,
and the appropriations 4 percent of the realised financial plan.

The difference between the valid financial plan and the realisation is the
uncommitted EUR 8.5 million. Of this, EUR 7 million of uncommitted
appropriations will be transferred to the 2012 fiscal year and used for the
construction and renovation of facilities which, due to their extensiveness,
require a longer realisation period (EUR 9 million of appropriations were
transferred from 2010). The remaining EUR 1.5 million were registered as a
surplus in the national budget.

In comparison to the adopted financial plan, the realisation dropped by
almost EUR 14.1 million, while the spending index was at 97. The realisation
of integral funds indicates a reduction of EUR 11.4 million, a lower proportion
for investments, namely EUR 5.6 million, and current expenditure, EUR 7.6
million, and a higher proportion, that is EUR 4.7 million, for salaries. The
realisation of appropriations was by EUR 2.7 million lower than planned.
Lower realisation is the result of difficult conditions for the implementation
of the financial plan due to the temporary suspension of the budget
implementation which, in line with different legal bases, was in force from
June to the end of the year.


-----

In comparison to the 2010 financial plan realisation, the realised 2011
financial plan was by EUR 104.3 million lower, while the index was at 81.1. In
the expenditure structure by economic purposes, integral funds included an
increased proportion of salaries and current expenditure; all other categories
were lower both in nominal terms and in terms of the structure share.

Salaries in the amount of EUR 284.2 million represent 63.4 percent of the
total MoD expenditure. The salary share has been increasing since 2008,
mainly due to lower investments.

Current expenditure stood at EUR 94.7 million, accounting for 21.1 percent
of the total expenditure, while the average share of the past four years
represented approximately 20 percent. Aging equipment results in higher
maintenance costs, while a large part of costs is also dedicated to the fixed
costs of operation.

Investment expenditure stood at EUR 50.5 million, accounting for 11.3
percent of the total MoD expenditure. Investment in the Basic Development
Programme accounted for EUR 13.8 million. The share of investments has
been decreasing since 2007.

The MoD spent EUR 851,000 for research and development, which is almost
a quarter of the resources planned. The share has been dropping heavily
since 2008 when it accounted for 3 percent.


-----

_Breakdown of 2011 Realisation by Economic Purposes_

Yearly realisation dynamics by economic categories are shown in the chart
titled the Realisation Growth Index by Economic Purposes (Base Year 2006).
It is possible to observe a decrease in development funds and, in the past
year, in investments.

_Realisation Growth Index by Economic Purposes (Base Year 2006)_


-----

**1.2 Overview of the Financial Plan Realisation by Programme Structure**

The year 2011 saw the first time implementation of the financial plan prepared
in line with the programme planning. This means that the resources were
planned in the context of policies, development programmes, development
sub-programmes, activities, projects and measures, all representing the
development programme plan. For the first time, the MoD included the
entire financial plan in the development programme plan; in the past, the
development programme plan only included investment funds. The financial
plan was implemented through 2 development policies, 4 development
programmes, 6 development sub-programmes, 26 activities and 67
measures and projects.

_2011 Financial Plan Realisation by Programme Structure (EUR)_

|POLICY/ DEVELOP- MENT PROGRAMME CODE|NAME OF POLICY/DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME/ DEVELOPMENT SUB-PROGRAMME|Col3|REALISATION 2011|Struct. 2011|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|13|NATIONAL SECURITY, DEFENCE AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS||447,436,361|99.81|
|1301|DEFENCE AND SECURITY||447,125,419|99.74|
||130101|Military Defence|357,078,990|79.65|
||130102|Protection against Natural and Other Disasters|36,907,939|8.23|
||130103|Defence System and Crisis Management|53,138,490|11.85|
|1303|FOREIGN POLICY||310,942|0.07|
||130303|Development Cooperation and Humanitarian Aid|310,942|0.07|
|02|HIGHER EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INFORMATION SOCIETY||851,366|0.19|
|0202|SCIENTIFIC AND RESEARCH ACTIVITY||213,184|0.05|
||`020201|Research Programmes and Projects|213,184|0.05|
|0203|TECHN. AND INFORM. SOCIETY||638,182|0.14|
||`020301|Support to Technology Development Projects|638,182|0.14|
|MoD TOTAL|||448,287,727|100|


-----

**1.3 Defence Expenditure**

Defence expenditure of the Republic of Slovenia consists of:

– The MoD financial plan, reduced by the funds earmarked for the System

of Protection against Natural Disasters.
– Pensions paid to Slovenian Territorial Defence (TD) war veterans and
the retired Yugoslav People’s Army (YPA) members.
– Financial plan of the Government Office for the Protection of Classified

Information.

The realised defence expenditure stood at EUR 478 million, accounting for
1.34 percent of the GDP (Winter Forecast of Economic Trends 2011/12,
IMAD). It was by EUR 10.4 million lower than that anticipated in the
supplementary budget (index was at 98). The defence system realisation
decreased by EUR 11 million, while pensions increased by EUR 0.6 million.

Defence system resources (the SAF financial plan, the MoD administrative
part and the DIRS) represented 86 percent of the defence expenditure. The
remaining 14 percent was represented by military pensions and resources of
the Government Office for the Protection of Classified Information, the latter
amounting to EUR 0.5 million.

_Defence Expenditure from 2010 to 2012_

|NEW PROGRAMME STRUCTURE|2010|Col3|Col4|2011|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Realisation|Adopted Financial Plan 25 Nov 2009|Adopted Changes 17 Nov 2010|Adopted Suppl. Budget 16 Sep 2011|Realisation|
|Budget Share (excl. the 1912 and 1913 Spending Units)|517,240|524,841|447,099|422,161|411,069|
|Pensions|65,149|58,000|65,962|65,962|66,635|
|Other Users|570|411|569|497|563|
|DEFENCE EXPENDITURE|582,959|583,252|513,630|488,619|478,266|


-----

|NEW PROGRAMME STRUCTURE|2010|Col3|Col4|2011|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Realisation|Adopted Financial Plan 25 Nov 2009|Adopted Changes 17 Nov 2010|Adopted Suppl. Budget 16 Sep 2011|Realisation|
|GDP in mil EUR|35,416|38,058|37,227|35,924|35,789|
||Winter Forecast 2011/12|Autumn Forecast 2009|Autumn Forecast 2010|Autumn Forecast 2011|Winter Forecast 2011/12|
|% DEFENCE EXPENDITURE in GDP|1.65|1.53|1.38|1.36|1.34|


The chart titled Comparison of the Percentage of Approved and Realised
Defence Expenditure in GDP shows that the realised defence expenditure
reached the lowest percent of GDP in 2011, namely 1.34 percent. The highest
percentage was reached in 2010 when defence expenditure stood at 1.65
percent of GDP. The highest percentage of adopted defence expenditure
was recorded in 2009, namely 1.63 percent of GDP. In the period 2001 2011, the average approved defence expenditure represented 1.52 percent
of GDP, while the average realised defence expenditure represented 1.5
percent of GDP.

_Comparison of the Percentage of Approved and Realised Defence_
_Expenditure in GDP_


-----

#### 2 Personnel Plan Implementation

**2.1 Human Resources in the MoD Administrative Part**

On the basis of the Joint Personnel Plan, set by the Government, a 2011
Joint MoD Personnel Plan was formed. It defines the personnel employment
policy in the administrative part of the MoD.

_Personnel Plan Realisation_

**1** **2** **3** **4** **5** **6** **7** **8=4-5-7** **9**

MoD IOU 903 2 28 47 854
ACPDR 344 4 340
IRSPANOD 63 63
DIRS 17 7 17
**MoD**
**Admini-**

**1,310 1,281 1,327** **6** **35** **47** **1,274** **-7**

**strative**
**Part**

The Government Joint Personnel Plan specified that the permitted number
of employees in the administrative part of the MoD as of 31 December 2011
was 1,281. In line with the Rules amending the Rules on the Contents and
Procedures of Preparation and Submission of Staff Plans (Official Gazette
of the RS, No. 96 of 27 November 2009), the personnel plan realisation
excludes:

– Full-time employment with reduced working hours to compensate for
phased or disability retirement of government officials.
– Temporary employment (the number is shown in Column 5) for the
replacement of temporarily absent government officials whose salary
compensation is not provided by the MoD for the time of:

  - Maternity and childcare leave.

  - Sick leave of over 30 working days.

|Spending Unit|Permitted Nbr. 31 Dec 2010|Permitted Nbr. 31 Dec 2011|Actual Nbr. 31 Dec 2011|Substitution|MoD Employees Performing Military Duties|SAF Employees Performing Military Duties|Personnel Plan Realisation 31 Dec 2011|Difference|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8=4-5-7|9|
|MoD IOU|||903|2|28|47|854||
|ACPDR|||344|4|||340||
|IRSPANOD|||63||||63||
|DIRS|||17||7||17||
|MoD Admini- strative Part|1,310|1,281|1,327|6|35|47|1,274|-7|


-----

  - Parental leave.

Military persons working in the fields of counselling and protocol, logistics,
military personnel affairs, information technology, and the aviation
investigation body are included in the SAF Personnel Plan (Column 7 in the
Table).

It is thus evident that the number of employees in the administrative part
of the MoD is by 7 government officials lower than the permitted number of
employees according to the Joint Personnel Plan for State Administration
Bodies for 2011.

In 2011, the permitted number of employees in the administrative part of
the MoD, specified in the Joint Personnel Plan, was reached by a restrictive
personnel policy in terms of not employing new government officials and
not compensating for the retired government officials. The MoD thus strictly
followed the adopted Government decisions and objectives regarding the
reduction in the number of public sector employees.

In 2011, the MoD employed 13 government officials, 8 in the administrative
part of the MoD and 5 in the ACPDR. Ten new government officials were
given fixed-term contracts, two returned after the suspension of employment
rights, while one was transferred from a different state body for the time and
purpose of performing civilian expert duties in an international mission.

There were 70 departures from the administrative part of the MoD, of which
52 employees left the IOU, 14 the ACPDR, 3 the IRSPANOD and 1 the DIRS.

**2.2 Human Resources in the SAF**

On the basis of the Joint Personnel Plan for State Administration Bodies,
the planned number of employed SAF members as of 31 December 2011
was 7,600. The SAF Personnel Plan takes into account the 47 employees
performing military duties in other parts of the MoD under Articles 47 and 48
of the Defence Act. These members work in the Service for Investigation of
Aircraft Accidents and Military Aircraft Incidents (4), the Protocol Service (4),
the Secretariat of the Secretary-General (9), the Defence Affairs Directorate
(26) and the Logistics Directorate(4).

The personnel plan realisation was 100 percent. Of 7,600 members employed
in the SAF as of 31 December 2011 there were 1,157 officers, 1,993 non

-----

commissioned officers, 3,340 soldiers, 254 senior military specialists, 369
junior military specialists and 487 civilians.

In 2011, the SAF structure improved, as the number of officers, military
specialists and civilians decreased, the number of soldiers increased, and
the number of non-commissioned officers stabilised. The ratio between
officers, non-commissioned officers and active component soldiers is thus
1 : 1.72 : 2.89.

_Comparison of the Personnel Plan Realisation for 2010_

**Actual Number** **Actual Number**
**Status** **Difference**
**31 Dec 2010** **31 Dec 2011**

Officers 1,175 1,157 –18
NonCommissioned 1,981 1,993 –12
Officers

Soldiers 3,253 3,340 87
Senior Military
281 254 –27
Specialists

Junior Military
410 369 –41
Specialists

Civilians 500 487 –13
**TOTAL** **7,600** **7,600** **0**

**_Promotion_**

In line with the provisions of the Military Service Act, a total of 10,300 conscripts
attended briefing sessions for national service personnel to be acquainted
with the obligations and rights of conscripts. The briefing sessions and
other promotional activities (career and job fairs, sporting, social and other
events) were carried out by the Military Affairs Division in cooperation with
regional defence administrations. For this purpose, the official publication,
the bulletin Ponosni nase (Proud of Ourselves), was published in 25,000
copies. This bulletin acquaints the youth with SAF units and commands,
and the opportunity to work in the SAF. The SAF prepared an annual plan
of promotional activities which took place on the field, in cooperation with
SAF units and commands. Thus, in 2011, nearly 200 promotional activities
were organised throughout Slovenia, attended by a large number of young
people interested in a military career and wishing to join one of the forms of

|Status|Actual Number 31 Dec 2010|Actual Number 31 Dec 2011|Difference|
|---|---|---|---|
|Officers|1,175|1,157|–18|
|Non- Commissioned Officers|1,981|1,993|–12|
|Soldiers|3,253|3,340|87|
|Senior Military Specialists|281|254|–27|
|Junior Military Specialists|410|369|–41|
|Civilians|500|487|–13|
|TOTAL|7,600|7,600|0|


-----

cooperation with the SAF. Promotion was also carried out through the www.
postanivojak.si website, where the SAF regularly posted news from the field
that are interesting for its target population (job-seekers aged 18 to 30). For
the purpose of the website, the SAF followed soldiers performing voluntary
military service, reported on contract reserve trainings, posted important
information on the employment and scholarships available in Slovenia and
abroad, and published interesting articles on the work and life in SAF units.

**_Employment in the SAF_**

A total of 518 candidates applied for employment in the SAF in 2011. On the
basis of selection procedures, the SAF employed 298 candidates, 262 of
whom were employed as soldiers.

**_Voluntary Military Service_**

A total of 479 candidates applied for voluntary military service. Contracts for
voluntary military service were concluded with 352 candidates. The remaining
candidates withdrew from voluntary military service before the signing of
contracts, or did not qualify for it (police record). After the conclusion of
contracts, another 104 candidates either withdrew from voluntary military
service or were rendered unfit for it at medical examinations. In the end, a
total of 248 candidates were employed for voluntary military service. In 2011,
the SAF also employed 57 candidates who had performed voluntary military
service in the time since 2004.

_Oath of voluntary military service_


-----

**_Scholarships in the SAF_**

There were 166 scholarship holders in 2011, 125 for employment in the SAF
active component and 41 for employment in the contract reserve component.
By the end of 2011, the SAF employed another 45 scholarship holders for
service in the active component and 22 scholarship holders for service in the
contract reserve component. Two scholarships were granted for training at
the West Point and the Naval Academy – one for each academy. In the end,
the SAF selected one candidate for the training and education at the West
Point.

There were no calls for scholarships in Slovenia. As a rule, all forms of
practical training were only implemented for SAF scholarship holders.

**_Preparation of Personnel for Departure from Military Service_**

The majority of SAF personnel have fixed-term employment contracts, as,
in line with the Defence Act, the upper age limit of soldiers employed in the
SAF is 45 years of age. In 2011, Instructions for Departure Preparations of
SAF Members (RS MoD, No. 0070-13/2011-15 of 21 November 2011) were
prepared and adopted. In line with Article 91 of the Service in the Slovenian
Armed Forces Act, preparations were held for retraining and exercise of
other rights held by members upon the termination of their employment
contracts. In 2011, preparations were carried out for the departure of the
first four soldiers who lost their employment contracts due to reaching 45
years of age. Three soldiers concluded employment contracts with the MoD,
while one soldier entered into a contract of employment with the Office of the
President of the Republic of Slovenia.

SAF members who, in 2011, acquired the right to a retirement pension were
invited to attend the information day which was attended by 73 out of 104
members invited. The pre-retirement seminar was attended by 59 members
of a total of 109 members invited. At the seminar, Slovenian top experts in
the fields of gerontology, healthy diet, addiction and so on acquainted the
participants with the traps and opportunities of third age. Special emphasis
was placed on the socialising of participants and the opportunities for the
mutual exchange of experience, plans, expectations and ideas for quality
transition into the third age.

**_Care of Former SAF Members_**

The SAF monitored the needs for assistance of its former members who are
socially, medically or otherwise disadvantaged and in need of assistance.


-----

Help was provided in the form of humanitarian and work campaigns, visits
and regular contacts, counselling and the organisation of voluntary work.

In 2011, the first Intergenerational Community Centre was established in
Ajdovščina, intended for socialising in the Centre's operational environment.
One of the Centre's objectives is to provide current and former SAF members
and their families with advice and practical help if needed. The Centre in
Ajdovščina held 56 events, ranging from regular recreation, lectures, thematic
workshops, to hikes, excursions and multi-day camps. Preparations are
currently underway for the establishment of two more such centres.

In 2011, seven intergenerational groups for quality aging were formed,
operating in a home environment, while their meetings are held on the field.
In 2011, these groups included 90 members, half of whom are still employed,
while the other half consists of the pensioners who are still young and vital
enough to share their social capital with their peers. A total of 16 members
completed leaders' training for leading these intergenerational groups.

**2.3 Military Service in the SAF Contract Reserve**

As much as 95.35 percent of the personnel plan regarding contract reserve
members was implemented. As of 31 December 2011, the SAF contract
reserve included 1,621 members, of whom there were 1,473 soldiers, 77
non-commissioned officers, 29 officers, 17 junior military specialists and 25
senior military specialists.

In 2011, 46 contracts were concluded for serving in the SAF contract reserve
component, while 47 contracts were terminated. Records of the Commission
for the Selection of Contract Reserve Candidates list another 623 candidates
who meet the formal requirements for the conclusion of contracts for serving
in the SAF contract reserve component. In 2011, a total of six annexes
regarding the extension of service in the SAF contract reserve component
were concluded. At the same time, 200 annexes were prepared for those
contract reserve members whose contracts expired in February 2012.

Currently, contract reserve members also include 22 former MoD scholarship
holders. In 2011, the first two soldiers, former SAF members, whose
employment contracts were terminated due to reaching the legally specified
age, joined the contract reserve component.


-----

For various reasons, the MoD terminated 47 contracts for serving in the SAF
contract reserve component, which is considerably less than in the previous
years.

Due to the rationalisation of costs, the SAF reduced the number of contract
reserve members who attended training sessions. Despite the reduction
in financial resources, special emphasis was placed on the upgrading of
contract reserve training, including training and preparation for international
operations and missions. Before deployment abroad, the SAF ensured that
members who decided to obtain important experience in the SAF operation
in an international environment acquired all the necessary competence
and skills. Contract reserve members also took part in training held abroad
(Germany). Thus, in the past year, a total of 1,578 contract reserve members
completed 22,478 training days.

The SAF implemented procedures for the deployment of contract reserve
members to peacetime military service in the 23rd and 24th Slovenian KFOR
Contingents in Kosovo. The 23rd Contingent included 26 contract reserve
members, while the 24th Contingent included 15 contract reserve members.
In the past year, two doctors (contract reserve members) performed their
military service in the ISAF mission in Afghanistan.

As is evident from the Table below, 55 contract reserve members participated
in IOM in 2011.

_Overview of Contract Reserve Members' Participation in IOM_

|IOM|Of i fcers|Non- Commissioned Of i fcers|Soldiers|Military Specialists|TOTAL|NOTE|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|KFOR 22|-|-|12|-|12|until March 11|
|KFOR 23|-|-|26|-|26|until September 11|
|KFOR 24|-|-|15|-|15|from September 11|
|ISAF 14|-|-|-|1|1|until January 11|
|ISAF 15|-|-|-|1|1|until October 11|
|TOTAL|||53|2|55||


-----

#### 3 Implementation of the Plan for the Acquisition of Physical   Assets

**3.1 MoD Informatisation**

**_Military Defence Informatisation_**

The SAF continued with the centralisation of the CIS services. The 11th
Signal Battalion completed the establishment of initial capabilities for the
provision of local CIS support to barracks and capabilities of the Service
Centre for the entire SAF CIS. The CIS Control Centre establishment and
technical support were suspended due to personnel limitations.

The MoD completed transition to the IRDG information system, while
pathways and server infrastructure were partially upgraded.

By introducing the SHF-X satellite system, independence of connections
from the local CIS infrastructure in IOM was provided.

The Command and Control Information System and the Command Centre
Information System were introduced into operational use. Due to limited
financial resources, the MoD did not purchase user hardware. Despite the
improvement in the operation of the data network, users felt the limitations
resulting from the increased use of IT services within the network.

The accreditation documentation for CIS sub-systems was partially produced,
while none of the planned systems has so far been accredited.

The MoD prepared complementary acts for the proper handling of CIS
equipment.

**_Informatisation of Protection against Natural and Other Disasters_**

In 2010, the MoD began with the gradual renovation of the paging system,
which is expected to be completed by the end of 2012. Thus, the paging
system will be completely redesigned, placement of the paging system
transmitters will be optimised, and the system will be separated from the
ZARE radio communications system.

The MoD purchased 84 public warning sirens which will be set-up by the end
of 2012.


-----

Moreover, it replaced the outdated switchboard at the regional notification
centre in Ptuj and upgraded the switchboard in Ig.

New emergency call technologies were introduced, allowing for text and
video emergency calls. The WAP112 services, enabling emergency calls
to be made by the deaf and hard-of-hearing, were complemented by the
SMS112 services and the 112 video calls. Both systems were set up on
the ACPDR website, while an agreement with the operators for the making
of such calls has not yet been made. For 2012, an agreement has been
reached with the Telekom operator for the SMS112 application.

**_Defence System and Crisis Management Informatisation_**

To achieve the set annual goals, the MoD ensured the operation of the CIS
infrastructure building blocks, particularly with regard to the communications
and information backbone, server infrastructure and data protection solutions.
Most emphasis was placed on the acquisition of modern cryptographic
devices and their maintenance, maintenance of the system for secure
transmission of electronic messages, and on wiring segmentation. Additional
funds were allocated to increase disk capacity, ensure the performance of
virtual servers and cryptographic devices, and to purchase a backup system
and the necessary server infrastructure for the implementation of the IRDG
solution in the Intelligence and Security Service. Additional funds were also
provided for the purchase and implementation of an active PKI network
equipment to prevent intrusions. Thus, an adequate level of security and
credibility of the MoD certification authority was ensured.

To upgrade and maintain software products, the MoD concluded several
contracts for the upgrading and maintenance of the following software
solutions: keeping of records (SKEV), materials management (MAPOS),
automatic registration of working hours (ARDﾈ), the public procurement
information system (ISOJAN), information system for defence and protection
duties (ISOZD), stock valuation, the management and distribution of
geographic information system data (UDIGISP), the ESRI-ArcGIS and the
ERDAS IMAGINE.

**3.2 Implementation of the Plan for the Acquisition of Physical Assets**

**_Investment in SAF Main Equipment_**

The financial crisis and the consequent reduction in investments resulted in
significantly reduced equipping of the SAF with the main equipment. Attention


-----

was primarily devoted to the completion of open projects launched in the
previous term. Of the projects under the Act on the Implementation of Basic
Development Programmes of the Slovenian Armed Forces in the Period
between 2008 and 2015, the MoD completed the project and purchase of
Ground Master long-range radars. Two vehicles were purchased as part of
the medium armoured vehicles MWAV 8 x 8 project, the C4I validation was
completed, and the information scientist and communicator instructor C4I
training was implemented.

In 2011, the MoD completed two purchase projects arising from the clearing
debt with the Russian Federation, namely the purchase of short-range Igla
missile systems with Strelec launchers and the purchase of the multi-purpose
military boat Triglav.

The project of upgrading Cougar helicopters is still underway and is expected
to be completed in 2013. The delay is mainly the result of difficulties in
coordination with contractual partners. In 2011, 12 light wheeled armoured
vehicles 4 x 4 Hummer were purchased for the purpose of the SAF’s
participation in operations.

**_Investment in Defence System and Crisis Management Equipment_**

Currently, the computer centre at the MoD Headquarters is being updated.

**_Investment in Infrastructure and its Maintenance_**

Major maintenance and repair included the construction and adaptation
of infrastructure for MWAV 8 x 8, the restoration of roofs on SAF barracks
and warehouses, and other maintenance work on buildings and other
infrastructure in use by the SAF.

In 2011, a total of 38 of the planned 51 MoD apartments in Ljubljana, Vrhnika,
Postojna, Maribor, Novo mesto, Brežice, Slovenska Bistrica, Ribnica and
other towns were completely renovated in order to be rented out to MoD
employees.

Multi-year contracts were concluded for the maintenance and renovation of
the housing fund. Nine contracts were concluded for the maintenance of
facilities and installed infrastructure of the SAF and the administrative part
of the MoD, while one contract was concluded for the maintenance of the
Cerklje ob Krki airfield area.


-----

**_Investment in Construction_**

In most cases, infrastructure projects launched in recent years continued in
2011. The Kadetnica facility was completed and handed over to the user.
The MoD completed the construction of the Škrilj firing range and training
area, and the renovation of the training centre in Sežana. Construction of the
Kranj sports centre was delayed due to the contractor's liquidity problems
and will continue in 2012. The MoD will also continue with the renovation
of business premises at the Maistrova Street in Celje. In 2011, a number
of MoD apartments underwent extensive renovation. The runway at the
Cerklje ob Krki airfield was renovated and extended; moreover, works were
carried out related to the preparatory phase of building a fire rescue service
facility. Procedures were underway for the purchase of land required for the
establishment of comprehensive airfield infrastructure.


-----

#### 4 Implementation of the Revenue and Expenditure Plan for the  Sale of State Property

**4.1 Movable Property Management**

The MoD granted free assistance (donations) to the Republic of Kosovo
(in the area of operation of the Slovenian KFOR Contingent) in the form
of school equipment and military weapons (6,680 AP 7.62 mm), and to the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in the form of military equipment for the
needs of the ANSF.

After several failed auctions, the sale process of the cold forging line was
completed successfully. It was sold at a bid price of EUR 430,000.

In early 2011, the MoD published an advertisement in foreign specialised
literature for the sale of the Dassault Falcon 2000 EX aircraft at estimated
market value, but received no bids. Until otherwise decided by the
Government, the aircraft remains in the management of the MoD which
covers all costs of maintenance and use.

Based on the plan for the management of movable property, the MoD sold
20 freight wagons and tank ammunition metal components – tungsten
alloys. Proceeds from the sale of tungsten alloys represented revenue in the
national budget, as this was a sale of raw material.

**4.2 Real Estate Management**

**_Real Estate Sales_**

Based on the Annual Plan for the Management of Tangible Property, real
estate not required by the MoD for the performance of its activities was sold
in public auctions and through direct sale in the amount of EUR 4,159,260.

In 2011, the MoD sold one plot of land, a garage and 27 apartments on the
basis of the 2010 Annual Real Estate Sale Plan as well as 26 of 113 plots of
land, 8 of 106 facilities and no apartments on the basis of the 2011 Annual
Real Estate Sale Plan.

A total of 38 MoD apartments were renovated. As many as 122 apartments
were allocated to SAF members, and a total of 73 rented apartments were
returned to the MoD. Twenty apartments were forcibly emptied (forced
eviction). There are 58 contentious proceedings underway in relation to


-----

the forced evictions. Through the sale of MoD apartments, the number of
unoccupied housing units decreased by 24 and now stands at 312. A total of
40 apartments are in the process of being rented out, while 108 unoccupied
apartments are expected to be sold in the next period.

**_Transfer of Management Rights_**

The MoD designated movable property managers (the Lipica Stud Farm,
the Krško Social Work Centre) and made free transfers of funds to the Local
Union of Veterans of the War for Slovenia in Trebnje, Ajdovščina and Vipava,
the Mountain Rescue Association of Slovenia, and the Maribor Radio Club.
Moreover, it donated military weapons to the National Museum of Slovenia.


-----

#### 5 Implementation of the Education, Training and Advanced 
 Training Plan

**5.1 Education, Training and Advanced Training of Employees in the**
**Administrative Part of the MoD**

**_Functional External Training_**

Participation in functional training in the administrative part of the MoD was
only 31 percent; the lowest participation was recorded in the ACPDR, only
11 percent.

Reasons for lower realisation:
– Streamlining of financial resources.
– Work obligations.
– Cancellation of some forms of training.

**_Further Training_**

In 2011, a total of 7 government officials should have completed their
education. The realisation, however, was only 71 percent, with merely
5 employees completing their education, while 2 had the deadline for the
completion of their education extended.

**_Training Abroad_**

Internal organisational units planned participation in 28 training programmes.
The realisation, however, was only 82 percent, as some of the planned
training programmes were not organised.

**5.2 Military Education, Training and Advanced Training**

**_Military Education, Training and Advanced Training in the Republic of_**
**_Slovenia_**

A total of 34 new contracts for the full-time and part-time study of SAF
members were concluded with participants of the modular study conducted as
a combination of military and undergraduate courses for non-commissioned
officers at the Vocational College of Traffic and Transport (20 contracts) or
as a combination of military and postgraduate courses in the context of the
Senior Staff Training at the Command and Staff School of the SAF Doctrine,
Development, Education and Training Command (14 contracts). Currently,
in addition to the above, there are 98 more valid education contracts for the
acquisition of a higher level education.


-----

Education courses for the acquisition of a higher level of general education
were successfully completed by 248 SAF members, 53 of whom had
education contracts concluded with the MoD.

Language courses were successfully completed by 96 members.

**_Military Education, Training and Advanced Training Abroad_**

Different functional and career education and training courses abroad were
attended by 465 SAF members; 60 members attended a course organised
by the NATO School Oberammergau mobile team at the General Maister
Military Post in Maribor. Most SAF members attended military education and
training courses in accordance with the IMET programme, in the framework
of which 112 SAF members attended various education and training courses
in the US and the Federal Republic of Germany. All participants completed
their education and training abroad successfully and on schedule.

The personnel plan for education courses abroad was fully realised. These
courses are partly comparable to the General Staff and Senior Staff courses
in Slovenia. Three members successfully completed education programmes
abroad that are partly comparable to the Slovenian General Staff training.

With regard to referrals to the education courses abroad that are comparable
to staff courses in Slovenia, the 2011 personnel plan was only partially
realised. Of the 17 planned referrals, 15 were realised, while 5 were realised
in relation to the 2010 plan. Two referrals were not realised, one due to illness,
the other because the member was referred to staff training in Slovenia. In
2011, a total of 22 First Lieutenants completed comparable staff courses
abroad.

Advanced non-commissioned officer courses abroad were attended by all
who were scheduled to attend them and were completed successfully.


-----

#### 6 Implementation Of The Research And Development (R&D) Plan

**6.1 Research Projects and Programmes**

In 2011, major discrepancies appeared between the adopted and the
valid financial plan and their realisation, as the year, in addition to the
supplementary budget, was marked by economy measures and appropriate
restrictions.

The MoD approved the implementation of 10 projects. Following public
tenders in 2011, 7 contracts were concluded.

Three projects were launched in 2011. The implementation and launch of the
remaining four projects are planned for 2012.

**6.2 Technological Projects**

Projects and activities in support of achieving priority defence and protection
capabilities at higher levels of technological development (TRL (Technology
Readiness Levels) 3-9) were planned in the context of:

– International cooperation.
– Orders to increase technical capabilities.
– Key technology development programmes.

Funds were used to finance three of the planned five projects for the increase
of technical capabilities.

In the context of the key technology programmes, one of the planned five
projects continued in 2011, namely the “VTSklad” project (high-temperature
PEM fuel cells). Contracts for four new projects (RTJKR (development of
technologies for understanding the nuclear quadrupole resonance), RTUN,
RTVTHz and RTGCSi) were not signed until the end of the year, which
resulted in no payments being made in 2011.

In 2011, seven of the planned ten agreements were concluded for the
cooperation of external experts in different fields in the context of the NATO
AC/323 RTO.

In the context of international cooperation coordinated by the EDA R&T
Directorate, Slovenian R&D entities continued their participation in
international programmes, namely the Joint Investment Programme on Force


-----

Protection (JIP-FP) and the Joint Investment Programme on Innovative
Concepts and Emerging Technologies (JIP-ICET) as well as the GUARDED,
EUSAS, Patch and E-STAR projects.


-----

-----

