# DEFENSE STRATEGY OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC

**INTRODUCTION**

**I. STRATEGIC STARTING POINTS OF DEFENSE OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC**

1. Political-Military Aspects of the Security Environment of the Slovak Republic
2. Strategic Reevaluation of the Defense of the Slovak Republic

**II. CHALLENGES, RISKS AND THREATS TO THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC**

1. Political-Military Challenges to the Security Environment of the Slovak Republic
2. Risks and Threats to the Slovak Republic
a. Military Risks and Threats to the Defense of the Slovak Republic
b. Non-Military Risks and Threats to the Defense of the Slovak Republic

**III. DEFENSE POLICY OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC**

1. Basic Objectives of the Defense Policy of the Slovak Republic
2. Basic Tasks of the Defense Policy of the Slovak Republic
3. Basic Principles of the Defense Policy of the Slovak Republic

**IV. DEFENSE STRATEGY OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC**

1. Main Areas of the Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic
2. Basic Measures of the Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic
a. Influencing Political-Military Aspects of the Security Environment of the Slovak Republic
b. Readiness and Capability to Address Military Threats to the Slovak Republic
c. Readiness and Capability to Address Non-military Threats to the Slovak Republic

**V. BASIC ELEMENTS OF THE DEFENSE STRATEGY OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC**

1. State Political Decision-Making Bodies and the Management of the Security and Defense of the Slovak
Republic
2. Defense System of the Slovak Republic
a. Mission and Tasks of the Defense System of the Slovak Republic
b. Management Bodies of the Defense System of the Slovak Republic
c. Armed Fforces
3. Other Elements of the Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic
a. Diplomacy
b. International Political-Military Cooperation
c. Economic Mobilization
d. Defense Infrastructure
e. Armed Security Corps
f. Civil Protection
g. Rescue Corps and Rescue Services
h. Citizens` Preparation for Defense

**VI. IMPROVING THE DEFENSE OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC**

1. Improving the Defense Management of the Slovak Republic
2. Improving the Management and Development of the Armed Forces
3. Defense Planning of the Slovak Republic
4. Defense Legislation

**CONCLUSION**

**INTRODUCTION**


-----

1. The Slovak Republic is adopting this Defense Strategy in accordance with its vital and important interests. The
Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic elaborates the Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic in the area of
defense of the State and thus it is replacing the Defense Doctrine of the Slovak Republic (from 1994) and the
National Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic (from 1996). This is an open and public document, and it is
being made available to our citizens as well as to the foreign public.

2. The main objective of the Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic is to create a systemic and material basis to
secure the defense of the Slovak Republic, while creating conditions to transition to securing the defense of the
State within the framework of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, by taking into account the security
environment and the defense resources of the State, by initiating and regulating the reform of the State defense
system and the defense planning process on the national level, and by creating new conceptual documents and
legal standards in the area of the defense of the State.

**I. STRATEGIC STARTING POINTS OF DEFENSE OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC**

**1. Political-Military Aspects of the Security Environment of the Slovak Republic**

3. The Slovak Republic belongs to the political, economic, cultural, and also militarily exposed region of Central
Europe. By its size, number of inhabitants and overall potential, including its defense potential, it belongs among
the smallest countries in the region. This objective position requires an active and sophisticated policy in all areas
including its Defense Policy.

4. Following the admission of Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary into the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, the prevailing part of the borders of the Slovak Republic is with these new member countries of this
political-defensive organization. This fact positively affects the security environment of the Slovak Republic in a
substantial way and improves the basis for securing its defense.

5. The international political-military position of the Slovak Republic is favorably affected by the initiation of
activities by the Vysegrad Four countries which also includes the area of political-military co-operation. These
facts, as well as other processes, are strengthening the position of the Slovak Republic in the Central European
region as a full participant of international politics and a serious aspirant for membership in the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization.

6. The Slovak Republic is a democratic state, which safeguards its vital and important interests in accordance
with international law and its own legal system. The character of the vital and important interests of the Slovak
Republic is of a long-term and stable nature; however, they are being realized in a dynamically changing security
environment.

7. Despite the fact that the probability of a large-scale armed conflict has substantially decreased, there are
remaining possibilities of social-economic, religious, national or other conflicts arising in unstable regions conflicts that could escalate into an armed form. At the same time new and above all non-military risks are being
exposed, risks to which the Slovak Republic must be prepared to react by using its defense potential, especially
by using its Armed Forces. At present, even in Europe, there remain risks and threats of this character.

8. The Slovak Republic does not consider any country to be its enemy and does not feel directly militarily
threatened by any country or a coalition. It has no territorial or other claims against other states, and it respects
their political independence and territorial integrity. It does not consider armed violence as a suitable tool for
addressing mutual disputes among states. In accordance with this principle, it will not be the first party to initiate
an armed conflict.

9. The Slovak Republic is actively contributing towards the enhancement of the efficiency of the activities of the
United Nations Organization, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, and other international
institutions in the area of confidence strengthening and co-operation between the countries, as well as in the area
of conflict prevention and resolution and in the reinforcement of the security environment in Europe and in the
whole world. It is an integral part of the co-operative system of European security, which at present does not
guarantee sufficient defense for its member states.

10. The Slovak Republic considers the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to be the only effective organization
capable of guaranteeing security and peace in Europe. The full membership of the Slovak Republic in the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization is one of the most vital interests of the Slovak Republic, as it represents the optimum
way of guaranteeing its security and defense.


-----

11. The Slovak Republic is not a member of any defense coalition and has not concluded any bilateral or
multilateral agreements with other states on common defense. This means that it secures its defense on an
individual basis, in combination with exercising its rights and obligations as a member state of the United Nations
Organization and by actively participating in the system of co-operative security within the framework of the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. It takes part in an active dialogue with the European Union
on common foreign and security policy issues and on a common European security and defense policy as well. At
the same time all efforts are being taken to meet criteria for regular membership in the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.

**2. Strategic Revaluation of the Defense of the Slovak Republic**

12. Assuring the realization of the vital and important interests of the Slovak Republic, in a substantially altered
security environment in Europe and in a world which brings new challenges, risks and threats to the Slovak
Republic, requires a qualitatively new complex approach for addressing priority tasks for the defense of the State
that match the standards of developed democratic states and will enable:

## • Defense of the State by the deployment of its own forces; 
 • Meeting the political-military and other criteria for the achievement of full membership of the Slovak
Republic in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and to subsequently secure effective involvement
within its structures;

## • Active participation of the Slovak Republic and its Armed Forces in international military co-operation
and in peacekeeping and humanitarian activities under the auspices of international organizations.

13. The fulfillment of these priority tasks forms the basis for continued implementation of systemic changes by
building upon the Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic in the area of State defense. It requires:

## • Prompt completion of the drafting of fundamental strategic documents and to begin implementing them
in the area of State defense - especially the Military Strategy of the Slovak Republic;

## • Preparation of the Concept of the Security System of the Slovak Republic and to implement the reform of
the Defense System of the Slovak Republic to make it compatible with systems of the member countries
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and able to effectively respond to present as well as future
challenges, risks and threats;

## • Implementation of a fundamental reform of the Armed Forces to enhance their readiness and their
capability for State defense, as well as to increase their interoperability with the Armed Forces of the
member states of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization;

## • Introduction of a system of multiyear defense planning on the state level interconnected with the defense
planning system of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization;

## • Preparation of a draft for the introduction of a complex personnel management system for the needs of
State defense;

## • Adoption of a comprehensive set of generally binding legal regulations in the area of State security and
defense, corresponding with the standards of the member countries of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.

**II. CHALLENGES, RISKS AND THREATS TO THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC**

**1. Political-Military Challenges to the Security Environment of the Slovak Republic**

14. Assuring the realization of the vital and important interests of the Slovak Republic in the area of its defense
requires that challenges be coped with and a readiness to address the risks and threats that are being brought by
the new security environment. In connection with the challenges which are being defined in the Security Strategy
of the Slovak Republic, it is necessary to respond especially to the following challenges in the area of State
defense:

## • The process of globalization and uneven development brings with it a main cause for diminishing of
differences between domestic and foreign policy. The new millennium is characterized by high dynamics
of social-political changes that are difficult to predict in advance. The unevenness of development opens
up a possibility for new epicenters of tensions beginning to emerge. Effective addressing of the
consequences of globalization exceeds the possibilities of individual states, and it also necessarily
requires the participation of the Slovak Republic in multilateral international co-operation in the politicalmilitary area;

## • A qualitatively new approach towards the issues of State defense is being strengthened in which the
complex method of addressing security questions in Europe and in the whole world is perceived together


-----

with its direct interconnection with other dimensions of security, especially foreign-policy, economic,
social and environmental dimensions. This increasingly close interconnection of individual dimensions of
security, which require complex solutions, is a worldwide challenge, and it could cause a transfer of
instability from one dimension of security to another if it is not properly managed;

## • Fundamental social-political changes in Europe and in the world are the main causes of qualitative
changes of political-military aspects of the security environment, including the changes of the role of
wars and armed struggles. These changes are being reflected in the new mission, tasks and the
composition of the Armed Forces, and they are directing them towards a more active contribution as for
the support and keeping of peace and security in the world, as well as for addressing not only military
threats, but also non-military threats and risks of a mixed nature.

**Risks and Threats to the Slovak Republic**

15. The analysis of the present security environment of the Slovak Republic and the expected development of
political-military aspects of the security situation in Europe and in the world indicate that there is a decreasing
probability of an emergence, gravity and extent of military risks and threats, and conversely, there is an increasing
probability, diversity, non-predictability and importance of the risks and threats of a non-military nature. The
relevance of mixed threats is increasing, and it is not only the regular Armed Forces that could participate, but
also various paramilitary groups and organizations, mercenary armed groups and terrorist commandos.

**a) Military Risks and Threats to the Slovak Republic**

16. Military risks and threats to the Slovak Republic are those activities which primarily involve the use of military
forces and means. These are especially:

## • A major armed conflict which presents the highest possible military threat and endangerment to the
Slovak Republic. It would mean that the most vital and important interests of the Slovak Republic are at
risk, and it would lead to a direct threat not only to the existence of the Slovak Republic, but also to other
countries as well. In the long-term perspective, there is a very low probability of such major conflicts;

## • A regional armed conflict in the vicinity of the borders of the Slovak Republic, which represents a serious
military threat. However, an armed conflict of such a nature in the region of Central Europe is relatively
highly predictable, and it would not occur unexpectedly. It could originate secondarily as a consequence
of the extreme possibility of political, social and economical disintegration in the unstable regions of
Southeast Europe.

**b) Non-Military Risks and Threats to the Slovak Republic**

17. Non-military risks and threats to the Slovak Republic are being represented by those in which non-military
forces and means are predominantly used. These non-military risks and threats include:

## • Massive, illegal migration through the territory of the Slovak Republic caused by ethnic, religious, social
tensions, disputes and conflicts, which may even lead to a failure of the state structures and socialeconomic collapse in the unstable states of Southeast and Eastern Europe as well;

## • International terrorism and organized crime enforced by massive growth of their activities and forms,
which represent a serious supranational threat to state security, including the areas and activities that
are vital for the functioning and the defense of the State;

## • Natural disasters and industrial catastrophes, which, according to their nature, extent and consequences
can seriously endanger the environment, life and health of inhabitants, and property on a large scale
including human and material resources for the defense of the Slovak Republic. A shortage of basic
foodstuffs can trigger a crisis situation which could considerably endanger state security;

## • An undermining of a State's stability by activities conducted by domestic and also foreign entities and
special services aimed against the democratic foundations of the State, the patriotic sentiments of its
citizens, and the political-social stability in the society, and national and racial tolerance that indirectly
negatively affects the determination of the State and its citizens to secure the needs for State defense;

## • An illegal proliferation of biological, chemical and nuclear weapons, including components for their
production, being transited through the territory of the Slovak Republic or their use in a terrorist act;

## • Activities and processes that directly or indirectly negatively affect the readiness and functionality of the
Defense System of the Slovak Republic and the level of readiness and operational capabilities of the
Armed Forces (psychological effects, information-intelligence activities, long-term underfunding of
defense requirements, but also an ineffective use of resources allocated for defense).

**III. DEFENSE POLICY OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC**


-----

18. The Defense Policy of the Slovak Republic, which is an inseparable part of overall national policy, constitutes
the defense dimension of the national security policy. It represents a summary of basic ideas, objectives,
principles, tools and mechanisms by which the State secures its defense function in peacetime, in emergency
situations and also during wartime. The Defense Policy has both internal and external dimensions. They enable
the creation of suitable internal (inner-state) and external (international) political, economic, social and military
conditions and also the tools for securing the defense of the State.

**1. Basic Objectives of the Defense Policy of the Slovak Republic**

19. The basic objectives of the Defense Policy of the Slovak Republic are:

## • to secure an effective defense of the Slovak Republic by its own forces; 
 • to ensure the timely meeting of political-military criteria for the entry of the Slovak Republic into the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization and to create conditions for an effective participation of the Slovak Republic
and its Armed Forces in coalition defense within the framework of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
but also within the framework of the security and defense policy of the European Union that is being
formed.

**2. Basic Tasks of the Defense Policy of the Slovak Republic**

20. The fulfillment of the aforementioned basic objectives assumes the implementation of the following basic
tasks of the Defense Policy:

## • Formulation and implementation of the Defense and Military Strategies of the State, which will secure the
implementation of the interests of the Slovak Republic;

## • Development and implementation of a set of conceptual developmental documents and legislative-legal
standards for systemic solutions to questions that are connected with the defense of the State in
accordance with standards of the countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization;

## • Implementation of State defense system reform and enhancement of its working mechanism in such a
way that it will be compatible with standards set by the member countries of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, which includes a system of multiyear State defense planning being introduced at the same
time, enabling the harmonization of the requirements of State defense with its defense resources in the
long-term, the mid-term and the short-term prospective;

## • Implementation of a fundamental reform of the Armed Forces of the Slovak Republic in such a way that
enables it to respond to risks and threats and also being capable of fulfilling the tasks in securing State
defense;

## • Deepening the political-military co-operation with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization with an
emphasis on increasing the level of interoperability of its own Armed Forces and their ability to contribute
to collective defense;

## • Securing effective participation of the Slovak Republic in international political-military cooperation with
an emphasis on its participation in the security and defense policy of the European Union, and on
maintaining peace and stability and on prevention and peaceful resolution of crisis situations and
conflicts in Europe which are affecting the defense of the Slovak Republic.

**3. Basic Principles of the Defense Policy of the Slovak Republic**

21. In an effort aimed at the implementation of the basic objective of its Defense Policy, the Slovak Republic will
employ the following principles emanating from its Security and Defense policies:

## • principle of the sovereign right to guarantee its own security 
Preparation for defense and securing of defense is being realized by the Slovak Republic in accordance
with the right to self-defense and the right to collective defense according to the Charter of the United
Nations. In doing so, the Slovak Republic thoroughly observes international law, voluntarily assumes
commitments, and observes the sovereignty of other states, which have equal rights to participate in
solving the questions concerning their own defense.

## • principle of complexity 
State defense is a multidimensional process. It is a part of the complex Security policy of the Slovak
Republic. In the event of an armed conflict, State defense must remain complex, being able to effectively
utilize the entire defense potential of the State including political, economic, social, military and other
factors. The Defense Policy and Strategy of the State contribute to the establishment of the integrated
security system of the State, in which the Defense System will be a part.


-----

## • principle of commitment 
The Slovak Republic will not remain only a passive consumer of advantages of the international politicalmilitary co-operation. It will become involved in the strengthening of stability and confidence in Europe
and in the world. It will meet the required criteria for the integration of the Slovak Republic into the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization, and it will actively take part in the creation of the security and defense
policy of the European Union.

## • principle of prevention 
While securing its defense, the Slovak Republic prefers to use preventive peaceful means in solving
disputes and conflicts rather than solutions achieved by other means. Besides the defense and
protection of its vital and important interests and fulfillment of international commitments in peacekeeping
and humanitarian activities, no other reasons exist for the Slovak Republic to use its Armed Forces.

## • principle of harmonizing State defense in accordance with its law and international treaties 
The defense of the Slovak Republic will be secured in accordance with the Laws of the Slovak Republic
and with international treaties which the Slovak Republic has signed.

## • principle of deterrence 
The Slovak Republic will rely on the functionality and continuous readiness of the Defense System of the
Slovak Republic, on the optimum composition, readiness and capability of the Armed Forces, on
effective utilization of the entire defense potential of the State and on the determination to use this
potential in the event of a threat in such a way where the negative consequences for the aggressor
would exceed the aggressor's expected advantages and discourage the aggressor from its original
intention.

## • principle of transparency 
The orientation and implementation of the Defense Policy of the Slovak Republic will be sufficiently
transparent, convincing and verifiable. It must contribute towards the strengthening of stability and
confidence in Europe as well as to the stability of the world while enabling the Slovak Republic to
achieve a position as a reliable partner in the process of active participation in the creation of the
European security system and the integration of the Slovak Republic and its Armed Forces into the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.

## • principle of justification 
The needs of defense of the Slovak Republic will be reconciled with developments of the political-military
aspects of the security environment, as well as with the economic, political, social, demographic and
scientific-technical potential and possibilities of the State.

## • principle of civilian and democratic control of the Armed Forces 
The Armed Forces of the Slovak Republic are and will be controlled by the legitimate civilian political
power. The mission, tasks, structure, and command and control system of the Armed Forces in
peacetime, in crisis situations and in wartime must be regulated by appropriate legal regulations. The
Armed Forces are an instrument of the State; however they must not interfere with the legitimate political
development of the country, and they must not be used in support of specific party interests.

**IV. DEFENSE STRATEGY OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC**

22. The Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic is based on the Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic, and it
has its foundations in the objectives, principles and tasks of the Defense Policy of the Slovak Republic. It
represents a complex set of conceptual, legislative and organizational measures and procedures; having a main
task to manage and co-ordinate the political, economic, social and military potential of the State while being able
to adequately respond to political-military challenges and to effectively address both military and non-military risks
and threats to the Slovak Republic.

**1. Main Areas of the Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic**

23. The Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic is being implemented in three basic areas:

a. In the area of affecting the political-military aspects of the security environment of the Slovak Republic;
b. In the area of readiness and ability to address military threats to the Slovak Republic;
c. In the area of readiness and capability to address non-military threats to the Slovak Republic.

**2. Basic Measures of the Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic**

24. The purpose of these measures is especially to ensure:

## • Effective prevention of a threat to the Slovak Republic from arising; 
 • Timely identification of the character and extent of a risk and threat to the Slovak Republic; 
 • Effective elimination and minimizing of the consequences of a risk and threat to the Slovak Republic; 


-----

## • Swift renewal of the original state of affairs. 

**a) Influencing Political-Military Aspects of the Security Environment of the Slovak Republic**

25. The measures and activities in this area will be aimed at strengthening the overall political-military stability of
the security environment of the Slovak Republic, at deepening mutual confidence and co-operation among the
states, and at preventing conflicts and tensions that could escalate into risks and threats. The following basic
measures are especially being considered:

## • a continuous analysis of political-military aspects of the security environment of the Slovak Republic and
their resulting challenges, risks and threats to the Slovak Republic;

## • adoption of timely preventive measures to preclude and eliminate these risks and threats to the Slovak
Republic;

## • active participation of the Slovak Republic and its Armed Forces in peacekeeping missions of the United
Nations Organization, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and on peace support
operations under the leadership of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization;

## • active participation of the Slovak Republic in building the common security and defense policy of the
European Union;

## • participation of the Slovak Republic in active dialogue within the framework of the Euro-Atlantic
Partnership Council concerning the questions of security and co-operation;

## • support of a strengthened and more operative Partnership for Peace; 
 • rigorous fulfillment of commitments in the area of arms control, disarmament and confidence and
security-building measures;

## • political-military co-operation with the Armed Forces of other countries with an emphasis being laid on
the member countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and neighboring states;

## • active participation in military diplomacy to build qualitatively new political-military co-operation. 

**b) Readiness and Ability to Address Military Threats to the Defense of the Slovak Republic**

26. The extent and character of adopted and implemented measures will depend on the character and the extent
of the concrete military threat to the Slovak Republic, which can take the form of a regional armed conflict (limited
war) or a major military aggression against the Slovak Republic (it can be a part of a regional or a global war).
The direct military threat to the Slovak Republic will not originate instantaneously, but is subject to its own
development and progression, or perhaps to a variable dynamic build-up of hostile statements against the Slovak
Republic. They can arise from diplomatic forms of pressure (political, informational, psychological, economical)
and military pressure including the possibility of direct armed aggression.

27. In times of increasing danger of a military threat to the Slovak Republic, measures will have to be
concentrated on preventive measures aimed at discouraging the aggressor from their intention, focusing on
searching for a peaceful solution to disputes and on preparation of the Defense System required for the
elimination of the specific threat. Measures being especially conducted include:

## • continuous analysis and evaluation of the situation's development and adoption of adequate measures; 
 • activation of diplomatic efforts for prevention of a military threat to the State and achieving international
support for a peaceful solution to the problem;

## • presentation of the determination and readiness to defend the Slovak Republic by using all means
available, including the Armed Forces;

## • activation of the defense resources and capacities of the State for eliminating the threat and averting an
armed attack aimed at the Slovak Republic;

## • activation of the Defense System of the Slovak Republic and preparation of conditions for its smooth
transition into a state of full functionality.

28. In the event that the implemented preventive measures prove to be ineffective, and it would come to an
imminent threat or a direct armed aggression against the Slovak Republic, it is especially necessary that
measures be implemented to:

## • secure a smooth transition of the country from peacetime status to wartime status, emphasizing the
achievement of full functionality of the Defense System of the Slovak Republic and its individual
elements;


-----

## • secure the mobilization of the Armed Forces of the Slovak Republic and to implement measures required
for providing material means and the specification of work responsibilities to fulfil the needs of State
defense and the Armed Forces;

## • continue diplomatic activities with the goal of informing about the situation and to gain international
support and assistance, and to search for opportunities to stop the armed aggression against the Slovak
Republic and resolve it by peaceful means;

## • to preserve the functionality of the state administration and the functioning of the war economy of the
country.

29. The Defense System of the Slovak Republic will ensure the fulfillment of the following defense objectives:

## • defense of state borders and protection of the air space of the Slovak Republic. In case of their
infringement by an aggressor, swift renewal of territorial integrity and sovereignty of the State. If this is
not possible, stop the advance of the aggressor by not allowing the advance to develop;

## • protection and defense of important political and economic centers and strategic areas necessary for the
preservation of the State and functioning of the Slovak Republic;

## • creating the conditions necessary for the support and deployment of forces of the international
community (allies) in support of the Slovak Republic;

## • protection of the population and the environment to the extent adequate for its function. 

**c) Readiness and Ability to Resolve Non-Military Threats to the Slovak Republic**

30. For the resolution and elimination of non-military risks and threats to the Slovak Republic, non-military forces
and means will be used first. In its various stages of development, when the extent and character being achieved
by these threats would lead to imperiling the vital and important interests of the Slovak Republic, the Armed
Forces and all means, in accordance with the principles of the use of the Armed Forces, will be used to eliminate
them. These specific types of non-military threats to the defense of the Slovak Republic especially include
massive uncontrolled illegal migration through our territory, ecological disasters endangering the environment on
a large scale, international terrorism and organized crime, natural disasters, industrial disasters (including
emergencies at nuclear power plants), and disruption of state stability by both domestic and foreign entities.

31. The Defense System of the Slovak Republic will be activated in accordance with the principles of crisis
management of the State, especially:

## • for monitoring and evaluation of non-military risks and threats to the Slovak Republic and their
developmental trends;

## • for strengthening the protection of state borders and the protection of the air space of the Slovak
Republic in co-operation with other services;

## • for the protection against possible terrorist attacks of key political and economic centers, facilities of
special importance and other facilities which are necessary for the functioning of the State;

## • for the fulfillment of tasks of civil defense (rescue operations), for the elimination of consequences of
events and stabilization of the situation, and for essential health care (protection of human health,
prophylactics) and veterinary prevention;

## • for supplying of the inhabitants in times of crises (maintenance, passage clearance of important roads)
and adequate social support and social aid based on a system of social support laws prepared for such
circumstances;

## • as part of a multinational force within the framework of peacekeeping operations under the auspices of
the United Nations Organization and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Organization for Security
and Co-operation in Europe and the European Union, which will be deployed for the prevention or for the
mitigation of conflicts and tensions in specific regions of instability, which are also the sources of a threat
to the Slovak Republic (preserving of peace, peace enforcement, stabilization of the situation);

## • as a part of observation and monitoring missions and humanitarian activities in conflict areas. 

**V. BASIC ELEMENTS OF THE DEFENCE STRATEGY OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC**

32. The basic elements of the Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic are:

1. State-political decision-making bodies and management of security and defense of the Slovak Republic;
2. Defense System of the Slovak Republic;
3. Other elements of the Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic.


-----

**1. State Political Decision-Making Bodies and Management of Security and Defense of the Slovak**
**Republic**

33. Securing the defense of the Slovak Republic is an issue concerning all state bodies of the Slovak Republic
that are responsible for the implementation of tasks in the area of State defense within their authority as being
specified in relevant legal regulations. The bodies of State political decision-making and management of security
and defense of the State are the National Council of the Slovak Republic, the President of the Slovak Republic
and the Government of the Slovak Republic. In accordance with the Constitution of the Slovak Republic and
relevant legal regulations, they use their decision-making and control powers in the area of security and defense
of the State, with an emphasis being put on:

## • approving the objectives and tasks of the Security and Defense Policy of the Slovak Republic and the
strategy of procedures for the realization of vital and important interests of the Slovak Republic;

## • determining priorities in foreign policy and diplomacy with the aim of creating reliable international
guarantees for the defense of the Slovak Republic and for gaining full membership of the Slovak
Republic in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization;

## • approving the Security, Defense and Military Strategies of the Slovak Republic and conceptual long-term
developmental plans of the Defense System of the Slovak Republic and the Armed Forces;

## • securing necessary defense resources and capacities in the long-term, mid-term and short-term outlook
plans.

34. The fulfillment of these tasks requires corresponding defense legislation to be adopted, where the decisionmaking and control powers of the National Council of the Slovak Republic will be adjusted, and the President of
the Slovak Republic and the Government of the Slovak Republic (but also other elements of the Defense
Strategy) in the area of security and defense of the State are corresponding with the standards of developed
democratic countries in a way that:

a. The National Council of the Slovak Republic, as the constituent and legislative body in the area of State
defense, will:
## o express its approval with international political treaties and international treaties of a military
character;
## o pass a declaration of war resolution in the event the Slovak Republic is attacked or if it results
from international treaty obligations on common defense against an attack, and after its
termination after making peace;
## o give approval for sending Armed Forces outside the territory of the Slovak Republic and also
approve the presence of foreign Armed Forces on the territory of the Slovak Republic;
## o approve the fundamental strategic documents in the area of security and defense of the Slovak
Republic, especially the Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic, the Defense Strategy of the
Slovak Republic, the Military Strategy of the Slovak Republic and the resources required for
defense.
b. The President of the Slovak Republic, as the Chief Commander of the Armed Forces, will in accordance
with the Constitution of the Slovak Republic in the area of State defense:
## o declare war based on a decision made by the National Council of the Slovak Republic;  o declare and terminate a state of war based on a proposal made by the National Council of the
Slovak Republic and order the mobilization of the Armed Forces;
## o declare and terminate a state of emergency based on a proposal of the Government of the
Slovak Republic;
## o after the declaration of emergency and state of emergency based on the proposal of the
Government of the Slovak Republic, the President of the Slovak Republic will be able to order
the soldiers of the Armed Forces, who are serving their compulsory military service, to perform
emergency duties, compensatory service, improvement service, preparatory or professional
service, as well as the recalling of the reservists of the Armed Forces to perform emergency
duties and also to decide on providing material resources and specification of work
responsibilities required to meet the needs of State defense;
## o prior to the declaration of the state of war, and according to the character of external threat,
based on a proposal by the Government of the Slovak Republic, the President of the Slovak
Republic will be able to decide on recalling of recruits, conscripts and soldiers whose
compulsory military service or compensatory service was suspended to perform emergency
duty. The President can order the mobilization of the Armed Forces or their components, and
decide on providing material resources and specification of work responsibilities for the needs
of State defense.
c. The Government of the Slovak Republic, as the supreme body of executive power of the State in the
area of State defense, shall:
## o decide in accordance with the Constitution of the Slovak Republic about the governmental
program and fundamental questions of internal, foreign and security policies;


-----

## o be responsible for securing the defense of the Slovak Republic;  o negotiate and submit to the National Council of the Slovak Republic, the Security Strategy of
the Slovak Republic, the Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic and the Military Strategy of
the Slovak Republic;
## o approve other fundamental conceptual documents in the area of State defense including the
build-up and development of the Armed Forces, their use, numbers and resource support;
## o secure the process of national planning of defense resources as an integral part of the overall
planning process of the State;
## o declare and terminate an emergency and propose to the President of the Slovak Republic the
declaration and termination of a state of emergency and a state of war;
## o decide on sending Armed Forces outside the territory of the Slovak Republic for the purpose of
humanitarian aid and military exercises or peacekeeping observers missions, or in the case of
fulfilling its obligations arising from international treaties on common defense against an attack;
## o decide on the transit of foreign Armed Forces through the territory of the Slovak Republic;  o decide on the presence of foreign Armed Forces on the territory of the Slovak Republic for the
purpose of humanitarian aid, military exercises or peacekeeping observer missions.
d. The Security Council of the Slovak Republic (until the enactment of the Constitutional Law on the
Security of the Slovak Republic, some of the listed tasks are being performed by the State Defense
Council):
## o is responsible for its performance to the Government of the Slovak Republic;  o has as its Chairman, the Prime Minister of the Slovak Republic, and the other members of the
Security Council of the Slovak Republic are appointed and recalled by the President of the
Slovak Republic based on a proposal of the Government of the Slovak Republic;
## o prepares, to the extent specified by the Government of the Slovak Republic, the measures
required for guaranteeing the security of the Slovak Republic. It manages, co-ordinates and
prepares the measures needed for preventing a crisis situation and also develops proposals for
resolving it;
## o in times of emergency, state of emergency and a state of war, makes decisions on measures
that are to be taken for their resolution; assigns binding tasks to the state authorities, public
institutions, township bodies, the authorities of territorial self-government, the sub-ordinated
security councils, legal and other entities; and co-ordinates their activities;
## o in a state of war, makes decisions on law proposals that are to adapt the social and economic
relations in the country pertaining to this state.

**2. Defense System of the Slovak Republic**

**a) Missions and Tasks of the Defense System of the Slovak Republic**

35. For securing State defense and in accordance with law, defense requirements and defense resources, the
Slovak Republic creates the Defense System of the Slovak Republic as a part of its Security System.

36. In peacetime, in crisis situations and in wartime, the Defense System of the Slovak Republic will especially
fulfill these tasks:

## • in accordance with the objectives of the Security Policy and the Defense Policy of the State, it will
prepare the procedural strategies for their implementation, including securing of corresponding defense
resources and means;

## • it will secure effective and continuous unified management of the defense of the Slovak Republic in
peacetime, in crisis situations and in wartime, as well as enabling a flexible and smooth transition of the
country into these states;

## • it will secure the building-up, development, modernization and unified management of the Armed Forces
with the main objective to enhance their readiness and ability to secure State defense and international
political-military co-operation;

## • it will improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the management and functioning of the State defense
system by means of State defense planning and its interconnection with the defense planning of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization;

## • it will be compatible with corresponding systems of the member countries of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and enable comprehensive political-military co-operation with them, and create conditions
for the achievement of full membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization;

## • perform effectively within the security system of the Slovak Republic. 

37. To fulfil the aforementioned tasks the State defense system is structured internally on a functional basis. Its
basic constituents are the managing bodies of the State defense system and the Armed Forces.


-----

**b) Managing Bodies of the Defense System of the Slovak Republic**

38. The Ministry of Defense of the Slovak Republic is the central body of state administra-tion responsible for
securing defense. It is held responsible especially for the co-ordination of activities of other ministries as well as
other central bodies of state administration, bodies of territorial self-government and legal entities in the
preparation process for the defense of the Slovak Republic, and for the building-up and the management of the
Army of the Slovak Republic (in the perspective of the Armed Forces). In the area of defense, the Ministry of
Defense of the Slovak Republic especially:

## • processes the proposals of concept materials in the area of State defense; 
 • in co-operation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic, analyses and assesses the
international political-military situation and on this basis, it proposes to the Government of the Slovak
Republic the essential measures to take for the preparation, organization and guaranteeing of security
and defense of the state;

## • secures the process of defense planning in the Ministry of Defense and co-ordinates the tasks of State
defense planning entities, including the use of financial resources for defense in the process of defense
planning. It prepares the defense infrastructure of the Slovak Republic and co-ordinates activities with
ministries and other central bodies of the state administration in its preparation;

## • manages, co-ordinates and controls the performance of state administration in the area of defense which
is being performed by specialized bodies of the state administration;

## • secures the performance of state administration in the area of defense according to a specific regulation; 
 • through the General Staff of the Army of the Slovak Republic, secures the management and coordination of activities of the operational bodies of command.

39. Additional management bodies within the State defense system are the ministries and other central authorities
of the state administration, which are carrying out these crucial activities within the framework of their authority:

## • they propose and fulfill measures necessary for securing State defense and development of the State
defense system;

## • they participate in the defense planning process and they are responsible for its preparation and
implementation;

## • they ensure the fulfillment of tasks in the preparation of the defense infrastructure; 
 • they secure protection of inhabitants, protection of key facilities and other facilities specified by the
Government of the Slovak Republic;

## • they ensure and control preparation of the measures needed for securing State defense. 

40. Individual ministries perform crucial activities in the management system of State defense, within their
authority, in these areas:

## • the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic - in the area of an active foreign policy and
diplomacy, where the main objective is the strengthening of the international position and security treaty
guarantees for the Slovak Republic;

## • the Ministry of Economy of the Slovak Republic - in the area of co-ordination of activities of ministries
and other central authorities of the state administration in economic mobilization, and in the preparation
of conceptual documents and draft decisions for the Government of the Slovak Republic in this area. In
addition, in influencing manufacturing and services to provide for the needs of State defense and in the
development and protection of important elements of the defense infrastructure within their authority;

## • the Ministry of the Interior of the Slovak Republic - in the implementation of the Defense Strategy, tasks
through the bodies of local state administration, the bodies of territorial self-government and the Police
Force, with emphasis being laid on ensuring defense tasks by protecting the Constitutional system, and
in matters of internal order and security, protection of the state borders, protection of the personal
security of the President of the Slovak Republic and other persons specified by the Government of the
Slovak Republic, protection of diplomatic missions, civil protection and fire protection;

## • the Ministry of Transport, Postal Services, and Telecommunications of the Slovak Republic - in the area
of securing State defense by providing the railway, roads, water-way and civilian air transport facilities,
by providing the post offices and telecommunications facilities and necessary infrastructure under its
authority, as well as the armed corps in transport;

## • the Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs and Family of the Slovak Republic - in the area of registration,
balancing, recalling and providing of the labor force for requirements of the defense of the State based
on a decision made by competent authorities;

## • the Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic - in the area of the state long-term planning and budgeting
system and its interconnection with defense planning;


-----

## • the Ministry of Health of the Slovak Republic - in creating conditions necessary for the protection of
health and survival of inhabitants, in proposing and implementing special measures in health care, and in
preparing adequate beds, staff and material capacities that are being required for defense;

## • the Ministry of the Environment of the Slovak Republic - in the area of preventing and eliminating
negative impacts of emergency situations on the environment originating from military or other activities;

## • Administration of the State Material Reserves of the Slovak Republic - in the area of co-ordinating the
activities of the central and other state bodies in the expedient creation of state material reserves in
satisfying State defense requirements.

41. In a crisis situation and situations of endangerment, securing of the defense management of the Slovak
Republic is identical to the one in peacetime, but other forces, means and management procedures are being
activated as well, that are necessary for coping with such a crisis situation by means of an activated Defense
System of the Slovak Republic within the framework of emergency management of the Slovak Republic on the
supreme level of management. In the event of a direct military threat and aggression against the Slovak Republic,
the defense management center of the Slovak Republic is activated, where the key participants are the President
of the Slovak Republic, appointed representatives of the National Council of the Slovak Republic and the
Government of the Slovak Republic, members of the State Defense Council (the Security Council of the Slovak
Republic), representatives of the Ministry of Defense of the Slovak Republic and other ministries. The command
center is being established to ensure a problem-free deployment and command of the Armed Forces and
preparation for this activity is taking place in peacetime as well.

**c) Armed Forces**

42. The Armed Forces of the Slovak Republic are the decisive executive element of the Defense System of the
Slovak Republic. In peacetime, in a crisis situation and in wartime, the Armed Forces must be able to fulfil the
following:

## • to ensure plausible deterrence, and in case of its failure, to effectively ensure the defense of freedom,
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Slovak Republic against an external armed
attack;

## • to create conditions necessary for effective participation in the structures of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization;

## • to take part in multinational peace support operations and in humanitarian operations, observer and
monitoring missions under the supervision of the United Nations Organization, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, as well as other international organizations, especially the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe and the European Union. To fulfil other tasks on the territory of the Slovak
Republic as well as outside of its territory resulting from international treaty commitments and within the
framework of international political-military co-operation;

## • to assist in eliminating non-military threats to the Slovak Republic and resolving crisis situations that
endanger human lives, the environment and property on a large scale, and elimination of their
consequences.

43. Based on the decision of the Government of the Slovak Republic, the Armed Forces may also be used for
securing key facilities and other facilities of great importance needed for the defense of the Slovak Republic, for
the fulfillment of civil defense tasks, for the support of other services in providing protection of the state borders of
the Slovak Republic, as well as in other cases that are being specified by a separate regulation.

44. The building up of the Armed Forces will be based on the following principles:

## • legitimacy of building-up the Armed Forces based on their mission, tasks and the defensive character of
the Armed Forces, which is being codified in the Laws of the Slovak Republic;

## • unified command and management in peacetime, in a crisis situation and in wartime; 
 • harmony with principles of civilian and democratic control of the Armed Forces by the legitimate political
power;

## • specifying the numbers, structure, sort, armament, technical equipment and the level of training of the
Armed Forces in accordance with the defense requirements and the defense resources;

## • implementation of defense planning in the process of management and building-up of the Armed Forces. 

45. The Armed Forces can be used according to the following principles:

## • harmonizing the use of the Armed Forces with international law and with the Laws of the Slovak
Republic (legitimacy);


-----

## • use of the Armed Forces for ensuring the vital interests of the Slovak Republic in accordance with the
Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic and the Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic;

## • use of the Armed Forces in accordance with the principles of civilian and democratic control to achieve
exactly defined defense objectives;

## • clearly determined hierarchy of command and responsibilities in the Armed Forces. 

46. Gradual improvement of the level of readiness and combat capability of the Armed Forces and increasing
their interoperability with the Armed Forces of the member countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
requires their categorization accordingly.

**3. Other Elements of the Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic**

47. Among other elements of the Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic are: diplomacy, international politicalmilitary co-operation, economic mobilization, defense infrastructure, armed security corps, civil protection, rescue
corps and rescue services and preparation of citizens for defense.

**a) Diplomacy**

48. In the area of diplomacy, the Slovak Republic will especially:

## • present its objectives, priorities and approaches in the area of securing its defensive capability that
ensure the realization of the interests of the Slovak Republic and which are in harmony with international
law and treaties;

## • deepen the credibility of the Slovak Republic as a trustworthy partner who fulfils all commitments in the
area of defense and security;

## • present the determination to obtain full membership of the Slovak Republic in the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and the readiness to fulfil the resulting tasks;

## • implement diplomatic activities for an active formation of political-military aspects of the security
environment in Europe;

## • contribute towards the prevention of crises from arising and towards effective solutions to crises that can
secondarily impact the defense capability of the Slovak Republic;

## • adopt effective diplomatic measures in the event of an escalated threat to the defense capability; 
 • create conditions for informing the international community at an early stage and gaining their support in
the event of a direct threat to the Slovak Republic (aggression);

## • engage in the common foreign and security policy of the European Union, the common European
security and defense policy and crisis management within the framework of the European Union.

**b) International Political-Military Co-operation**

49. International political-military co-operation is an important factor in the implementation of the Defense Policy of
the Slovak Republic, and among its main objectives are the following:

## • to enhance the conceptuality, purposefulness, effectiveness and harmonization of political-military cooperation;

## • to focus international political-military co-operation on fulfilling strategic objectives of the Security and
Defense Policy and on implementing reform of the Ministry of Defense and the Armed Forces;

## • to further develop political-military co-operation with the member countries of NATO with the objective of
bringing this co-operation closer to those parameters of the allied relations;

## • to deepen political-military co-operation with neighboring countries with the aim of developing and
deepening the processes of stabilization of the security environment in Central Europe;

## • to enhance political-military co-operation with other countries based on the basis of mutual advantage
and usefulness.

**c) Economic Mobilization**

50. In the economic area, the Slovak Republic will ensure sufficient material resources and means for the defense
of the State in peacetime, in crisis situations and in wartime. The Slovak Republic considers the system of
economic mobilization through the resource bases for the defense of the State to be an important part of this
system.


-----

51. To ensure fulfillment of the objectives of the Armed Forces, the Slovak Republic will maintain the defense
industry potential of the State including the creation and utilization of state and material reserves indispensable for
securing defense, while taking into account real possibilities and effectiveness of the defense industry in the
context of co-operative development with the defense industries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the
European Union countries (and immediately with Vysegrad Four countries) as the starting point for its
maintenance and its optimal development.

**d) Defense Infrastructure**

52. As part of these objectives, the Slovak Republic will build and maintain the corresponding infrastructure to
secure the defense, including telecommunications, transport, energy production and distribution, banking and
finance, information technologies and other elements. In the Defense System, conditions will be created for its
protection and functioning in crisis situations. In doing so it will be necessary to take into consideration the future
requirements from the perspective of integration into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. It will ensure an
effective combination of the state and the private sector for its maintenance and development.

**e) Armed Security Corps**

53. The Police Force equates to an armed security corps, which is fulfilling the tasks regarding internal order and
security of the country. To ensure the fulfilling of the tasks of the defense of the State in peacetime, in crisis
situations, as well as in wartime, the Police Force assists in protecting the lives, health and security of persons
and also the protection of property, it ensures the protection of the state borders, and it ensures the personal
security of the President of the Slovak Republic and other persons specified by the Government of the Slovak
Republic. It ensures the protection of specified facilities and protection of the facilities of special importance, and it
supervises the safety and smooth flow of traffic and assists in its regulation.

54. The Railway Police performs the tasks of an armed security corps to ensure fulfillment of the tasks of defense
of the State in the scope specified by law.

**f) Civil Protection**

55. Civil Protection participates in the defense of the Slovak Republic in peacetime, in crisis situations, as well as
in wartime by fulfilling the tasks of protecting the population. In addition to the internal tasks, its significance is
growing in humanitarian and peace operations in connection with the system of civil emergency planning of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and with the requirements of the United Nations Organization, the Organization
for Security and Co-operation in Europe and the European Union. It participates in the planning of resources and
measures of civil protection for the rescue, localization and restoration activities, or for the elimination of
consequences of an emergency event. To achieve the inter-operability of the civil protection system with similar
systems of the member countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization requires the adoption of
organizational, technical and personnel measures which will ensure an effective functioning of civil protection
within the framework of the Integrated Rescue System of the Slovak Republic.

**g) Rescue Corps and Rescue Services**

56. The Rescue Corps and rescue services participate in the defense of the Slovak Republic in peacetime, in
crisis situations, as well as in wartime within their authority specified in legal regulations as elements of the to be
formed Integrated Rescue System of the Slovak Republic.

**h) Preparation of Citizens for Defense**

57. In the preparation of citizens for the defense of the State and civil protection, the emphasis will be placed on
strengthening the awareness of the citizen responsibility for the defense of the State and their personal readiness
to participate in the spirit of the Constitution of the Slovak Republic. By securing a complex development of civil
defense and preparation of the population as part of the educational system, the citizens will be prepared for
coping with the consequences resulting from the anticipated development of risks and threats.

58. In order to gain the support of the population in the implementation of the Defense Policy and the Defense
Strategy, the Slovak Republic will improve the quality of public awareness and access to objective information
about the Defense Policy of the Slovak Republic in the context with the accession processes of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and the European Union.

59. In terms of the changing structure of the Armed Forces towards higher professionalisation, the Government of
the Slovak Republic will create general conditions for the building-up of the Armed Forces, their replenishment


-----

and replacement. Adequate motivation for military service will be ensured by combining moral and material
appreciation and also by creating career conditions to the level achieved by comparable countries and by
ensuring the return of former professional soldiers to civilian life while reducing the length of service of soldiers
and the introduction of volunteer service.

60. The Slovak Republic considers ensuring the replenishment of the Armed Forces by reserves and their
preparation as an important resource for securing the defense of the State in the long-term. For the fulfillment of
this requirement, the Government of the Slovak Republic will create the necessary conditions needed for effective
retraining of the necessary reserves in peacetime and their preparation for deployment in the event of a threat.

61. The Slovak Republic will create conditions for scientific activity needed for the defense of the State in context
with the practice of the countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European Union. In addition to
the development of military science, it will increase the participation of civilian universities, science institutions and
non-governmental organizations in the creation of an intellectual and scientific base for the defense of the State.

**VI. ENHANCING THE DEFENSE OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC**

62. The preparation of the Slovak Republic for defense represents a coherent set of measures and instruments
realized in peacetime by bodies of the state administration and bodies of territorial self-government and by other
substantially relevant legal entities. The main objective of this set of measures is to continuously improve the level
of securing the defense of the Slovak Republic.

**1. Enhancing the Management of Defense of the Slovak Republic**

63. In order to improve the quality of task fulfillment concerning the defense of the State, the Slovak Republic will
continue improving the activities and mechanisms of management of the defense of the State in accordance with
present and prospective requirements, with emphasis on:

## • improving the management of the defense of the State in the spirit of the principle of enhancing civilian
and democratic control over the Armed Forces, with emphasis being laid on precise specification of
responsibility of the President of the Slovak Republic, the National Council of the Slovak Republic, the
Government of the Slovak Republic and their mutual relations in the area of State defense in peacetime,
in a crisis situation and in wartime;

## • improving the management of the Defense System of the Slovak Republic so that it will be able to
ensure continuity of the management process in peacetime, in a crisis situation and in wartime, while
strengthening the management and coordination role and responsibility of the Government of the Slovak
Republic and the Ministry of Defense of the Slovak Republic;

## • implementing the systemic preconditions for deepening the level of interoperability of the Defense
System of the Slovak Republic with equivalent systems of the member countries of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and with our nearest neighbors in the way to enable multilateral co-operation and
collaboration in addressing the tasks of security and the defense of the Slovak Republic and for the
fulfillment of its integration objectives;

## • establishing and improving the activities of the Security Council of the Slovak Republic as the body of the
Government of the Slovak Republic for addressing the tasks of security and defense of the Slovak
Republic by performing an advisory and co-ordinating role in peacetime and a managing and coordinating role in a state of war and wartime in the areas exactly specified by the Government of the
Slovak Republic with regards to the state organs, organs of territorial self-government and substantially
relevant legal entities and natural persons in fulfilling the tasks of State defense.

**2. Improvement of the Management and Development of the Armed Forces**

64. In accordance with the principle of civilian and democratic control of the Armed Forces and the requirement
for the unified command and control of the Armed Forces and in the interest of achieving compatibility with the
systems of command and control of the Armed Forces of the member countries of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, it is necessary to reassess the present state of management and command of the Armed Forces
and subsequently to ensure the management of all parts of the Armed Forces by the Ministry of Defense of the
Slovak Republic, both in peacetime, in a crisis situation and in wartime.

65. At the same time it is necessary to provide a transition period needed for transformation of the Troops of the
Ministry of the Interior of the Slovak Republic and the Railway Troops of the Ministry of Transport, Postal Services
and Telecommunications of the Slovak Republic to non-military elements which will not be part of the Armed
Forces, but will fulfil the tasks within their respective departments.


-----

66. In the area of the development of the Armed Forces, it is necessary to continue with their reform with the aim
of building a small modern armed force that will be able to implement the new missions and tasks at the beginning
of 21st century. Emphasis will be placed on:

## • reducing the structures of the Armed Forces with a low combat readiness. In accordance with the
security-political direction of the Slovak Republic, to increase the combat readiness of the Immediate
Reaction Forces and the Rapid Reaction Forces with the aim to improve their readiness for deployment
according to requirements at home and also abroad;

## • transforming and subsequently subordinating all types of the Armed Forces under the Ministry of
Defense of the Slovak Republic with the aim to ensure their common command in peacetime, in a crisis
situation and in wartime;

## • implementing defense planning and resource management with the utilization of priority setting,
especially for those programs that contribute towards strengthening inter-operability with the Armed
Forces of the member countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization;

## • creating effective personnel management for professional soldiers, conscript soldiers and also for civilian
employees, which must solve the recruitment of personnel, their training, allocation and dismissal;

## • drafting and implementing programs with visibly defined priorities in accordance with the requirements
identified in the Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic, the Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic
and the Military Strategy of the Slovak Republic.

**3. Defense Planning of the Slovak Republic**

67. Defense planning of the Slovak Republic must be a part of the management of the State and an integral part
of the state planning process. It will represent a complex process carried out by the Government of the Slovak
Republic and bodies of the state administration for ensuring the defense of the State. By means of defense
planning of the Slovak Republic, the Government of the Slovak Republic and the National Council of the Slovak
Republic can ensure the available resources for the defense of the State in the long-term (10 to 15 years), in the
mid-term (5 to 7 years) and also in the short-term (1 to 2 years) planning periods.

68. Defense planning of the Slovak Republic will be aimed especially at the implementation of the following
requirements:

## • clearly defining the long-term plans and mid-term programs for the defense of the State, which will
ensure effective utilization of the defense resources of the State according to specified priorities;

## • ensuring stability of defense expenditures necessary to guarantee the defense of the Slovak Republic
and the fulfillment of its integration objectives;

## • co-ordination and improving the effectiveness of the work of competent bodies of the state administration
and other subjects within the framework of the Defense System of the State in fulfilling the tasks of State
defense;

## • improving the effectiveness of mutual co-operation of the Slovak Republic with the bodies of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization and creating the conditions for smooth interconnecting of the defense
planning of the Slovak Republic with the defense planning of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization;

## • creating the material conditions for more effective participation of the Slovak Republic and its Armed
Forces in the planning and implementation of international political-military co-operation including the
participation in peacekeeping and humanitarian operations;

## • improving the transparency of expenditures used for the defense of the State and deepening the
effectiveness of control of their use.

69. Defense planning of the Slovak Republic must become a prime concern of all bodies of the state
administration. The crucial role in the process of defense planning of the Slovak Republic will be played especially
by the National Council of the Slovak Republic, the Government of the Slovak Republic as well as relevant
ministries and other central bodies of the state administration. Defense planning of the Slovak Republic is the
responsibility of the Government of the Slovak Republic, and its co-ordination is the responsibility of the Ministry
of Defense of the Slovak Republic. Defense planning of the Slovak Republic is performed continuously in
peacetime, in crisis situations of the State and in wartime, and it is interconnected with civil emergency planning.

70. To support defense planning, the Slovak Republic will introduce a system of defense planning, programming
and budgeting which will ensure the defense of the State. In the interest of securing the defense function of the
State, the Slovak Republic will provide budgetary resources for defense in particular years based on long-term
and mid-term priorities and tasks defined in the following documents: the Long-term Plan of Development of the
Armed Forces and the Plan of Development of the Defense System of the State within the Framework of
Possibilities of the State Budget. Taking into account the development of the security environment, the defense
objectives of the country as well as its available defense resources and integration interests, it will ensure, based


-----

on priorities determined by the Government of the Slovak Republic, a stable growth of real expenditure for the
defense of the State.

**4. Defense Legislation**

71. In the area of defense legislation, it is necessary to emphasize:

## • the creation of legislative conditions for new systemic solutions to problems concerning the security and
defense of the State and the Armed Forces according to the standards of the developed democratic
countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization;

## • the determination of responsibility of individual constitutional representatives, central and other bodies of
the state administration and other entities in the area of security and defense, especially regarding the
Constitutional Law on the Security of the Slovak Republic, the Law on Defense of the Slovak Republic,
the Law on the Armed Forces, the Law on the Integrated Rescue System of the Slovak Republic, the
Law on Economic Mobilization and other legal regulations;

## • the harmonization of our legal standards in the area of security and State defense with our integration
needs;

## • the creation of legislative conditions for the introduction and utilization of a new system of defense
planning of the Slovak Republic;

## • codification of a unified system of command and control of the Armed Forces, and the system of
building-up, replenishment and training of the Armed Forces.

**CONCLUSION**

72. Within their authority, determined by relevant Laws, all bodies of the state administration, bodies of territorial
self-government and other substantially relevant legal entities are responsible to the National Council of the
Slovak Republic and to the Government of the Slovak Republic for the implementation of the Defense Strategy of
the Slovak Republic. The Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic is the starting point for drafting of the Military
Strategy of the Slovak Republic as well as generally binding legal regulations and fundamental conceptual and
planning documents in the area of securing defense with the emphasis being put on the reform of the Defense
System of the Slovak Republic.

73. The Defense Strategy of the Slovak Republic will be continuously reviewed and updated depending on and in
connection with the Security Strategy of the Slovak Republic and depending on the development of politicalmilitary aspects of the security environment of the Slovak Republic. At a minimum, such a review and update will
be conducted at least once every two years.

**Approved by the National Council of the Slovak Republic on 25th May 2001**


-----

