SOLOMON ISLAND GOVERNMENT

##### NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY SOLOMON ISLANDS GOVERNMENT


## NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY


###### MINISTRY OF POLICE, NATIONAL SECURITY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICE


-----

### Contents

Table of Content……………………………………………………………………………….i
Foreword by the Prime Minister ................................................................................................ ii
Overview by the Minister…………………………………………………………………….iii
Executive Summary…………………………………………………………………………...v

**PART 1: Solomon Island In Context**

Geography…..…………………………………………………………………………………1
Government……..……………………………………………………………………………..2
Judiciary……………..…………………………………………………………………….......3
Parliament………………..………………………………………………………………........4

**PART 2: Purpose, Vision, Mission and Definition**

Purpose.………………………...………………………………………………………….......5
Vision, Mission Principles...…………………………………………...………………….......6
Defining our National Security Strategy………………...….............................................……7

**PART 3: Fundamentals**

National Security Fundamentals…...……………………………………………………….....8
National Security Pillar……………...………………………………………………..............9
National Security Goals……………...……………………………………………………... 22

**PART 4: National Security Governance Structure**

National Security Governance Structure……………………………………………………..23
National Security Council…………………...…........……………………………………….23
National Security Advisory Committee……...………………………...…………………….24
Secretariat………………………………………...…………………………………….…….24
National Security Working Group...…………………...…………………………………….24
Provincial Security Taskforce………………………...………………………………...........25

**PART 5: Solomon Island Security Environment**

Security threats facing Solomon Island….................................………………………..........29

**PART 6: Conclusion**

Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………………30

**PART 7: Annexures**

**Annex 1: Abbreviations and Acronyms….…………………………………………….........32**
**Annex 2: Institutions and Agencies role are important to National Security ……………….35**
**Annex 3: Solomon Island International Commitment.……………………………………....37**
**Annex 4: Regional Facilities………………….......................................................................39**


-----

## Foreword by the Prime Minister

In this day and age, we are challenged by many
threats that have impacted our way of life. No longer
can Solomon Islands, as a sovereign nation, ride on
complacency and surrender to chance, hoping that
somehow these threats will fizzle away. Instead, we
must be strategic and discern strategies to tackle these
threats, so that our nation is protected, and the safety
of our citizens is guaranteed. This is why we must
have a National Security Strategy (NSS). My
Government, the Democratic Coalition for
Government Advancement (DCGA), is committed to
fully implement the NSS. In fact the NSS was
conceived under my earlier Prime Ministership during

the DCCG Government that I led from 2014.

In this regard, we, as a responsible Government, will be resourcing the full implementation of
the NSS to ensure that its goals are fully realized for the benefit of our nation.

The NSS provides an assurance for concerted national effort to contain environmental
hazards and internal or external challenges from infringing on our ambition to forge a
peaceful and prosperous Solomon Islands for all. The NSS is a national call for all citizens,
state agencies, private sector institutions, communities, traditional leaders, churches, men,
women, youths, and our nation as a whole, to rise and take action to subdue, terrorism,
human and illicit goods trafficking, people smuggling, corruption, illegal border crossing,
political instability, bio-hazards, climate change, geo-political intrusions, infectious disease
manifestations like Covid-19 pandemic, piracy, IUU resource exploitation and border
invasions all of which have potential to affront our sovereignty and peaceful national order.

As Prime Minister, I am particularly proud that we now have a National Security Strategy for
the first time in our history. Our country has been continuously challenged by wide range of
threats. The NSS is fundamentally important in charting our future course. Let us build on the
NSS and implement the strategic actions therein to ensure capabilities to protect our security
are credible and can be respected.

Our country is in the part of the Pacific, which some call the “arc of instability”. It is an
imperative our nation must seriously commit to provide adequate resource to implement the
NSS.
Investing in the NSS upfront will help prevent surprises. It will help to position our country
strategically and equip it to deal with any situation or threat may arise.


-----

This foundation upon which I, as Prime Minister of our beloved country, avidly call for the
full implementation of the NSS across all Government agencies, under the leadership of my
office and the Ministry of Police, National Security and Correctional Service (MPNSCS).

I am grateful to the MPNSCS team, especially the Minister and Permanent Secretary,  for
leading the development of the NSS. I also thank the consultants and the national security
advisor of my office for assisting the team to formulate and validate the NSS.

On behalf of the Government and people of Solomon Islands, I wish to personally thank
everyone that have contributed one way or another in the realization of this strategy for your
hard work in ensuring we are able to embrace this document today.

May this document help maintain peace and security of our Happy Isles as it is translated into
action and keep our country safe from shore to shore.

###### Hon. Manasseh Damukana Sogavare  Prime Minister of Solomon Islands 


###### Hon. Manasseh Damukana Sogavare 


-----

## Overview

###### By the Minister for Police, National Security and Correctional Services 

I am very pleased that finally the work for developing the
National Security Strategy (NSS) has been completed. This
work started in 2016 and the first draft was actually drafted
and completed in late 2018. A long process of consultation
had ensued, covering all the Provinces which then generated
a huge repository of valuable information that had informed
the drafting of the NSS. The NSS has five pillars on
sovereignty, government, economy, society and people, and
environment. It has 13 goals, grouped for ease of reference
under each pillar. The goals, called National Security Goals,
are broadly-based and multifaceted.

It is hoped that the NSS will be supported by its own legislation, so that it can have perpetuity
and legal grounding. This would allow the NSS to remain a standing national document that
cannot be easily changed by the influences of politics that, as we know too well, can often
render important documents of this kind tentative compilations. Therefore, an NSS Act will
be formulated and tabled in Parliament to protect the NSS so that our nation can look forward
to policy stability and coherence. However, to ensure the NSS remains current and relevant, it
will be a living document and will be subject to regular revision when required.
Finally, an implementation plan ensures that there is a framework that will guide the
implementation of the NSS so that those who are involved in its implementation can work to
one document that assure coordinated and concerted effort. In this regard, while it is hoped a
whole of SIG responsibility will be afforded to its implementation, the Ministry of Police,
National Security and Correctional Services, will be the lead ministry responsible for
coordination and implementation of the NSS. On this note, while, we, as a ministry are proud
that the formulation work has been completed, the harder job of implementation is still ahead
and whatever help others, especially our partners, can extend to support the implementation
process will be greatly appreciated.
I wish to end by thanking the Permanent Secretary, and the ministry team, for working really
hard to ensure the NSS is eventually completed. The leadership of the Permanent Secretary
has been exceptional and I count on the permanent secretary and the ministry team to
progress the implementation. I call on the entire staff of the Ministry to support the
Permanent Secretary and the National Security Team to ensure successful implementation of
the NSS.

###### Hon, Anthony Kamutulaka Veke, MP
_Ministry of Police, National Security and Correctional Services_


-----

## Executive Summary

In this age of evolving global and regional security landscape, it is increasingly becoming
intricate and complex. The expanded mode of security issues, including the traditional and
non-tradition security threats, have challenged Solomon Islands’ sovereignty, peace and
stability. It is, therefore, important that Solomon Islands pursues a robust action to strengthen
the internal mechanisms and work together with the regional and global communities to address
threats collectively. It is on this perspective that Solomon Islands has developed a National
Security Strategy that provides a pathway to address the security challenges of the country.
The NSS has seven parts. Part 1 looks at Solomon Islands context, the Geography,
Government, Judiciary and Parliament. Part 2 outlines the Purpose, vision, mission,
principles, and definitions. Part 3 outlines the pillars and goals. Part 4 discusses the National
Security Governance Architecture, Part 5 outlines the security threats that are facing Solomon
Islands, and Part 6 has the conclusion.

Finally, Part 7 contains the annexures which provides a space to attach relevant information
that are valuable for knowledge sharing but has the potential to disrupt the flow of discussion
if included in the substantive parts of the NSS. There are four attachments in the annexures.
The first one lists the abbreviations and acronyms used in the Strategy. The second
documents the ministries and agencies which play a critical role in our National Security. The
third contains the international and regional conventions and Treaties to which Solomon
Islands is a party, and the fourth lists the regional and international mechanisms and facilities
that can be a resource to Solomon Islands in pursuit of enhancing the implementation of the
NSS.

It has taken, over few years, much consultation and engaged validation to develop the NSS.
On this basis it is inclusive, relevant and has broad buy-in across Solomon Islands. Although
drafted, so that it adheres to our foreign policy strategic posture as, “friend to all and enemy
to none”, ultimately the NSS seeks to protect our national interest as a sovereign nation.

The NSS will be a living document and will be subject to reviews and updating. The
implementation of the NSS will be a whole of government approach and will be coordinated
by MPNSCS. In this regard, capacity building, financial resourcing and technical assistance
will be pivotal in ensuring there is sufficient capacity to be drawn on to support
implementation of the NSS. To this end, going forward, capacity of the MPNSCS, especially
the National Security Division of the ministry, must be augmented to allow for the
coordination and operational functions to be delivered as quickly as possible to preface the
implementation of the NSS.


-----

# PART 1 

###### SOLOMON ISLANDS IN CONTEXT ________________________________________________________

 GEOGRAPY, GOVERNMENT, JUDICIARY, PARLIAMENT

 1.1 GEOGRAPHY
Solomon Islands is made up of nine provinces and one municipality. The Provinces are
Guadalcanal, Malaita, Western, Choiseul, Central, Isabel, Makira/Ulawa, Temotu and
Rennell and Bellona. The Municipality is Honiara, the capital city. The nine provinces have
their own provincial capitals. Solomon Islands is in close proximity with Papua New Guinea
in the northwest, bordering the Autonomous Region of Bougainville. The Santa Cruz Islands
of Solomon Islands are bordered to the southeast by the Torres and Banks Islands, which are
a part of Vanuatu. Ontong Java Atoll, in Malaita Province, and the Solomon Islands’
northern-most island, also shares a border with Papua New Guinea. Rennell and Bellona
Province is in the south of the country bordering New Caledonia. Solomon Island Exclusive
Zone (EEZ) borders with that of Australia in the Coral Seas to the South.

**Figure 1:** Solomon Island Map


-----

###### 1.2 GOVERNMENT 

Solomon Islands was a British protectorate before gaining its independence in 1978. It
inherited a parliamentary democracy from Britain. The parliamentary democracy recognizes
a constitutional monarchy with the British monarch, serving as the formal head of state and
being represented by the Governor-General, who is elected by the National Parliament.

Our National Parliament is made up of 50 members that are elected for a four-year term by
universal suffrage. Legislative power lies with the 50 members of Parliament.

Executive power is exercised by the Prime Minister and Cabinet. The Prime Minister, who is
head of the Cabinet, is elected by a simple majority of members of Parliament, through a
meeting, presided by the Governor General.

Cabinet Ministers are appointed by the Governor General from among the members of
Parliament based on the recommendation of the Prime Minister. Once appointed, Ministers
become part of the executive Government and, barring the success of votes of no confidence
in the Prime Minister, the Government serves for four years.

Solomon Islands Government has 23 ministries. Each ministry is headed by a Minister, who
is a member of Cabinet and has a Permanent Secretary, who is the administrative head of a
ministry. MPNSCS is responsible for the nation’s national security, and it is the lead ministry
for developing, managing and coordinating all efforts at solidifying the nation’s security.


-----

###### 1.3 JUDICIARY

Judicial power lies within the Judiciary, comprising of a Court of Appeal, High Court,
Magistrates Courts, Local Courts and Customary Land Appeal Court.

The judiciary branch of the government is responsible to interpret and apply the laws of
Solomon Islands, to ensure equal justice under law, and provide the mechanism for dispute
resolution. The court system include local court, customary land appeal court, magistrate
court, high court and the court of appeal. The Ministry of justice and legal affairs provide
administration support to the judicial body.

**Figure 2: Solomon Islands Judicial System.**

The Chief Justice of Solomon Islands is the head of the Judiciary and is appointed by the
Governor General on the advice of the Prime Minister who normally acts on a recommendation
by the Judicial and Legal Service Commission.


-----

###### 1.4 PARLIAMENT 

The parliament of Solomon Islands is a unicameral chamber. The parliament plays a pivotal
role in making laws for the peace, order and governance of Solomon Islands.  The speaker of
parliament is elected by members of Parliament for a four year term and presides over a
chamber of fifty members of parliament.

**Parliamentary Standing Committees**

The National Parliament of Solomon Islands has a committee system that enables members to
examine issues in more detail than is in the house. It also enables the public to have direct
input into parliamentary process. These committees have a vital role in making sure that
National Security issues are critically discussed outside of the house. The role of the Foreign
Relations Committee is critical to security given that it presides on matters of our foreign
relations. Also the Police, National Security and Correction Service Committee which are
established to enquire into, make observations and recommendations on matters referring to it
by parliament or government relating to National Security.


-----

# PART 2

###### PURPOSE, VISION, MISSION AND PRINCIPLES AND DEFINING OUR NATIONAL SECURTY. 

 PURPOSE

The NSS is intended to bring to the fore the importance of national security, in order to alert
every citizen, and especially policy makers, to act proactively and support this national
priority. National security is vital for nation building, because it protects our sovereignty
from both traditional threats and Human Security threats that are presented and challenge our
nation.

As a nation, all citizens must be aware of what needs to be done to safeguard our national
interest and sovereignty. Led by relevant Government Institutions, the NSS coordinates
every action for maximum impact. It also provides an enduring sense of purpose for all
Solomon Islanders to set aside their differences, through embracing a common purpose
working towards building a peaceful and prosperous future for all.

The NSS avoids “muddling through” and sets a clear pathway for actions to combat threats
facing Solomon Islands. It provides a sense of direction towards achieving the goals of the
NSS for security and peace.

The NSS is a blueprint for Solomon Islands to protect its sovereignty and all its citizens from
Internal and external threats, natural hazard and climate change, which can never be
sufficiently prepared to deal with as a nation. In this regard, the NSS is a tool to help our
nation respond to these threats to protect our people, our land, our Government and
institutions, our oceans and our air space.

Against this background, the NSS is fundamentally a national roadmap which is based on
five pillars – Sovereignty, Government, Economy, People and Society, and Environment.

In essence, the purposes of the NSS are:

(i) Solicit and elevate support for national security in the country;

(ii) Increase consciousness on national security;

(iii) Provides a sense of direction for all to act in a coordinated manner in dealing
with National Security matters;

(iv) A blue print to guide any work on national security;

(v) A roadmap for keeping our nation and people safe; and

(vi) A tool for helping our nation to prepare to respond to threats that affront our
sovereignty, national interests and impacts of any global pandemic.


-----

###### 2.3 OUR VISION, MISSION & PRINCIPLES


-----

###### 2.2 Definition of the National Security Strategy


###### National Security 


###### National Security 


-----

# PART 3 

###### Fundamentals of the National Security Strategy

Since its inception as an independent and sovereign country, Solomon Islands has not had a
national security strategy to address the nation’s security challenges in a consistent and
coordinated manner. The absence of such a strategy makes it difficult for the country to
implement effectively, the whole-of-government policies to address the multitude of security
concerns, both internal and external, which threaten Solomon Islands. Ultimately, this places
Solomon Islands in a vulnerable position with greater risk to its peace and national security.
The inability to comprehensively mitigate these threats prevents Solomon Islands from
effectively safeguarding its national interests and protecting the nation’s future prosperity.
Beyond working to address existing security challenges in the pursuit of peace and promoting
security, Solomon Islands, as a country, must be prepared and equipped to resolve conflicts
and mitigate threats before they escalate and harm vital national interests.

Recognising that the development of the NSS would assist the country in addressing the
complexities of the global, regional, and national security environment, the Solomon Islands
Government issued a mandate for the creation of the first NSS. The government tasked the
National Security Division (NSD) of the MPNSCS task with this historic and vital
undertaking on behalf of the government and people of Solomon Islands. This document
complements the strategic direction provided by the government, and outlined in the National
Development Strategy (NDS), which are based, in part, upon the UN Sustainable
Development Goals. Additionally, extensive consultations were conducted with government
ministries and agencies; provinces; development partners; key stakeholders such as nongovernment organizations, traditional leaders, churches and faith-based organizations,
schools and universities, and community groups; and – most importantly – the people of
Solomon Islands. The breadth of consultations throughout the provinces and communities has
helped to make this document uniquely Solomon Islands’ owned, and responsive to the wide
range of national security issues facing the country.

The discussion, debate, formulation, and ultimate fruition of the NSS has been in keeping
with the Solomon Islands Government’s theme of becoming a peaceful, united, and
progressive country through the united efforts of its leadership. Under the guidance of ethical,
accountable, respected, and credible leadership, the government and people of Solomon
Islands can collectively work together to achieve these aspirations with the understanding that
security, development, and prosperity are inexorably connected. The NSS is an indispensable
tool to assist in that effort. The NSS defines the guidance for coordinating security for the
people of Solomon Islands by providing a framework for government institutions, security
partners, and key stakeholders to facilitate the country’s security goals.


-----

###### 3.1 NATIONAL SECURITY PILLARS 

The NSS was created based on the understanding that national security efforts must focus on
five critical pillars of national interest.

###### 1. Sovereignty

Protecting our territory, people, institutions and the Constitution;

###### 2. Government

Ensuring the stability and integrity of the government and political system;

###### 3. Economy

Safeguarding the country’s economic prosperity and resources;

###### 4. People and Society

Protecting the country’s citizens, communities, culture, and civilization;

###### 5. Environment

Preserving and protecting the environment.


###### The Pillars are the precursors of the NSS; therefore, their purpose is to provide the basis on which the goals and corresponding strategic actions are founded. 


-----

###### 3.2 NATIONAL SECURITY GOALS (NSG)

 Fundamentally, the goals are the ambitions that Solomon Islands will endeavour to attain in order to keep its nation safe
 NSG 1: Provide for national the importance of conflict prevention and

resolution by peaceful means.

###### security and defence 


Solomon Islands currently has no
established military, paramilitary, or
defence force for national defence and
security. Therefore, government
institutions, preventive diplomacy, law
enforcement agencies, key security
partnerships, and participation in regional
and global organisations are cornerstones
of the approach for protecting the
independence, sovereignty, and territorial
integrity of the State.

At the international level, Solomon Islands
is a Member State of the United Nations,
and the UN General Assembly provides a
forum for all Member States to address
issues on peace and security. The UN
Security Council has primary
responsibility, under the UN Charter, for
the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Security Council can be
called upon by Member States, including
Solomon Islands, to take enforcement
measures in the event of a threat to peace
or an act of aggression toward the state.

Regionally, Solomon Islands national
security is supported by PIF and key
Forum Leaders’ Declarations - like the
Biketawa Declaration - which guides the
region’s collaborative approach to
security. The Biketawa Declaration
provides a framework for coordinating the
Pacific Island Forum response to crises
based on a recognition of the vulnerability
of member countries on o threats to their
security, broadly defined, and the
importance of cooperation among
members in dealing with such threats when
they arise. The Declaration also stresses


In 2018 the Pacific Island Forum leaders
sign the With the changing security
dynamics, geopolitical environment,
Climate Change Pacific Island Forum
Leaders has sign the Boe Declaration as a
framework that guides the region
collaborative approach to the new security
environment The Boe Declaration in
succession to other regional security
framework it provided for regional
security, and also strengthen of national
security framework and enabling
environment.

National defence capabilities for protecting
our nation and all its territories is the
government ultimate goal. RSIPF,
established under the Constitution and the
Police Act, plays a prominent role in
maintaining national security. RSIPF is in
the frontline charged with keeping law and
order and almost all necessary matters
relating to national security. The RSIPF
has a maritime division, which is also
responsible for surveillance of our vast
EEZ and borders. It also, responds to
emergency and relief work required by the
National Disaster Management Office
during disaster situations. In all accounts,
the RSIPF does a lot beyond its traditional
policing role. It is, therefore, important to
strengthen all the law enforcement
agencies that have a role in protecting our
national security.


-----

**Strategic Actions**

  - Support RSIPF capacity and

strategic capabilities plan including
community policing program.

  - Improve coordination among LEAs

to assist with national security to
reduce dependence on police.

  - Develop and establish a Coast

Guard to support our Solomon
Island Maritime and Police
Maritime.

  - Support the implementation of the

Boe declaration.

###### NSG 2: Secure the country’s borders and territory

Solomon Islands is increasingly exposed to
opportunities and risk associated with
increased international and regional trade,
the ease of mobility for people and capital
in the region, greater accessibility through
technology and modernisation. Solomon
Islands,with its porous borders, is
vulnerable to illegal activities such as
human trafficking, poaching of natural
resources, movements of small arms, drug
smuggling/contrabands and armed
incursion. On this premises, it is important
that Border Agencies must work to address
insecurities and illegal activities.
Protecting our borders is essential to
national security, development and
economic prosperity.

In terms of International partnership,
Solomon Islands government is committed
to work with its bilateral and regional
partners to enhance cooperation to address
border security issues. The national border
strategy is a step in the right direction in
addressing multiple security issues
affecting our citizens at the borders.
Furthermore, the coronavirus has taught us

P a g e | 11


a lot of lessons on gaps that exist in our
maritime borders which need
strengthening in order to address our
border security.

**Strategic Actions**

  - Support the implementation of the

National Border  Strategy.

  - Establish police station/post at

strategic location at the borders.

  - Improve and strengthen the

capabilities of our law enforcement
agencies.

  - Enhance cooperation with regional

and international communities in
addressing mutual border security
issues.

  - Improve the communication at all

our borders and maritime
boundaries.

###### NSG 3: Develop information security and cybersecurity capabilities

In this era, cyber space and information
communication technology (ICT) is
becoming an important component of
Solomon Islands. Protecting both our
physical and soft communication
infrastructure is crucial. Information
security is a critical part of maintaining the
government integrity and credibility.
Hence, protecting information from
unauthorised access, use, disruption, or
destruction, regardless of whether the
information is stored electronically or
physically is a government responsibility.
Furthermore, information security is
essential to good governance and public
confidence, and the government
confidentiality.

Recently, the technological advancement
of the region has taken an unprecedented


-----

path. Solomon Islands has recently receive
the fibre optic cable which will increase its
internet capability. Therefore, it is
important to be vigilant to the security risk
associate with such shift in technology. In
this regard, the government must develop
information security framework that
describe best standards and mechanism to
maintain and manage Solomon Islands
cyber safety. Also, continue to build
public- private partnership and capacity to
strengthen measures against cyber threats.

**Strategic Actions.**

  - Formulate a cyber-security

strategy, cyber security legislation,
and cyber policies.

  - Capacity building based on

international recognised cyber
security standards.

  - Strengthen cooperation with

international partners on cyber
security, and build cyber capacity

  - Improve security posture and

ensure leadership role in cyber
security to ensure cyber security
risks are managed.

###### NSG 4: Strengthen government institutions and frameworks capabilities

In order to defend against the range of
complex threats facing the country, the
government institutions and agencies that
front our national security efforts must be
strengthened. The complex threat facing
the globe, region and Solomon Islands as a
country require a comprehensive
approaches  through the “whole of
government approach”. The need for a
unified approach to national security
challenges necessitates the ongoing
improvement of legislation, structure,

P a g e | 12


management, and readiness of national,
provincial and community capabilities.
Addition to these is the capacity to
coordinate and respond effectively across
government sectors.

**Ministry of Public Service**

Recognising that public servants provide a
vital role within government through
providing the skills, institutional
knowledge, and continuity to maintain
government functions, the Ministry of
Public Service (MPS) is working to
improve planning, strengthen management
systems, and develop a professional and
committed public service workforce to
improve public service delivery. These
improvements are advantageous for
enabling the Solomon Islands Government
to function more efficiently and effectively
with the added benefit of preparing public
servants to assist with their organisation’s
role in national security response efforts.

**Provincial Government**

Provincial Governments contribute to
national security efforts through ensuring
the safety and stability of the provinces
and identifying threats and challenges
within the province. The administrative
and communication links between the
national government and provincial
government is important and must be
improved. The Ministry of Provincial
Government and Institutional
Strengthening provides a critical link
between the national government and the
provincial governments. As the national
government works to implement the
national security framework, it will
continue to engage with provincial
government as a key stakeholder in that
process. Thus, support by providing
adequate resource, needed for the


-----

provincial government to function
effectively is required.

**Community chiefs and leaders**

Community chief, elders, women and
leaders are an important part of
maintaining security, law and order at the
community level. The ‘third tier level’
leaders remains a primary source of
authority and stability throughout the
country. They also serve as source of
intelligence information necessary for
identification and early responses to
security challenges. Within their
communities, these leaders help to
maintain cultural practices and traditions,
societal harmony, and peace and stability.
Traditional leaders are also typically called
upon by the people of Solomon Islands to
resolve disputes within their own
communities rather than police and legal
systems only. The government is working
to formally acknowledge this authority in
law, removing the ambiguous situation
where the relationship between custom and
statute law is unclear. This will also help
to raise the threshold at which the police
become involved in many minor manners.

**Churches and religious groups**

Churches and religious organisations, also,
provide an important element of social
stability and help to guide communities.
Post-conflict reconciliation programs
served to highlight the important role that
the church plays in restoring and
maintaining peace. Churches and religious
organisations are recognised for their
pivotal role in the spiritual development of
the country, thus shaping and guiding the
moral behaviour of the people. The
support and counselling provided by the
churches, together with their wider
community activities, complement the

P a g e | 13


government’s development and social
welfare policies, particularly in relation to
youth and others who feel aggrieved or
disadvantaged. Conversely, other religious
organisations and cultural movements may
disrupt peaceful co-existence within
communities, thereby threatening the
security of the community, province, and
country.

**Strategic Actions**

  - Provide and support a coordinating

mechanism for a whole of
government approach to address
National security issues.

  - Provide empowerment, capacity

building and development initiative
to traditional, youth, women and
church leaders on peace building
and security.

  - Support and strengthen traditional

governance framework in dealing
with security matters.

  - Collaborate with Provincial

government and other institution in
dealing with their security
concerns.

  - Review and improve public service

pay structure and conditions.

###### NSG 5: Combat corruption in the country

Corruption continues to exist in many
parts of the world and it affects
government’s obligation to service
delivery, destabilize economic
development and impinge on social justice
and harmony. Solomon Islands
acknowledges the reality of the thriving
corruption that has negatively impacted
lots of aspects in our society. The nexus
between corruptions, lack of progressive
development and economic growth is a


-----

threat to our national stability. Therefore,
combating corruption is crucial and will
pave the way for national development and
the economy to thrive. Importantly,
understanding our economic fragility,
Solomon Islands must take firm steps in
combating corruption. Implementing the
Anti-corruption legislation is a way
forward in addressing corruption.
Furthermore, Solomon Islands has acceded
to UNCAC and committed itself to comply
with the provision of the convention.
Solomon Islands government will continue
to work towards building transparent and
strong governance mechanisms.

**Strategic Actions**

  - Implementation of the Anti
Corruption Act.

  - Support the role of Leadership

Code Commission, Ombudsman,
and Anti-Corruptions Commission
to promote good governance,
transparency and accountability;

  - Set-up anti-corruption bodies in the

provinces.

  - Continue working towards

compliance with UNCAC.

###### NSG 6: Strengthen the Justice system

The justice system is the corner stone of
our security apparatus. It must have the
resources and capacity to be able to deliver
and assure that justice is accessible to
every Solomon Islander. This goal seeks
to provide support to the justice sector so
that it is able to deliver justice to all its
citizens. Solomon Islands will continue to
foster more effective and timely justice
responses across the country in order to
maintain peace and stability.

P a g e | 14


Also it is important to acknowledge our
overlapping systems of dispute
management. For instance, the non-state
customary that associates with traditional
authority of chiefs, which most used
mechanism to deal with disputes and
grievance at the community level. The
system ensures access to justice at all
levels to prevent discontent and conflict
that might arise within communities, and
which might lead to security concern. It is
imperative to recognize that all systems
and aspects of community depend largely
on well-established and grounded principle
of justice and rule of law.

**Strategic Actions**

  - Provide and improve quality access

to justice including provision of
more judges to the benches and
magistrate to the provinces;

  - Build magistrate buildings and

court rooms in Honiara and the
provinces.

  - Provide adequate budgetary

support to the justice sector.

  - Support the proposed National

Security Bill.

  - Strengthen the court circuits to all

the province.

  - Develop and strengthen the

informal justice system.

###### NSG 7: Promote prosperity through growing a strong and stable economy

The aspiration for all Solomon Islanders is
to build a better life for their families,
communities and future generations. A
strong economy will help to facilitate this
aspiration. However, there is a lot of
constraints to our economic growth and
private sector investment remains. The


-----

National Development Strategy provides
for long term development and reform of
the productive sector to increase export
earning in productive sector. Fulfilling the
NDS is necessary as it could support the
stability and security of our country’s
economy. It is equally important that we
maintain and sustain a stable economy as it
underpins national security.

While Solomon Island is susceptible to
global economic shock due to the narrow
economic base, economic reform is
important to expand the country’s
economic base. In addition, Solomon
Islands must continue to maintain close
relations with development and
international partners in addressing global
issues that have an impact on our local
economy such as Covid-19.

**Strategic Actions**

  - Improve the environment for

private sector development and
increase investment opportunities;

  - Strengthen land reform systems to

encourage economic development
in urban, rural and customary
lands.

  - Increase employment and labour

mobility opportunities.

  - Ensure access to quality education

so the nation’s manpower is
sustainably met.

  - Expand the productive sectors in SI

  - Provide effective mechanisms to

support entrepreneurship;

  - Support the economic growth

Centre across SI.

  - Support the development of SMEs

in all aspects to enable growth.

P a g e | 15


###### NSG 8: Develop the country’s infrastructure

Solomon Islands must invest more in
infrastructure development. Limited
physical infrastructure hinders economic
growth and national security capabilities.
Working together to enhance standard of
infrastructure facilities will boost
development and prosperity for Solomon
Islands. Good infrastructure provides a
nation with the ability to increase
production, improve the quality of life and
stimulate economic growth by inclusive
participation of the population in economic
activities. National critical infrastructure
such as transportation, energy and power,
communication, Ports, Airports and Health
systems are key drivers of development
and security, hence, it is important that the
government invests in these sectors.

A National Infrastructure Investment Plan
highlights Solomon Islands’ key priority
investments, focusing on infrastructure
projects that contribute to economic
growth. Current infrastructure
development in three key areas will help to
improve security and resilience in
Solomon Islands: (i) transportation, (ii),
energy and power, and (iii),
communication. Access to reliable
transportation that connects populated
areas to markets and productive resources
among our islands, country-wide helps
create employment and improve
livelihoods.

The expansion of power infrastructure and
investments in the upgrade and
maintenance of existing assets will help
improve electricity access in Solomon
Islands. Access to energy services can
have an enormous impact on productivity,
education, health, water, sanitation, and


-----

communication services which cross all
sectors. Projects like the Tina River
Hydropower Project will provide reliable
power supplies, and will simultaneously
promote the use of renewable energy. The
addition of electricity to remote areas is
important in helping to increase rural
development.

Solomon Islands communication
infrastructure is also a critical component
of the country’s economy, underlying the
operations of business, public safety
organisations, and government. The
private sector, as owners and operators of
the majority of communications
infrastructure, is the primary entity
responsible for protecting communication
infrastructure and assets. The government
works closely with the private sector to
ensure that communication is reliable and
that national leadership is able to
communicate in times of crisis in order to
effect response and recovery operations.
The installation of the undersea fibre optic
cable linking Solomon Islands to Australia
will include the private sector as a
stakeholder in securing sector
infrastructure and assets.

**Strategic Actions**

  - Support the national Infrastructure

plan 2013 – 2023.

  - Support and implement the

National energy strategic plan.

  - Support and implement.

Communication Strategic Plan.

  - Build, refurbish and expand all

provincial substations, institution,
and infrastructure.

  - Establish and support the local

Road Authority

P a g e | 16


###### NSG 9: Safeguard the country’s natural resources, environment and, anticipate, prepare for and confront climate change 

Over the last decade, economic growth in
Solomon Islands was largely driven by the
resources sector. The country’s resources
contribute significantly to the generation
of national wealth, with more than half of
Solomon Islands’ GDP being provided by
the forestry sector. Effectively managing
the forestry sector remains a challenge,
and unsustainable logging has had serious
impacts on forest land availability,
resulting in significant loss in forestry
resources including biodiversity.

Protecting Solomon Islands environment
and natural resources is a government
priority. Solomon Islands, therefore, will
continue to improve its laws and step up
its compliance, enforcements, education
and holistic management approaches. The
proper regulation, management, and
conservation of Solomon Islands’ natural
resources is essential for on-going
economic prosperity and for maintaining
community sustainability.

Sustainability assures that we are
conserving for the future development of
our future generations. Solomon Islands
must take safeguard measures to promote
sustainable use of its natural resources and
also strengthen its adaptation strategies
against climate change.

**Climate Change**

Like most countries within the Pacific
Islands region, Solomon Islands is
extremely vulnerable to climate change
and the associated sea-level rise. Climate
change impacts Solomon Islands in many
ways.


-----

Sea-level rise is an immediate concern as
rising sea-levels cause widespread erosion
and inundation of low-lying atolls in the
Pacific Islands region. Solomon Islands
has seen annual sea levels rise by as much
as 10mm over the last two decades.
Erosion and inundation result in large
swaths of land being washed into the sea
or submerged, which has the potential to
destroy villages and to force people to
relocate. In 2018 Pacific Islands Forum,
Leaders affirm that climate change
presents the single greatest threat to the
livelihood, security and wellbeing of
Pacific people. Under this commitment,
Solomon Islands will work with regional
and international partners in advocating
climate responsibility and working
towards building resilient communities.

**Strategic Actions**

  - Conduct robust EIAs for all

development projects and
commercial undertakings.

  - Increase compliance with

environmental safeguards therefore
reduce pollution.

  - Strengthen resilience and adaptive

capacity to climate-related hazards
and natural disasters.

  - Integrate climate change measures

in to Solomon Islands Government
policies, strategies, and planning ;

  - Improve education, awareness, and

capacity on climate change
mitigation, adaption, impact
reduction, and early warning
system.

  - Promote mechanisms for raising

capacity for effective climate
change-related planning and
management, including focusing
on women, youth, and local and
marginalised communities.

P a g e | 17



  - Review Mines and Mineral Act,

and Environmental Act.

  - Set high penalties for breaches of

environmental safeguards.

###### NSG 10: Respond to threats, crises, and disasters

As a nation, Solomon Islands must have
some capacity to provide a first response
to threats, crises and disasters. To date,
that first response capacity is very limited
and a lot more work needs to be done to
build this capacity.

Solomon Islands is susceptible to a wide
range of hazards, such as cyclones, storm
surges, floods, drought, earthquakes,
tsunamis, landslides, volcanic eruptions,
fires, agriculture pests and diseases,
aviation and maritime disasters, marine
pollution, and other man-made threats,
including unexploded ordnance, and the
civil impacts of conflict. These existing
hazards are magnified as climate change
causes changes in rainfall patterns,
increased severity of storms, and rises in
sea levels. These vulnerabilities are also
intensified by poverty, population growth,
and continued urbanisation. Natural
disasters, in particular, can severely impact
the national economy and test the
country’s ability to provide support and
assistance to all of its people. Therefore,
effectively manage all types of
emergencies, in building capability to
prepare for disasters in order to reduce or
eliminate long-term effects to people and
their property from hazards and to respond
to and recover from major incidents.

The National Disaster Management Plan
2018, developed under the strategic
oversight and direction of the National
Disaster Council, provides for the


-----

institutional arrangements that allow the
government to effectively manage
disasters within the country. The plan
includes elements of preparedness and
early warning, response, and recovery
arrangements at all levels of government
and with the private and non-profit sectors.

**Strategic Actions**

  - Support and strengthen the

implementation of the national
emergency response plan.

  - Supporting self-help at all levels of

government and avoiding
dependence.

  - Leading disaster response and

coordinating internal and external
support through government
arrangements.

  - Utilizing assessment as the key to

effective response.

  - Delivering response through the

sectors and through provincial and
local arrangements.

  - Coordinating response and

providing support through national
arrangements involving sectors,
partners, and NGO’s and regional
support.

  - Informing roles through explicit

standard operating procedures and
processes.

  - Community awareness and

preparedness for disaster response.

###### NSG 11: Promote a healthy and prosperous population

**Health Security**

Health Security depends on reducing
vulnerability to health threats through
collective public health action. Access to
core public health functions, both in
Honiara and within the provinces, provides

P a g e | 18


the foundation for health security.
However, health care service delivery in
Solomon Islands is challenged by the
country’s geography, funding, resources,
and capabilities. Health threats such as
NCDs, malnutrition, obesity, and endemic
diseases such as malaria, diabetes, and
dengue are preventable, yet lead to
premature death. Women’s access to
health and family planning services is
particularly lacking in rural areas, and
infant and child mortality rates remain
high. Improper water and sanitation
services are a further threat to health.

In addition to Solomon Islands’ health
security, newly emerging and re-emerging
infectious diseases travel fast in our
globalised world in which Solomon
Islands is not insulated. A breach of health
security, like a disease outbreak, has the
potential to impact national security.

Also, health emergencies may lead to
widespread displacement, nationally and
possibly across borders, which has the
potential to lead to increased tension and
potential security issues.

Solomon Islands National Health Security
Plan 2016-2020, developed by the
Ministry of Health and Medical Services
(MHMS), focuses on improving Solomon
Islands’ health sector through improving
National Health Service coverage and
quality, and by building strong
partnerships to ensure the country provides
for the health of its people. The overall
goal of MHMS efforts is to achieve
universal health coverage in Solomon
Islands, so that all people can access and
use preventive, curative, rehabilitative, and
palliative health services.


-----

Within MHMS, PHESU contributes
national health efforts through three major
programs:

  - Surveillance and early warning

systems for pandemic and
outbreaks of disease.

  - Preventing and responding to

infectious diseases and emerging
diseases; and

  - Disaster risk management for

health.

A critical function of a health system is the
ability to manage and respond to public
health risk. This includes traditional public
health risks management measures such as
disease surveillance, screening, contact
tracing, quarantine and emergency
responses, as well as regulatory measures
to manage emerging public health risk
such as antimicrobial resistance, breastmilk substitute, and rising noncommunicable disease

The Environmental Health Division is also
part of the efforts mentioned above in the
implementation of the IRH, with a focus
that extends beyond service delivery to
work toward a holistic approach,
recognizing the impact on water, food, air
quality, waste treatment, and other
environmental considerations on health.
The coronavirus pandemic has risen the
need and importance to strengthen our
public health system.

**Food Security**

Food security in Solomon Islands will
continue to be challenged by climate
change, a growing population, rising food
prices, environmental stressors, and new
pests and plant diseases. These threats
require a greater effort in mitigation and
approach to make sure Solomon Islanders
have access to healthy food through

P a g e | 19


affordable price and a continuous food
supply.  Increased diversification in
agriculture, livestock, and aquaculture are
additional efforts that will contribute to
Solomon Islands food security and
resilience to food-related threats and
challenges. These efforts will help to
reduce the country’s heavy reliance on
imported food, and help to counter the
adverse health effects contributed to
increased cases of NCDs in Solomon
Islands.

**Education**

Access to quality education in Solomon
Islands is essential to building the capacity
for growth and to meeting the manpower
needs that support increased growth and
improved livelihoods, which enhance
people’s well-being. It is the goal of
Solomon Islands to ensure inclusive and
equitable quality education, and to
promote lifelong learning opportunities for
all citizens. Education-related challenges
have contributed to conflict through a lack
of access, limited resources, and a Western
curriculum that challenges traditional
ways.

Solomon Islands has made progress in
increasing education access at primary and
secondary levels, and the government is
making strides to increase access. Based
on the guidance of the NDS. Solomon
Islands Government will continue working
to provide universal access to quality
education for all children, improved access
to technical, vocational training, and
higher education. The government’s
continued commitment to education is
essential for engaging the nation’s rapidly
growing youth population in order to
reduce conflict, promote peace and


-----

security, and develop the country’s human
capital for economic success.

**Strategic Action**

  - Support the implementation of the

National Health Strategic plan.

  - Strengthening public Heath in

addressing Environmental and
public health threats.

  - Refurbish and develop all health

facilities in the country.

  - Formulate a health national

emergency response plan.

  - Coordinate multi-sectorial Heath

Reponses to health security issues.

  - Formulate and implement a

national NCD strategy.

  - Review Environmental Health Act

and Regulation.

  - Enhance and promote sustainable

agriculture to support food
security.

###### NSG 12: Protect the rights of all citizens 

Every citizen regardless of race, creed and
ethnicity, must be a free person whose
rights are protected by the Constitution
and UN Charter. Solomon Island is a
diverse nation: predominantly Melanesian
of around 95% and a small population of
Polynesian, Micronesian, Chinese, and
European. In terms of religion, Solomon
Island is 92% Christian with 8% of other
faiths. The diverse range of backgrounds,
cultures, perspectives, skills, and
experiences of the Solomon Islands’
population can be harnessed to ensure the
country is prosperous. To succeed,
Solomon Islands must draw on the
potential of all of its people, and the
government must be a champion for

P a g e | 20


communities and individuals that are
vulnerable to violence, abuse, and neglect
– such as women and girls, ethnic and
religious minorities, the elderly, and
people with disabilities.

The NDS recognises that sustainable,
inclusive, social and economic
development must be supported by
improved gender equality, and support for
the disadvantaged and the vulnerable.
Furthermore, the benefits of development
must be more equitably distributed to
ensure that all men and women, in
particular the vulnerable, have equal rights
to economic resources as well as access to
basic services.

**Gender**

Gender inequality deprives women and
girls of their basic rights and opportunities.
Gender inequality is prevalent in Solomon
Islands, and there are high levels of
gender-based violence, which ranges from
sexual violence, coercion, and emotional
and/or physical violence. Achieving
gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls will require a vigorous
effort from the Solomon Islands
Government, including legal frameworks,
to counter gender-based discrimination.

The role and place of women in society is
an essential element of any country and
promoting gender equality and
empowering women remains an important
objective for Solomon Islands in order to
increase the political and economic
participation of women. Current efforts are
based on four key areas:

**Participation – Ensuring women equal**
participation and influence with men, and
promoting gender equality in peace and


-----

security decision making processes at the
local, national and international level.

**Protection – Working towards the full**
implementation of all laws that protect the
rights of all women and girls, along with
special measures to protect women and
girls from gender-based and sexual
violence.

**Prevention – Improving the strategies for**
preventing all forms of violence against
women and girls, involving women and
integrating gender considering into
security activities and conflict prevention,
and challenging discriminatory gender
norms, attitudes, and behaviour.

**Recovery and Reconciliation**
Strengthening women’s capabilities and
agency in recovery processes and
responding to the particular needs of
women and girls when rebuilding and
healing after conflict.

**Strategic Actions**

    - Protect PLWD rights and

provide facilities for them in
the country.

    - Ensure national policies are

inclusive.

    - Support the Fight on violence

against women.

###### NSG 13: Protect Maritime security

Solomon Island as a maritime nation
depends largely on its maritime resources.
It is, therefore, critical that our maritime
boundaries are protected. Protecting our
marine jurisdiction, whose threats are
multi-faceted, is a government
responsibility. However, the vastness of
Solomon Islands maritime jurisdiction is a
significant challenge.  National capacity

P a g e | 21


to protect Solomon Islands maritime
boundaries and territorial integrity, and to
mitigate threats  must be developed.

Maritime security is important to Solomon
Islands as it links to our economic
development and livelihood. Also, much
of the trading, either internationally or
locally, happen via the marine water.
Thus, supporting international order, in
making sure open sea lanes and keeping it
from dispute, is crucial.

Solomon Island EEZ is 1.6m sq km and
the challenge with monitoring such huge
maritime boundary. Given the limited
resource available to monitor the country’s
maritime domain, effective control over
the country’s maritime boundaries and
resources is achieved through a concerted
regional effort. FFA monitoring, control
and Surveillance is a key programme
supporting our national effort in protecting
our resource from illegal harvesting.
Solomon Islands will continue to work
collaboratively with International and
regional partners, and organisations such
as, PIF, FFA and Pacific Maritime
Security Program are to support our
maritime domain.

**Royal Solomon Islands Police Maritime**

Royal Solomon Islands police maritime
plays a critical role in in our maritime
security.   The RSIPF maritime is
responsible for doing territorial
surveillance, border patrolling and
reconnaissance, monitoring our EEZ and
protecting against illegal entry into our
water. The Police Maritime is, also, the
first responder to calls, during disasters
and emergencies. The donation, by
Australia, of the new guardian patrol boat,
and one other, yet to be delivered, was a
boost to our maritime security. A most


-----

recently donated speed craft has, also,
given additional support to the police’s
role on policing and protecting our
borders.

This assets will also help to assist our
fight against IUU which is a major threat
to the security and long-term sustainability
of Solomon Island Tuna fisheries

**Solomon Island Marine Safety**
**Administration**

Solomon Islands Marine Safety
Administration plays a significant role in
our maritime security. Solomon Islands, as
a maritime country plays a critical role in
our economy, both nationally and globally.
SIMSA adopts the International Code for
Security of Ships and Ports facilities.
SIMSA’s role in local regulating local
ships is crucial in making sure that ships
comply with the marine law to avoid
accidents at sea. Also, they play a critical
role in working with international shipping
company and tracking ships coming in our
out of our waters.

Importantly, they work closely with other
relevant agencies to make sure both
international and local ships adhere to the
ISPS code. Also, the ports facilities are to
be maintained and safe for ships. Finally,
SIMSA is, also, responsible for marine
surveillance, and protecting marine
infrastructure.

**Strategic Action**

  - Develop a maritime strategic plan.

  - Support Institutional strengthen

and information sharing.

  - Improve coordination and

collaboration among maritime
related agencies.

P a g e | 22



- Strengthen and enhance marine

security capabilities.

- Enhance cooperation with FFA,

regional and international
organization on maritime.

- Initiate a Coast Guard to support

Police Maritime and SIMSA.

- Strengthen the RSIPF Maritime

capacity.


-----

# PART 4

###### NATIONAL SECURITY GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE

The Solomon Islands Government, under the direction of the cabinet, will continue to protect
national security through ensuring government agencies, and national security stakeholders
are united in purpose and mission under the strategic guidance provided by the NSS.
Importantly, NSS is a framework developed to coordinate and integrate national security
efforts within ministerial policy, and facilitate information sharing to drive coordination and
decision making within the government. The National Security governance structure will
become an essential system to be triggered during national security events. A new legislation
must be made to support the role of the National Security System (NSS) and to protect its
independence, as part of the government’s effort to putting this system in place.

**Figure 1. Illustrate national security governance structure.**

**National Security Council**

The National Security Council (NSC) will be the highest ministerial decision-making body
on national security matters. The NSC, placed within the Office of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet, will serve as the government’s principal forum for addressing national security and
foreign policy matters with senior national security officials and cabinet officials. The
primary function of the NSC will be to advise and assist the Prime Minister and Cabinet on
national security and foreign policy. The NSC will serve as the government’s principal body
for supervising national security policy development, implementation, and accountability.

P a g e | 23


-----

The NSC will be chaired by the Prime Minister. Its regular members will be the Deputy
Prime Minister; the Minister of Foreign Affairs and External Trade; the Minister of Finance
and Treasury; the Minister of Police, National Security, and Correctional Services; and the
Minister for Provincial Government and Institutional Strengthening. The PM’s National
Security Advisor, RSIPF Commissioner, presents intelligence from the RSIPF Intelligence
Unit, and the Attorney-General also attends as contributing advisor.

Other ministers and senior government officials may be invited to attend NSC meetings when
appropriate.

**National Security Advisory Committee**

The National Security Advisory Committee (NSAC) will be the peak officials-level
committee considering national security matters. The NSAC will directly support the NSC as
an inter-ministerial committee that considers all major policy matters to be put before the
NSC.

The NSAC will provide the support needed to facilitate the coordination of national security
matters  across the government. NSAC will be comprised of the Permanent Secretaries for
each respective Ministry, and will also be represented by a Minister on the NSC as well as
representatives from the Solomon Islands Government intelligence community and other
national security related agencies. NSAC members will include the Secretary to Cabinet as
Chair; Permanent Secretary (PS) Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade; PS Ministry of
Finance and Treasury; PS MPNSCS; PS Ministry of Communication and Aviation; PS
Ministry of Health and Medical Services; PS Ministry of Provincial Government and
Institutional Strengthening; PS Ministry of Rural Development; PS Ministry of Commerce,
Industry, Labour and Immigration; PS Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock; the National
Security Advisor; PS Ministry of Justice and Legal Affairs; and RSIPF Commissioner. The
Chair can invite any relevant stakeholder to attend NSAC’s meeting.

**Secretariat**

The Office of the Prime Minister , Cabinet, and Ministry of Police, National Security, and
Correctional Services will provide Secretariat support functions for the NSC and NSAC.

**National Security Working Group**

The National Security Working Group (NSWG) will be the directors-level committee for
considering national security matters. The NSWG will directly support the NSAC as an interministerial group which considers all major matters to be put before the NSAC and supports
the coordination of national security efforts across the government.

NSWG will be comprised of Directors for each respective Ministry, and represented by a
Minister on the NSC and NSAC as well as representatives from the Solomon Islands
Government intelligence community and other national security related agencies. NSWG
members will include the NSD Director, serving as chair; the National Security Advisor;
RSIPF Deputy Commissioner for National Security and Operational Support; RSIPF
Intelligence Unit Director; Immigration Division Director; SICED Comptroller; ICTSU

P a g e | 24


-----

Director; Directors MECDM, Biosecurity Director; PHESU Director; TCU Director; Deputy
Secretary to Cabinet, Deputy Secretary to Prime Minister, Communication Director; Finance
Director of Budget; and Foreign Affairs Assistant Secretary, Director INTERPOL.  Other
directors and officials will be called upon to attend the NWWG meeting when required.

**Provincial Security Taskforce**

Solomon Island is made up of province that a security taskforce is require to establish at each
province. The office of the taskforce shall be established under each provincial government
and works directly with the National Security Division within the Ministry of Police,
National Security and Correctional Service. They will be responsible to do assessments in
their respective provinces and send their report to National Security Division.

**National Security Division**

The NSD within the Ministry of Police, National Security and Correctional Services is
comprised of a Director and relevant officials needed to support national security efforts and
coordination. The NSD will serve as Secretariat for the NSWG through coordinating,
providing administrative support, gathering and consolidating information, and offering
evidence-based recommendations to the NSAC, as determined in NSWG meetings, for its
deliberation on items that require action or warrant presentation to the NSC. The National
Security division will also responsible to do impartial assessments and independent
intelligence gathering to the decision makers. NSD have fundamental role in our national
security system and must build its ability to gather information and make sense of changing
security landscape.

**Strategic Actions**

  - Support National Security Bill to provide statutory mandate for NSC, NSAC,NSWG

and PST

  - Strengthen the governance, institutional arrangement, and interoperability between

agencies.

  - Update the ministry’s existing policies and plans to reflect national security planning

and efforts.

  - Enhance the National Security Assessment Capability to support governance structure

with information and intelligence.

  - Facilitate Security Forum for all government agencies.

  - Provide strategic assessment to the NSAC and NSC

P a g e | 25


-----

# PART 5 

###### THE SECURITY THREAT FACING SOLOMON ISLANDS 

The table, below, discusses the suite of security threats to which Solomon Islands is exposed
ranging both from external and internal risks. However this list is not ultimate as the security
landscape of Solomon Islands changes over time.

**Table 1:** **_Security Threats Facing Solomon Islands_**

**_Type of Risk_** **_Discussion_**

Climate Change Climate Change is the number one global security risk facing Solomon

Islands. Climate change includes sea level rise, increasing intensity of
cyclones, droughts and floods and temperature rise. This risk is already
eventuating and lives of citizens are being affected especially on lowlying atolls, small islands, and artificial islands. SIG must invest funds
on adaptation and mitigating strategies.

Heath Security Many Solomon Islanders have lost their lives because of diseases such

as NCDs and cancer with many more are at risk. Greater awareness on
quality life styles, as well as funding improvements to the health
system, will save lives.
Also Pandemics like coronavirus (Covid-19) spreading across regions
and the globe has shown us how vulnerable we are. Solomon Islands’
lack of robust health care system will be disastrous if a breach of our
border efforts. Also Covid-19 has really tested our health system and
the government capabilities in addressing health security issues.

Solomon Islands, as a sovereign and independent nation, will make

Foreign sure no foreign government, or their other proxies, influence its
Interference democracy, values and principles.

P a g e | 26

|Climate Change|Climate Change is the number one global security risk facing Solomon Islands. Climate change includes sea level rise, increasing intensity of cyclones, droughts and floods and temperature rise. This risk is already eventuating and lives of citizens are being affected especially on low- lying atolls, small islands, and artificial islands. SIG must invest funds on adaptation and mitigating strategies.|
|---|---|
|Heath Security|Many Solomon Islanders have lost their lives because of diseases such as NCDs and cancer with many more are at risk. Greater awareness on quality life styles, as well as funding improvements to the health system, will save lives. Also Pandemics like coronavirus (Covid-19) spreading across regions and the globe has shown us how vulnerable we are. Solomon Islands’ lack of robust health care system will be disastrous if a breach of our border efforts. Also Covid-19 has really tested our health system and the government capabilities in addressing health security issues.|
|Foreign Interference|Solomon Islands, as a sovereign and independent nation, will make sure no foreign government, or their other proxies, influence its democracy, values and principles.|
|||


-----

Given our porous borders SI is exposed to transnational crimes. These
include,especially, drug trafficking, money laundering, people
smuggling, small arms smuggling, counterfeit goods, trading of
wildlife, and kidnapping,which pose serious risks for Solomon Islands.
SI must develop responses and capacity to deal with such emerging
threats.

|Border Security|Strengthening control over our borders and immigration is central to our National Security and economic prosperity. The new National border strategy is a step in the right direction in our governments’ effort to protect its borders.|
|---|---|
|Ethnic Conflicts|Although an ethnic tension has happened in the Solomon’s in the late nineties through to the early parts of the 20th century, and despite our cultural diversity, it is remotely likely that we will see another in Solomon Islands. The provision is Government must continue to invest in economic development to create prosperity and ensure everyone is contented.|
|Transnational crimes|Given our porous borders SI is exposed to transnational crimes. These include,especially, drug trafficking, money laundering, people smuggling, small arms smuggling, counterfeit goods, trading of wildlife, and kidnapping,which pose serious risks for Solomon Islands. SI must develop responses and capacity to deal with such emerging threats.|
|Cyber threats|Advances in ICT have revolutionised all aspects of Solomon Islands society by allowing for greater accessibility, mobility, convenience, efficiency, and productivity. Solomon Islands is now dependent upon ICT – for national security, economic prosperity, and social well-being. However, there is a huge risk associated with it, against which Solomon Islands must utilise its safeguards to protect its citizens against cyber threats.|
|Terrorism|A terrorist attack on our soil is considered remote at the moment. However, the global risk of indiscriminate terrorist attacks remains a prospective concern for Solomon Islands.|
|Land disputes|Over the years, major developments have come to a standstill due to land disputes. This has been widespread across Solomon Islands and has severely hindered investments and developments, and, therefore, causing a considerable security challenge for Solomon Islands.|
|||


P a g e | 27


-----

|Political & Social instability|The nature of our politics and frustrations over lack of development imply riots will remain a risk to national security. The government will continue to address this issues through a whole of government development approach.|
|---|---|
|Pest Infestation|Risk of invasive species, pest and infectious diseases in crops and livestock is a threat to Solomon Islands. The introduction of new pests and diseases has the potential to jeopardise the economy and people’s wellbeing, and must be mitigated. The need for capacitating the Bio- security and further strengthening its roles on entry points is crucial for our national security.|
|Corruption|The wide-ranging consultation leading up to NSS identified corruption as one of the major threats to National Security. The government is, therefore, committed to fight corruption and promote transparency.|
|Unemployment|The rapid increase in the population of Solomon Islands is a positive resource for the country. However, limited employment opportunities for the increasing population is a growing concern. The population of Solomon Islands will continue to grow over the next 33 years, and from an estimated 650,750 people to an estimated 1.351 million in 2050. This projection of population growth against the economic growth causes a disquieting trend for the government and stakeholders to deal with in terms of our national security.|
|Environmental Security|The occasion of major environmental pollution event by either a manmade or natural event will have a huge impact on our environment. For instance, the oil spillage in Rennel and Bellona Province which causes massive damage on the sea resource and the environment. Furthermore, an emergency response plan must be in place to protect Solomon Islands against this possibility and environmental safeguards within relevant laws must be enforced. Resource security - Our resources, both inland and marine resources are our valuable commodity that must be protected. In the face of increasing population and the global demand for raw materials and sea resource, Solomon Islands must be cautioned about the use and harvesting of its resources. Security of our resources is fundamental to maintaining, sustaining and improving our quality of life.|
|Economic Security|Solomon Islands is relatively insulated from any major global economic crisis because of its huge rural sector. However, the statues of our|


P a g e | 28


-----

|Col1|economy is disquieting that as a country we must be vigilant. Given the geo-political power play in the region, Solomon Island must seek its economic opportunity with caution to avoid loan risk associated with contractual obligation.|
|---|---|
|Influx of Foreigner|Over the years the movement of people across borders has grown exponentially within the Solomon Islands. Given the risk associated with such mix migration, our border control must be vigilant. Solomon Islands also needs to strengthen our immigration, customs and biosecurity policies in order to defend our country from illegal entries of any kind. This effort will contribute to protecting our sovereignty.|
|Limited and Lack of Development|Development is a measure of prosperity. When it is limited or lacking, citizens are frustrated and resort to unlawful activities that cause security concerns.|


P a g e | 29


-----

# PART 6

##### Conclusion

The NSS will be a living document and will be continuously updated to ensure it remains
relevant. Although the intention is to foreshadow long-term strategies, perhaps designing a
five-year rolling strategy is a much better approach as has been envisaged. However, it will
be flexible, and an update will be made whenever it is required. This would allow for new
ideas to be incorporated along the way as we seek to keep improving the NSS.

Overall, this strategy will serve its purpose as a roadmap for creating awareness, and
coordinating national responses to any national security threat that may be looming and
imminent. It can only be effective through cooperation and leadership. Therefore, the
Government is committed to provide leadership, and to support the commitment of security
agencies, public safety institutions, private sectors and the communities to work together to
address threats that are facing our nation. The challenges ahead in this new security
environment will be huge but we can achieve the goals in this NSS through our strong
commitment, cooperation and resourcing. Finally, it is important that the government works
to create a new legislation that will provide the legal basis for legitimizing the action in
enforcing the NSS.

P a g e | 30


-----

# PART 7 

#### Annexes 

 Abbreviation and Acronyms

**ACA** Anti-Corruption Act

**ADF** Australian Defence Force

**ASYCUDA** Automated System for Customs Data

**BCU** Border Control Unit

**BSI** Biosecurity Solomon Islands

**NBCC** National Border Coordination Committee

**CSS** Cyber Security Strategy

**DCP** Defence Cooperation Program

**EEZ** Exclusive Economic Zone

**FAO** Food and Agricultural Organization (United States)

**FAO** Food and Agriculture Organization (United Nations)

**FFA** Forum Fisheries Agency

**GDP** Gross Domestic Product

**ICAC** Independent Commission against Corruption

**ICTSU** Information and Communications Technology Support Unit

**IUU** Illegal, Unregulated and Unreported

**IPPO** International Plant Protection Convention

**IRH** International Health Regulations 2005

**MCA** Ministry of Communication and Aviation

**MDPAC** Ministry of Development Planning and Aid Coordination

**MHMS** Ministry of Health and Medical Services

**MNURP** Ministry Traditional Governance, Peace and Ecclesiastical Affairs

**MPNSCS** Ministry of Police, National Security and Correctional Services

**MPS** Ministry of Public Service

**MRD** Ministry of Rural Development

**MWYCFA** Ministry of Women, Youths, Children, and Family Affairs

**NACS** National Anti-Corruption Strategy

**NCDs** Non-Communicable Diseases

**NDC** National Disaster Council

**NDMO** National Disaster Management Office

P a g e | 31


-----

**NDS** National Development Strategy

**NSC** National Security Council

**NSAC** National Security Advisory Committee

**NSD** National Security Division

**NSS** National Security Strategy

**NSWG** National Security Working Group

**OCO** Oceania Customs Organisation

**PHESU** Public Health Emergency and Surveillance Unit

**PICP** Pacific Islands Chiefs of Police

**PIF** Pacific Islands Forum

**PIFS** Pacific Island Forum Secretariat

**PMSP** Pacific Maritime Security Program

**PNG** Papua New Guinea

**PPBP** Pacific Patrol Boat Program

**PPPO** Pacific Plant Protection Organisation

**PS** Permanent Secretary

**PTCA** Pacific Transnational Crime Assessments

**PTCCC** Pacific Transnational Crime Coordination Centre

**PTCN** Pacific Transnational Crime Network

**RAMSI** Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands

**RSIPF** Royal Solomon Islands Police Force

**SDG** Sustainable Development Goals (United Nations)

**SICED** Solomon Islands Customs and Excise Division

**SIG** Solomon Islands Government

**SPC** Secretariat of the Pacific Community

**SPS** Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary Measures (WTO Agreement)

**TCU** Transnational Crime Unit

**UN** United Nation

**UNCAC** United Nations Convention against Corruption

**UNDP** United Nations Development Programme

**UNODC** United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime

**UNTOC** United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime

**UN-PRAC** United Nations Pacific Regional Anti-Corruption

**WTO** World Trade Organization

**PLWD** People living with Disability

P a g e | 32


-----

#### Annex 2  

###### Law enforcement Agencies, financial Institution and SOEs role that are critical to National Security. 

The following government and non-government institutions play a pivotal role in protecting
the safety of the people of Solomon Islands. Drawing upon the capabilities of these
institutions strengthens our National Security effort. Thus, collaboration among each agency
brings a stronger synthesis than any constituent part could be. Note that the list below are
few of many government ministries and other institutions that perform a vital role in our
national security.


**Ministry of Foreign**
**Affairs and Trade**


This ministry is primarily responsible for diplomatic liaison in
relation to UN Conventions. Foreign Affairs’ diplomatic role works
with close neighbouring countries to prevent, mitigate and respond to
challenges through development and enforcement of mutually
beneficial treaties and agreements. It is also, the principle body
responsible for advancing Solomon Islands interests in the region and
internationally. MFAET also is mandated for protecting and
promoting Solomon Islands interests abroad. Solomon Islands has 11
missions abroad and their responsibility is to be the frontline for our
country on diplomatic, consular, and matters of national interest.
Hush


**Immigration** The immigration division is responsible for the enforcement of the
Solomon Islands immigration laws. The Immigration works to ensure
that people who travel through Solomon Islands’ borders do so
legally through the administration of the Immigration Act of 2012,
and other relevant government regulations and policies. The division
is, also, responsible for issuing of passports, monitoring of granted
permits and visas, and deportation of foreign nationals who breach
Solomon Islands’ immigration laws.


**Customs and**
**Excise Division**

**Inland Revenue**

P a g e | 33


This division, within the Ministry of Finance and treasury, is
responsible for collecting revenue, and managing the security and
integrity of Solomon Islands borders and the movement of people and
goods. Customs is, also, responsible to investigate illegal
transportation/BNI at the borders. Customs officers are to be present
at seaports, Airports, and outports to ensure our border regulations are
not breached.

This is the division within the MoF which is responsible for
collecting income, sales, and withholding goods taxes, as well as
undertaking vehicle licensing for the government. The core function
of Inland Revenue is to maximize revenue collection through the
effective and efficient administration of the tax law. The audit section
deters and investigates tax evasion.


-----

**Biosecurity** Biosecurity is guided by the Biosecurity Act of 2013, and focuses on
the preventative measures designed to reduce the risk of transmission
of invasive species, pests, and infectious diseases in crops and
livestock. Increased interconnectivity through globalisation, trade,
and tourism increases the potential for biological threats to Solomon
Islands. The introduction of new pests and diseases has the potential
to jeopardise the well-being of the nation’s people, agriculture,
environment, and economy.


**The Foreign**
**Investment Division**
**(FID)**

**Company Haus**

**Solomon Island**
**Financial**
**Intelligent Unit**
**(SIFIU)**

**Solomon Power**


FID of the Ministry of Finance and Treasury considers the application
of the investment by foreign individuals and corporations and grants
foreign investors’ permission to invest in Solomon Islands.

This division is responsible for registration of companies both
domestic and overseas, operating in Solomon Islands.

SIFIU is the lead agency and central focal point in preventing and
detecting Money Laundering and Terrorism Financing activity. SIFIU
is playing a vital role in formulating and implementing strategies to
compact money laundering, terrorist financing and other serious
crimes to ensure that safety and integrity of Solomon Island financial
system.

Solomon Power with its role in providing energy to the nation plays a
vital role in enabling better livelihood and business wellbeing.
Support for major project such as Tina hydro is critical to Solomon
Islands in enabling people to access clean and affordable electricity.
Also, support for the role of Solomon power in the provinces results
in electricity access to the people in the rural areas. Energy is a
critical infrastructure and must be protected and be made affordable
to the people.


**Solomon Water** Solomon Water Authority is a state-owned enterprise wholly owned
by the Government of Solomon Islands. Solomon Water operates
under the SIWA Act 1992. Under the SIWA 30 year’s strategic plan,
it has four goals; (i) water supply, (ii) waste management, (iii) wash
program targeting schools and communities, and (iv) ensure SIWA is
financially sustainable.  Solomon water vision is to provide safer and
quality water for all Solomon Islanders. Solomon Islands needs to
make sure  it has a standard guideline on water quality. Also, water
catchment source is becoming a critical issue that needs to be
addressed due to the climate change impact. SIWA, therefore, needs
to redesign its system to be resilient.


**Solomon Port**
**Authority**

P a g e | 34


Solomon Ports is a state own enterprise establish and operate under
the Ports Act facilitating international trade through tow declare
ports, Honiara Port and Noro Port. Solomon Ports Authority is
operating under international ships and ports facilities security (ISPS)
Code. ISPS is a set of measures to enhance the security of ships and
ports facilities around the world. Solomon Ports, under the SOE Acts,
reports on security matters to Solomon Islands Marine Safety
Administration (SIMSA)


-----

**Civil Aviation**
**Authority of**
**Solomon Island.**
**(CAASI)**

P a g e | 35


CAASI is a statutory body established under the Civil Aviation Act
2008, in which its technical functions are stipulated. The principal
responsibility of CAASI is to perform the state responsibility of
regulating civil aviation operations as required under the International
Civil Aviation Convention at the national level.
CAASI is responsible for carrying out supervisory standard checks
across technical areas such as airport operations and management, air
traffic control, aviation security services, engineering and technical
services.
Overall, CAASI have the power to regulate airport operations,
including all personnel and officers such engineers, pilots, airline
services, other aviation services, service providers and airport
companies operating within the aviation industry.


-----

#### Annex 3 

###### International and Regional Declarations, Conventions and Treaties to which Solomon Islands is a Party.


**Honiara**
**Declaration**

**Biketawa**
**Declaration**

**Boe Declaration**

**Nasonini**
**Declaration on**
**Regional Security**

**South Pacific**
**Nuclear-Free Zone**
**Treaty (Rarotonga**
**Treaty)**

**Comprehensive**
**Test Ban Treaty**

**Non-proliferation**
**Treaty**

P a g e | 36


The Honiara Declaration on Law Enforcement Cooperation,
adopted by PIF in 1992, marked the formal beginnings of regional
efforts to combat transnational crime in the region, through
implementation and use of national legislative measures in key
areas, such as extradition, assets forfeiture, mutual criminal
assistance, economic crime, and drug issues. It provides a
framework for combating transnational crime through law
enforcement cooperation; mutual assistance in criminal matters;
money laundering control, asset forfeiture, and banking regulation;
suppression of drug offenses; suppression of environmental
offenses; suppression of terrorism; and maritime surveillance.
Under these auspices, a range of regional agencies exist to prevent,
detect, monitor, and combat transnational criminal threats and
activities in the Pacific region.

The Biketawa declaration is a framework for coordinating regional
responses to regional crises agreed to by Forum Leaders in 2000 in
Kiribati. To date, the declaration had been activated three times –
to authorize the mission Helpem Fren (or RAMSI) for Solomon
Islands, PRAN for Nauru, and suspension of Fiji from the Forum.
All Forum members are parties to the Biketawa declaration.

The Boe declaration on Regional Security complements the
Biketawa declaration, and acknowledges that climate change is the
number one threat to the livelihood, security and wellbeing of the
peoples of the Pacific. Solomon Islands is a party to the Boe
declaration.

This is a supporting declaration for the Biketawa and Auckland
Declarations, agreed to by the Forum at Nasonini in Fiji in 2002,
to strengthen regional cooperation in dealing with regional
security. As a member of the Forum, Solomon Islands is obliged to
adhere to the requirements of the Nasonini Declaration.

This Treaty, also known as the Treaty of Rarotonga, bans testing,
storage, transhipment and carriage of nuclear material in the South
Pacific area. As a party state member, Solomon Islands has
obligations under the Treaty.

This multilateral treaty bans any nuclear explosions for both
military and civilian purposes. Solomon Islands has signed the
CTBT in 1996 but has not ratified it. However, as member of the
UN, Solomon Islands is bound by the requirements and
obligations stipulated under the CTBT.

This is the international treaty that prevents the spread of nuclear
weapons and weapons technology. Solomon Islands succeeded as


-----

**UNSC Resolution**
**1373**

**Rome Statute**

**Geneva Protocols**

**The Hague**
**Conventions on**
**declaration of war**

**Paris Agreement on**
**Climate Change**

P a g e | 37


a party to the NPT from Great Britain, therefore, it is expected to
comply with its provisions.

The UNSC Resolution obliges member states to suppress terrorism
in their territories by refraining from financing, organizing,
instigating, assisting or participating in terrorist acts. Solomon
Islands, as member of the UN, has an obligation to adhere to the
requirements of this resolution.

This statute forms the International Criminal Court (ICC) which
tries individuals or groups for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity and aggression. Solomon Islands is a signatory
party but yet to ratify.

This international treaty bans the use of chemical and biological
weapons in international conflicts. Solomon Islands is a state party
to protocols I – III and is required to adhere to the provision of
these protocols.

This is an old treaty under the League of Nations (precursor to
UN) on declarations of wars. As a member state of the UN,
Solomon Islands is expected to respect the obligations under the
Hague conventions.

This agreement within the UNFCC deals with greenhouse gas
emissions, mitigation, adaptation and finance. Solomon Islands, as
a state party, is required to comply with the requirements of the
agreement for dealing with climate change especially with
submissions of annual reports on its nationally declared
commitments.


-----

#### Annex 4 

###### Regional Facilities that could help Solomon Islands with Implementation of the NSS. 

**Pacific Trans-national** The PTCCC, based in Apia, Samoa, coordinates the regional
**Crime Coordination** effort on combatting transnational crimes. The centre can
**Centre (PTCCC)** provide expertise to assist Solomon Islands develop capacity

and skills for responding to transnational criminal activities

**Pacific Fusion Centre** This is an Australian Government funded intelligent sharing
centre on regional security developments. It is currently
based in a temporary facility in Canberra, but will be
relocated to a permanent base anywhere around the Pacific.
This is a resource that can assist Solomon Islands especially
with generating and sharing intelligence on the origins and
features of particular security threats that could impact
Solomon Islands.

**Pacific Security College** This is a very new Centre, set up by the Australian
**(PSC)** Government in 2019, to provide technical support to Pacific

Island countries on security matters. They can also provide
specifically tailored training for personnel’s from the Pacific
on security and strategic fields. Although the PSC has the
makings of a useful facility to help boost capacities in the
Pacific, however its experience to help the region is
uncertain.

**Interpol** Solomon Islands is a member of Interpol, and can now
access necessary intelligence from Interpol regarding
specific transnational crimes that may impact Solomon
Islands national security. An Interpol liaison office has been
established in Honiara within the RSIPF.

**Secretariat of the PIDC** This is the regional organization that coordinates regional
cooperation for immigration offices in the Pacific. Solomon
Islands is a member, therefore it can access the services of
the PIDC if required especially to tracing the origins of
people smuggling and illicit drug movement. It is a valuable
facility to help Solomon Islands.

**Oceania Customs** The OCO is the regional organization for customs. Solomon
**Organization (OSO)** Islands is a member and can access its services especially in

tracking hazardous goods movement.

**FFA’s Surveillance Centre** The FFA’s surveillance Centre is one of the most advanced
and well equipped monitoring and surveillance Centres in
the Pacific. As a member country and host of the FFA,
Solomon Islands can request assistance from the Centre to
help out with surveillance of its vast EEZ. The Centre also
has an automated vessel identification system which is really
important in determining and penalizing illegal vessels.

P a g e | 38

|Pacific Trans-national Crime Coordination Centre (PTCCC)|The PTCCC, based in Apia, Samoa, coordinates the regional effort on combatting transnational crimes. The centre can provide expertise to assist Solomon Islands develop capacity and skills for responding to transnational criminal activities.|
|---|---|
|Pacific Fusion Centre|This is an Australian Government funded intelligent sharing centre on regional security developments. It is currently based in a temporary facility in Canberra, but will be relocated to a permanent base anywhere around the Pacific. This is a resource that can assist Solomon Islands especially with generating and sharing intelligence on the origins and features of particular security threats that could impact Solomon Islands.|
|Pacific Security College (PSC)|This is a very new Centre, set up by the Australian Government in 2019, to provide technical support to Pacific Island countries on security matters. They can also provide specifically tailored training for personnel’s from the Pacific on security and strategic fields. Although the PSC has the makings of a useful facility to help boost capacities in the Pacific, however its experience to help the region is uncertain.|
|Interpol|Solomon Islands is a member of Interpol, and can now access necessary intelligence from Interpol regarding specific transnational crimes that may impact Solomon Islands national security. An Interpol liaison office has been established in Honiara within the RSIPF.|
|Secretariat of the PIDC|This is the regional organization that coordinates regional cooperation for immigration offices in the Pacific. Solomon Islands is a member, therefore it can access the services of the PIDC if required especially to tracing the origins of people smuggling and illicit drug movement. It is a valuable facility to help Solomon Islands.|
|Oceania Customs Organization (OSO)|The OCO is the regional organization for customs. Solomon Islands is a member and can access its services especially in tracking hazardous goods movement.|
|FFA’s Surveillance Centre|The FFA’s surveillance Centre is one of the most advanced and well equipped monitoring and surveillance Centres in the Pacific. As a member country and host of the FFA, Solomon Islands can request assistance from the Centre to help out with surveillance of its vast EEZ. The Centre also has an automated vessel identification system which is really important in determining and penalizing illegal vessels.|


-----

|Pacific Island Forum (PFC)|The PFC is an important organisation that will help drive the security interest of the Pacific Islands and Solomon Islands is also member.|
|---|---|
|Melanesian Spearhead Group( MSG)|MSG is an important forum in which Solomon Islands is a member state, and has worked closely with. . Solomon Islands, in its implementation of NSS, will continue to make sure that its security interests are also shared among MSG members.|
|SPREP|SPREP is also an important regional organization to Solomon Islands as it is charged with the role of protecting and managing the environment and natural resources of the Pacific.|


P a g e | 39


-----

